




THE CHURCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY FROM THE BEGINNING OF CHRISTIANITY TO THE NORMAN CONQUEST under

ROMAN GOVERNOVRS.
BRITTISH KINGS.
The ENGLISH-SAXON HEPTARCHY.
The ENGLISH-SAXON (and DANISH) MONARCHY,

CONTAINING

I. The Lives of all our Saints assigned to the proper ages wherein they lived.
II. The erections of Episcopall See's, and Succession of Bishops.
III. The celebration of Synods, Nationall, Provinciall and Diocesan.
IV. The Foundations of Monasteries, Nunnerie, and Churches.
V. And a sufficient account of the Successions of our Kings, and of the Civill affaires of this Kingdom.

From all which is evidently demonstrated: That the present Roman-Catholick Religion hath from the Beginning, without interruption or change been professed in this our Island, c.
By R. F. S. CRESSY of the Holy Order of S. BENEDICT.
Thus saith the Lord: Stand upon the wayes, and behold and enquire concerning the ancient pathes, which as the good way, and walk in it, and yee shall find rest for your soules. But they sayed. We will not walk in it.
Ierem. vi.16.
Printed in the year. 1668.
Permissu Superiorum,  Approbatione Doctorum.




TO THE QVEEN.
_MADAME,
YOVR MAIESTY, Will, I hope, graciously be pleased to permitt wee to make my present Addresse with the sincere Confession of a fault, and most humbly beggin pardon for it.
It was not from mine own presumptuous ambition, but because I thought it necessary to the good of many Readers of the fol|lowing History, that, with leave, YOVR MAIESTIES name should be seen at the first opening of it: But till now I durst not declare why I thought so, being apprehensive least, not so much YOVR GREATNESSE, as scrupulous HV|MILITY should forbid it.
The Design which I had in compiling and publishing this

Work was to represent, as on a Theater, to the view of our Nation the more then Heroicall Gests (especially) of our Ancient Kings and Princes, now by your, to us happy, Mariage, become YOVR MAIESTIES ANCESTOVRS; Such Gests I meane of theirs as regarded Heaven and Religion: How humbly and ioyfully they entertained it, how by their Sanctity they adorned it, and with what industry and magnificence they advanced it, being the very same Religion, which, though in this last age defamed and persecuted, wee still with ioy professe.
The same Theater will likewise represent this Religion with at least equall advantage and splendour in the Lives and actions of very many glorious Queens and Princesses, to the eyes of whose minds Almighty God having discovered the more then celestiall Beauty and Glory with which it adorns pure and humble soules sincerely embracing it, they suddenly found themselves deprived of all Tast of perishing Delights, and all esteem of wordly Emi|nence, insomuch as their own Greatnes and the Affluence of all Temporall contentments became a Burden to them: Yea many of them conceived such a loathing aversenes against them, that not being able to endure even their presence and sight, they made hast to hide themselves from them in Desarts, or perpetuall Pri|sons of Monasteries: And others not so nice, or perhaps wanting opportunity, lived in the sight of them on purpose to shew their contempt of them. And their State obliging them to abundance and delicacies of Meats, to costly Magnificence in Apparell, and to a necessity of admitting ceremonious honours and Veneration from others, they would for these things be revenged on their in|nocent selves by many stoll'n Fastings, by secret tormenting Chains and Cilices, by humbling themselves in spirit under the meanest of their Subiects, and by prolonged retreats in Prayer and con|versation with God alone. By these and many other such Arti|fices the Divine Spirit taught them to use this world as if they used it not, to crucify the Flesh and all the appetites of it, and to live to and with God alone, whilest the world thought they belonged to it.
Now such a Life as this being altogether unfashionable and even hydeous in the eyes of the late Reforming age, wherein Poverty, want of sensuall contentments, solitude and continuall attendance in Spirit to God are esteemed extremest Miseries,

and a willing embracing and seeking such Mortifications to Nature, Madnes: Hence it comes to passe that the frequent Stories of the like, which will be afforded in the following Book, will no doubt by many be resolved to have been fabulous inven|tions, such Practises impossible, and whensoever pretended, Hy|pocriticall.
Fore-seeing this, I iudged it necessary, by the best means I could, to prevent such like prejudices or incredulity of my Readers. And no expedient could I imagine more proper and efficacious for this purpose, then a restoring, as it were, to life again those glorious Examples of Piety, whose seemingly inimitable Vertues my desire was they might see are visibly quickned among us in YOVR MAIESTY, a Daughter of those glorious Princes, a far greater QVEEN, yet no lesse ambitiously aspiring to their Humility, contempt of worldly Glory, affection to Mortifications, and unwearied attendance to God, both in the same Publick Ordinances delivered by Him to his Caholick Church, and the same private Recollections, and amorous Whisperings to his Divine Heart.
MADAME, for fear of obstructing YOVR MAIESTIES hoped for pardon I dare not enlarge my self upon this Argument, which contains my Fault. Neither indeed is it needfull: For it will be a sufficient advantage not only to my present Design, but also to recommend our Catho|lick Faith it self, if the Maligners of it can be perswaded, onely to reflect on the blessed Fruits of it in YOVR MAIESTIES mind and conversation: Fruits which they dayly see and acknow|ledge. If they would doe this seriously, they would, no doubt, wonder by what fatall Constellation that Religion should be so persecuted, the Effects of which even the Persecutours them|selves doe love and admire.
As touching this Work it self, the which (first humbly again begging leave) I lay at YOVR MAIESTIES feet, if onely the Names of Persons and Places were changed, it re|lates in effect the same Story which all Catholicks read in the Records of their own respective countreyes. It is the very same Faith which is reported to have been preached both here and there: and the same successe attends the preaching of it. At first it is derided, hated and persecuted: the Professours of it in

the mean time patiently suffring whatsoever its Enemies will think good to inflict: But in time it begins to be hearkned to: and then it never fayles to ingratiate it self with its most bitter Adversaries, and without the terrour of Secular armes, without any seditious conspiracies, being armed only with its own beauty and gracefullnes, and recommended from Heaven by healthfull Miracles, it subdues and captivates the hearts of Nations, the most Savage and barbarous.
Such has been the constant Method by which CATHO|LICK RELIGION, and it alone, has triumphed over Idolatry and Atheisme. As on the contrary by a Method di|rectly opposed to this, but yet constant likewise and Vniform, other Vncatholick Sects, wheresoever intruding themselves, have prevayled. For surely it was not by Miracles, it was not by patient suffring, it was not by the zeale of unarmed Preachers that the Professours of Calvinism in France, Scot|land and Holland, and of Lutheranism in Germany and the Northern Regions became possessours of Churches not built by their own Ancestours, for they had no Ancestours at all. Truly if for the space of above a thousand years, which the following History comprehends, I could have discovered any Province or Citty by such unchristian arts made Christian and Catholick, or but one Catholick Writer pretending to such a Method of pro|pagating his Religion, I should not have passed it over with a desingenuous silence.
For the generall substance therefore of this History, YOVR MAIESTY already knowes it before you cast your eyes on the Book. Yet I may take leave to say, That one Advantage this History may boast of, beyond that of any other Catholick Nation: For which therefore it may invite even YOVR MA|IESTIES curiosity. As it embraces a greater variety of Revo|lutions hapning in our Island (the Scene of it) then any other countrey: So in all those Revolutions it affords many great and extraordinary Rarities. Never any Nation was so plentifull and over-flowing in Benedictions to other Countreyes, by sending forth an incredible number of Apostolick Bishops and Preists which converted to the FAITH almost all our confining Nations. Never any Nation was blessed with so many glorious Saints adorned with Crownes and Purple. Yea it may be affirmed

that the Annalls of the whole CATHOLICK CHVRCH doe scarce record in all other Countreyes so many Kings and Princes, who have relinquished their Thrones to change their Scepters for Crosses, their Treasures for Poverty, their ma|gnificent numerous Courts for bare, solitary Cells, and their awefull Power for Subjection. This was a change which none could work, but onely the right hand of THE MOST HIGH.
And yet the like Change wrought by the same ALMIGHTY HAND in the soules of a far greater number of our Queens and Princesses was more admirable, in as much as their imbecil|lity, delicacy of education and naturall timidity were greater. For the space of severall Ages the Daughters of our Monarks seemed as if they thought themselves born in a countrey none of their own, a Countrey of Strangers, or rather Enemies: the destru|ction of whose race they sought to procure, by refusing their concurrence to continue it. And therefore as if they had been ashamed to acknowledge their Native countrey, and afraid to con|verse with the inhabitants of it, they made hast to hide them|selves from them, that they might freely entertain their far more Noble and aspiring thoughts and desires of A BRIDEGROOM worthy of their Love, and a Crown answerable to their holy ambition. Or if such Retreats were denyed them, they were taught by A HEAVENLY INSTRVCTOVR to erect so|litary Monasteries, or Bride-chambers for their CELESTIALL SPOVSE in their own hearts: Where they could live undi|sturbed even among Crowds of Visitants or Flatterers: they could macerate themselves with Fastings at the most luxurious Feasts, and with painfull Hayrcloathes under their softest and most gor|geous Vestments. They knew no use of worldly Riches but to supply the necessities of the poore, or to adorn the Altars of their CELE|STIALL SPOVSE: from a continuall entertainment of whom nothing could distract them, even in sleep their hearts waked to him.
A great well-orderd Army of such glorious Saints of your own Sexe will the following History discover to YOVR MA|IESTY, and this of all states, Wives, Widdowes and Vir|gins, and which was wonderfull, some of them all these, both Wives, Widows and yet Virgins. So that here YOV may sett before your eyes a numerous Variety of Heavenly Patterns of YOVR own rank, by conversing with whom YOV may

yet more richly adorne YOVR, soule. Each of them will present YOVR MAIESTY with a Gemme sparkling with a peculiar different luster, all of them both like and unlike in beauty and glory. Now may a Heavenly Crown besett with such more then Starlike Iewells attend YOVR MAIESTY, whensoever Death shall ease YOV of that YOV now wear. This is the argument of the dayly Prayers of
YOVR SACRED MAIESTIES, Most humbly devoted Subject, and Servant in our LORD, Br. S. CRESSY.




Permissio A. R. P. Praesidis Generalis.
_EGO Fr. Augustinus Hungate Congregationis Anglo-Benedictinae Praeses Ge|neralis, Librum, cui Titulus, The Church-History of Brittany,  R. P. Sereno Cressy, nostrae Congregationis Monacho compositum,   S. Theologiae Doctoribus ad id deputatis, approbatum, typis mandari lubens permitro. Datum 2. Maij stilo Vet. 1668.
Fr. AVGVSTINVS qui supr.


Approbationes Doctorum.
LIBER hic cui Titulus, Historia Ecclesiae, c. nihil continet sanae Doctrinae aut bo|nis moribus dissonum: Antiquorum acta, doctrinam, mores clar  succinct tradit:  dum Historiae veritatem felici essequitur indagine, Fidem veram contra quocunque Novatores mirific confirmat: quare reipublicae Christianae hunc Librum vtilis|simum fore iudico: Datum Londini Maij 12. stilo Veteri. 1668.
Fr. BENEDICTVS STAPYLTON, Ord. S. Ben. Sac. Theol. Doctor.


EGO subsignatus Doctor Facultatis Theologiae Cadomensis legi librum Anglico idiomate scriptum cui Titulus, The Church-History of Brittany (sive, Historia Ecclesia|stica Brittanniae)  R. P. Sereno de Cressy Religioso Anglo Ordinis S. Benedicti com|positum, in quo plurima scitu digna, omnia Fidei Catholicae consona,  bonis moribus nihil absonum deprehendi. Quare ad Catholicorum utilitatem  Hereticorum convictio|nem praelo debere mandari censui. Actum Rothomagi die 20. Augusti, annoque Domi|ni 1667.
THOMAS DE SIMON.


EGO infr scriptus in Alma Facultate Parisiensi Sacrae Theologicae Doctor, fidem facio me accurat perlegisse librum Anglicano idiomate consciptum, cui Titulus, The Church-History of Brittany, composed by the R. Father F. Serenus Cressy, Religious of the holy Order of S. Bennet. In quo quidem nihil deprehendi quod Catholicae, Apostolicae  Ro|manae fidei, aut bonis moribus adversetur. Quin imo hanc ipsam fidem, quam hodie Ro|mano-Catholici in Anglia profitentur, validissimis argumentis demonstrat omnino conso|nam esse illi, quam primits viri Apostolici in Britannia propagarunt, quam Christus Do|minus Apostolos docuit, quamque Ecclesia Catholica suggerente Spiritu Sancto perpetu retinuit. Datum Parisiis Kal. Aprilis. 1668.
FRANCISCVS GAGE.


EGO infr scriptus, Sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis Doctor Theologus, testor me legisse Librum Anglic conscriptum, cui Titulus, The Church-History of Brittany, composed by the R Father F. Serenus Cressy, Religious of the holy Order of S. Bennet: Et nihil in eo invenisse, quod Fidei Orthodoxae, aut bonis moribus repugnet. Datum Parisijs prima die mensis Aprilis. Ann. Dom. 1668.
GVILIELMVS PHELAN.




VPON THE ENGLISH EC|clesiasticall History written by his honourd freind F. SERENVS CRESSY.
_STILL lovely in thy beautie's ruines, look,
ENGLAND, thy face in this reflecting Book.
Start not at Scarrs, or wrinckles: this smooth glasse
Shews but thy Primitive and youth-full face.
Read with delight and ioy: this breathing Story
Sets out to life thy death-surviving Glory.
But if thy curious glance must prye too far
Beyond these leaves, what now thy featu|res are,
Blame not his Penn, who (not t'endanger Truth)
Shadows thine Age, and onely paints thy Youth.
Nor will wee blame thy blush, nor yet thy Teare,
If thou wilt needs thy time with this com|pare.
So blush'd, so wept the Worlds great Em|presse, when
In lively Mirrour of her Livie's penn
Her faded honour she with sigh's recalls,
And mourns her buried Vertues funeralls.
When she her Curij, her Fabrcij mourns,
Bathing her Regulus, her Decij, Vrnes,
Those Heathen-Saints, whom had our ages seen,
Had Catholick as well as Roman been.
How she disdaind herself, though she could now
Her Great Augustus boast, as well as Thou,
Yet was't' expiring Fame so seem alive,
Though onely in effigie some Reprive:
Whose very sight Idea's might create
For proud Posterity to imitate.
And thou in this Serener Glasse maist see
If still thy looks dare own themselves and Thee.
Be thine own Iudge: And who can better know,
Then thine own self, if Thou bee'st Thou, or no?
No bitter Satyres here, no nettling Witt,
No Passion strutting in Zeale's Counterfeit.
No crooked Mood, no Crosse-dilemma here:
Deny not but thy self, the cause is cleare.
Eares are slow Iudges, much by Rumour dull'd,
By tickling flattery too as often Gull'd.
What Plea, then this, can surer Proof dis|pence,
When thine own Eyes bring their own evi|dence?
In no false dresse disguis'd see hete thy face,
No patch'd Reform here foyles thy Native Grace.
Here view thy Pietie's forgotten look
So lively drawn in this reviving Books
Thy Vnity, by Sects and Schismes rear
Restor'd in this Eernall Monument:
Thy ruin'd Sepulchers, and buried Shrines
Repaird and rais'd in these Immortall lines:
Thy banished Saints recall'd by Saint like men,
Thy Bede restor'd in CRESSIES life and Penn.
Ed. Thymelby Pr. S. Gaugerici Cameraci.



THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
1. _IT will no doubt be expedient, with the Christian Readers leave, to entertaine him a while in the porch and Entrance of this history, there to in|forme him touching certain general matters relating to it, the knowledge of which will not be unusefull to him: and those are principally three; 1. the Motive inducing the Authour to com|pose it. 2. the disposition and order observed in it, 3. the most considerable Wriitters from whom ma|terialls have beene furnished for the fabrick of it. As touching the Motive to the end it may ap|peare not irrationall, I must give this account of my selfe to my Readers:
2. I have not been able of late to prevent or expell a deepe ressentment of greife, mixed with some indignation, to see the cause of God and his Church too ordinarily defended, and in a manner alwaies opposed with so much vnbeseeming passion and violence, so as that oft times on the one side the merit of defending truth is lost by extreme preiudice don to Christian Charity and humility: and on the other side the guilt of opposing truth is heightned by proceedings full of fury and revenge in the enemyes of it.
3. A sad consideration hereof has produced in my mind a great aversenesse from Contro|versies. For though I am not much suspicious of my selfe but that through the assistance of Divine grace I may hope to mannage a dispute how weakily soever, yet without an arro|gant incivility or mingling therein contemptuous reflexions on the adversaries persons: yet perceiving that even candour  modestie, though excesse in proceeding from the penn of a Catholick disputant, like oile increases the flame of a Sectaries passion: there sore a compassio|nate solicitude in behalfe of our Adversaries themselves, least by my occasion they should be plunged yet more deeply and inreparably in the hatred of Divine Truth and Christian peace, has induced one almost to a resolution (as far as I may dispose of my selfe not to con|tinue, much lesse to renew Debates and controversies, except it shall appeare with sufficient evidence to me, that God shall require it of mee.
4. Indeed it was to me at first an astonishment to see how the violence of our Anti|catholick Writers in England has been increased against those who have assisted them; and their calmnesse eqaully encreased towards those who had not long since almost, and they know intend still to destroy their Church, and Monarchy with it. But this asto|nishment quickly ceased asson as I perceived that for the most part the new Defenders of the Church of England against Rome were arrant Sectaries, some of them notoriously stigmatized and who not long before had been the loudest Trompets of war against the same Church: such are the Champions who of late have intruded themselves into this Controversie, knowing how much thereby they can ingratiate themselves with the people whom they have made thirsty after blood: and likewise how in mannaging of it, they can covertly pursue their old desing

the English Church her selfe. For this purpose they speake favourably of the tender con|sciences of their own seditious partie, and treacherously commend the Church of England by telling the people how unlike it is to the Roman Church which challenges a supreme obliging authority, whereas according to them the English Bishops have no Iurisdiction at all, no not even my Lord of Canterbury himselfe, but every ones private reason and conscience exempted from all humane authority is to be his onely Guide. Thus they defend the Church of England by making it no Church at all.
5. Vpon the sight of this, I again wondred that so manifest, so traiterous a prevarication should be connived at by the heads and Governours of the English-Protestant Church. But this wonder did not long continue after I had upon reflexion considered, that from the very beginning of the breach of England from Rome, the Bishops themselves have beene the vnderminers of their own Church. For there have never wanted in that number at least three, or four who in Episcopacy loved onely the mannors and revenues, being otherwise in their Iudgments and affections poisoned and embittered with the very Gall of Calvinism. Now ordinary experience has shewed that among more than twenty moderate Protestants, if there be found three or four genuine Calvinists, they doe infallibly make the maior part, by the advantage of their furious zeale, restlesse activity, and interest in popular favour.
6. These masked Prelats then are they whose Faith consists in disbeleiving the Doctrines of the Catholick Church, and their charity in hating and persecuting the Professours of such Do|ctrines. Whence it comes to passe that the seditious preaching party conforming themselves to this unbeleiving beleife, and uncharitable charity, have right enough to their affections and favour: so that out of a liking to their vnchristian zeale against Catholick vnity they easily pardon and excuse in them the like zeale against both Episcopacy and Monarky it self. These are they who having first asserted the furious doctrines of Calvin touching absolute Reprobation, predestination to sin, impossibility of loosing grace, c. as opposed to the Roman faith, have thereby given the Presbyterians advantage to brand all moderate Protestants with the unpardonnable crime of Popery. These are who, though they will not, or dare not themselves undervalue the Challenge made by the Church of England of a legitimate succession of Ordinations, yet have ren|dred such succession uselesse to them, and indeed ridiculous, by giving the right hands of fel|lowship to Calvinisticall Congregations abroad, In which those who call themselves Ministers of Gods word and dispensers of his Sacraments, have no more right to such titles than their wives or daughters have. Lastly these Prelats have been the persons who not onely favouring, but by their own writings promoting the Fanatick position, That the Pope is Antichrist, have hereby put a sword into the hands of Presbyterian Gladiators by which they can cutt, mangle,  destroy every way, whom soever they please, as easily as they think they can Catholicks them|selves. Bishops they can destroy with it, as being proud Prelats who by their own confession have received their character and Iurisdiction from Anti-christ. And kings they can with a safe conscience destroy, in case they will not deliver up unto them Anti-christian Bishops, Anti-christian Litanies, sober prayers or Ceremonies, yea and Anti-christian Lord-ships or mannners too. Indeed so advantageous has this Engin of Popish Anti-christianisme been to every Sect which would destroy another, that we have seen even the Presbyterians themselves wounded almost to death with it by the Independents, Anabaptists, c. who confidently charged their Classes and Synods with Anti-christian tyranny.
7. Ecclesiasticall matters being reduced to these termes in England, can any one esteeme it a wonder if malicious and unquiet Sectaries, being shadowed under such Rochets, are so se|curely busy both to encrease their esteeme and credit amonst the ignorant multitudes by their zeale against Popery, and withall at the same time closely pursue their old designs upon Church livings, and for that end make use of such credit to pluck down that Church, which now they would seeme to support? Whilst they snarle and grin against Catholicks, they bite, and hope shortly to devoure Prelatical Protestants, and whatsoever Power shal maintain them.
8. Such being the present state of Controversie-writings: To what purpose should any Catholick interesse himselfe in confuting bookes, in which if there be any thing material, it is the un|dermining of that Church which in the frontis-peice is pretended to be asserted? for generally it is agreed on by the late Authours that the English Church has no authoritie to oblige any one in conscience to beleive doctrines proposed by her. From whence followes necessarily that no man can be obliged to be a member of it, and therefore that she can not iustly ex|communicate or otherwise punish any one for not yeilding obedience to her, or for deser|ting her and choosing another communion. And yet lesse are we concerned in what is written by them directly against us, and the faith which we professe: since not a word of sober rea|soning can be found, but what the last age had heard a hundred times obiected and refuted. If there may be any thing new, it is a Texture of new invented calumnies  phrases of foule language: And what a folly, and pitty likewise, is it by contesting, to open yet wider such noysom Flood-Gates.
9. Yet notwithstanding all this, the Cause of Gods Church must not be deserted. Therefore far be it from mee in so miserable a distraction of Iudgments and affections to entertain any resolution of surceasing endeavours to promote Catholick vnity and Peace. And (our Lord be

blessed) it seemes to mee that this desireable and never more than at this time seasonable duty may be performed without any quarrelling controversie at all. And one healthfull meane for this purpose I have here made use of, which is a sincere  simple relation, uncontested by any, of the state of our Brittishs Churches since from the Primitive times, both as to the Doctrines of faith received by them, and externall practises in use among them. For I suppose that any sober and rational Christian will not unwillingly grant, That that Church which in these times shall appear most conformable to those Primitive Apostolical doctrines and practises, ought unque|stionably to be esteemed most safe and Orthodoxe. Now for a Triall of this there will be no use of sylloziging or disputing: The simplest Readers eyes will resolve him that those very points of faith and discipline for which the Roman Catholick Church is so cruelly assaulted on all sides by Sectaries are the very same which Apostolick Doctours at first taught our forefathers, and which by their Successours have been so carefully transmitted to us, that during the space of more than a thousand yeares comprehended in this History, not any congregation at all, nor any persons, except a few dispersed known Hereticks, did ever appear to contradict what we still beleive and practise; nor did ever teach any of those opinions, which now constitute any of our later English Sects.
10. Now this way and Method of arguing implicitely, without disputing, seems to me of force inexpugnable, as being not obnoxious to the peevish Cavils of quarrelsom spirits, and efficacious to extort the assent of such as are truly desirous to find the truth. For though among all our Sectaries (as antiently among professed Hereticks) the pretence of each one be to admitt no other Rule of faith, but onely his own sence of Scripture, the chime whereof seems to every one of them to accord to the tune framed by himselfe, though each of them has a tune utterly discordant from all the rest: Yet surely that man must renounce his reason, forgett his Creed, yea he must covertly blaspheme Christ himselfe, who shall continue to impute most horrible superstitions and Idolatries to the Catholick Church, after that he shal have disco|vered plainly that she teaches the very same Doctrines and Observances which were at first de|livered by Apostolick Preachers. For since there never was anciently any other Church in Brit|tany (and the like may be said of other Countries) but that which taught the same doctrines, such blasphemers of Gods Church must consequently affirm, That so many Holy Apostolical Do|ctours have taught, so many glorious Martyrs have shed their blood, and so many Blessed Saints have wrought most stupendious Miracles for confirming most damnable superstitions and Idolatries.
11. Now what other consequence can flow from hence but this most execrable yet by them unavoydable one, that Iesus Christ was not the true Messias: for how can they esteeme him the Messias who it seems failed in the principal End for which the Messias was sent which was by shedding his blood to redeem, and by the effusion of his spirit to sanctifie a Church, and such an one as is prophetically described to be a spiritual kingdom which should never be destroyed:Dan 11.44. Eph. iv.11. Esa 11 c 2. Math. v.15. Psal cxx.3. Esa. xlix.23. Io. xiv.12. a Church in which God would place Pastours till the Consummation of the saints: A Church into which all nations should flow:Esa. 2. A Church or citty built upon a hill so that it cannot be hidden, and which is alwayes at unity in it selfe: a Church unto which Kings shall be Nursing-fathers and Queenes nursing-Mothers.Esa. 49. Lastly a Church in which Christs people should doe the miracles which he did, and greater yet then they were (which last Character is referred to the whole body of the Church in whom this vertue doth shine for ever, as is observed in the margin of the English Bible.
12. This being so, let those defamers of Gods Church be demanded, Where is the Church that is promised, and thus described, to be found? We can shew them such an one, not one of these marks wanting to it: but let them shew the like to us. They abhorre all supposition that the Catholick Church, staind, as they accuse her, with horrible superstitions, and Idolatries, should be it, for what would they then be? Where then would they have us to looke for it? Trly if they be our directours we may looke long enough to little purpose. We may search all corners with candles and torches, and all in vain: And this our adversaries acknowledge: For not any one of them pretends to shew a Church distinct from the Catholick and qualified as the ancient Prophecies require On the contrarie they content themselves with the fancie of a Church invisible and hidden in some unknown desart presently after the Apostles times, during the whole space contained in this history: so that no wonder if they can give no ac|count of it: which is to say in plain language, Christ could not or would not, and certainly did not make good the many promises of his Father.
13. O the miserably sandy and miry foundation on which these men doe build all their pre|tentions of belonging to Christ, and expectation of eternall happinesse from him, since it re|lies upon this blasphemous supposition, That all the Saints acknowledged hitherto by Gods Church, and iustified to be such by innumerable stupendious miracles, all the famous Do|ctours and Converters of Nations, all the Glorious Martyrs, all the immaculate Virgins, and in a word, all those who have and doe acknowledge themselves members of this one Catholick Church have been estranged from Christ,  excluded from that happinesse by criminall Anti-christian superstitions and Idolatries.
14. Now I must confesse that this way of arguing does take its force from another sup|position

(which whether it be made good or no the prudent Readers eyes may iudge) which is this, That by the following History is evinced, that the present Catholick Church teaches the very same doctrines which from the infancy of Christianity were taught and received in our Nation. The truth of which Assertion I doe not wel know or imagin by what course or me|thode it can rationally be expugned or considerably weakned: and much lesse can I con|ceive how upon supposition that it is true, it can be sleighted by any.
15. Yet I assure my selfe this book will fall into the hands of some, who without exami|ning particulars, will think with one puff of their breath to blow down the whole fabrick of this by professing confidently, That they have no obligation at all to beleive one word written in it, being withall certain that all is false whatsoever it is which may be pretended advantageous to Catholicks: The Scripture, the Scripture, and nothing but the Scripture can chal|lenge beleife from them: as for all other writers, and especially such as these out of whom this history was collected, who were generally Monks or little better, Iohn Fox has taught to make their stories no part of their Creed.
16. But as for these men they seem not unlike an honest Northern tenant of the late Earle of Cumberland, very zealous for the honour of his Lords family, who when another his com|panion had in discourse imputed treason to some of the said Lords Ancestours, replyed: I am sure that is false: for I have read all the Bookes of histories both in the old and new Testament, and I defie any man to shew me that ever any Clifford has been a Traytour.
17. Others there will be who will read this History with very great indifference whether the things related be true or not, yea and whether the inference even now drawn from thence be valid or not. A preassumed assurance, as they conceive, that the now Catholick Church is such an Anti-christian Congregation as they read described in the Apocalypse, fortifies their stomack to swallow down and digest any consequences whatsoever, though Christianity it selfe should be endangered by them.
18. To such Readers as these I have nothing more to say, but that I am sorry since they want the skill of Iudging like rational creatures, that they have the misfortune not to want the fa|cultie of reading; or at least that it is not in my power to prevent their unproffitable expenses of money and time upon such a book as this.
19. But as touching more sober Protestant readers, who notwithstanding out of a preiudice against Catholick Doctrines, and some times out of a feare of the worldly incommodities of being convinced by writings which assert them, are ordinarily too negligent in examining the weight of Testimonies produced in thr behalfe. In case this Historie fall in to the hands of such, the Authour (having first besought almighty God to give them a more perfect discern|ment between temporall and spirituall things) desires them seriously to consider in gene|rall the degrees of credibility, which occurr in Histories, and Records: and how far they doe respectively require our assent to them as a dutie of obligation.
20. God our heavenly creatour as he has given us an internall light of reason to iudge of the nature of objects occurring to our senses, by a frequent Experience of effects flowing from them: So for asmuch as concernes other obiects which can come no other way to our know|ledge but by the testimonie of men (such as are actions or events which have hapened before our dayes, the same God, who is pure reason it selfe, has instituted another light or guide which is authority, to direct our reason in iudging of them: that is, in affording our assent proportio|nably to the merit and weight of such authority: Therefore obstinately to refuse our assent to the testimony of witnesses, who can be iustified to have been persons of learning, Iudg|ment, diligence, fidelity, and pietie, and especially in matters the truth of which it highly concernes us to know, is to oppose ones selfe to the most wise ordonnance of God, and not onely to renounce our reason, but the most necessary care of eternitie. Vpon which ground S. Augustin sayes, it is some unhappines to be mis-lead by authority, but it is a far greater unhappines not to be moved by it. The reason is, because the former onely argues the imbecillity of hu|man reason: but the latter, an absolute contradiction to it, as if our soules were fit to iudge of nothing but the present obiects of sense, as beasts doe. Therefore Calvin himselfe affirmes, that to deny our assent to witnesses many in number and of authentick credit, is an act not of diffidence, but of depraved furious obstinacy. Which Censure is most Iust, since thereby all use of humane conversation is destroyed: For all publicke iudgments, tenures of land, rights of priviledges, c. depend on the testimonie of records and witnesses.
21. Now for application of this to the subiect in hand, which is the credibility of the prin|cipal Writers from whom this historie has been collected, how exempted they are from the least suspicion of a will or intention to deceive posterity, how Iudicious they were and conse|quently not much obnoxious to be deluded by others; how diligent they were in searching authenthick reports for matters past, and the testimony of the most pious and grave per|sons for actions or events which themselves saw not; It will not be necessarie by a particular enumeration of proofs to weary my Readers, who if they please may for satisfaction herein consult the preface to the Flores Historiarum written by the late most venerable and learned Bishop of Chalcedon, who has there made a Collection of the Elgies and honourable Characters given by the most learned amongst Protestants writers to our ancient Catholicke Historians,

S. Aldelm, S. Beda, S. Alcuin: Ethelwerd, Florentius Bravonius, William of Malmbury, Mathews of Westminster, Henry of Huntingdon, Hoveen, Marianus Scotus, Ingulfus, Osbern the Monk, c. and to these we may adioyn testimonies yet more unquestionable from letters of Popes, Princes and Prelats, authentick Records of Churches and Monasteries, Charters of Kings, Acts and Decrees of Councils, all these still extant, unquestionably legitimate, and evidently confir|ming the Catholick Religion now professed. To derogate therefore from all these, and at the same time not to doubt of the fidelity of Polybius, Livy, Tacitus, Dio, c. pagan Historians, cannot be an act of reason but onely willfull passion.
22. When therefore, for example, we shall read that before the coming of the Saxons a holy Bishop of the Picts (S. Kentigern) having a scruple of some irregularitie in his Ordination, to quiet his conscience had recourse not to any Metropolitan his neighbour in Brittany or France; but the Pope onely (who alone could dispense in the Common Law of the Church) and to his disposal submitted his miter, had all defects supplied, and acquiesced in his iudgment. Again when we shall reade both in the Records of the Brittish and Saxon Churches, that no Metropo|litan durst presume to exercise his spiritual iurisdiction till enabled there to by a Pall received from the Pope: that Popes have threatned excommunication against Saxon Kings and Prelats for disorders in Ecclesiasticall discipline, for not supplying Episcopall Sees, too long vacant, c. that they have sent Legats into England with authority acknowledged and submitted to, to call Synods, to visit and reforme abuses, c. that they have required an account of the Faith of our Bishops; accepted and iudged appeales of Bishops oppressed, not any one English Prince or Bishop protesting against such authority: That they have communicated (pro tempore) a iurisdi|ction to one Metropolitan to visit and reforme the Province of another not subiect to him (not to insist upon priviledges and exempions conferred by Popes on Churches and Monasteries, c.) I say, when any one shall have read all this and more, yet shall continue to denie that Popes have anciently exercised any spirituall Iurisdiction in our Island, or shall pretend that Brittany was of it selfe a kind of Patriarchat absolute, and independent, whereas to this day our Metropolitans have nothing to shew for their Power or places, but what they have received from Popes: this is not diffidence, but well deserves that foule title which Calvin even now gave it: And especially when wee shall see the authority and credit of a roaguy Welsh paper preferred before all such irrefragable Witnesses.
23. The like may be applied to any one who shall doubt whether the veneration and invoca|tion of Saints was anciently in practise among the Saxons in England, yea and approoved by our Lord himself, after he shall have read (besides many other passages in this our History) re|corded in the authentick acts and subscriptions of a Nationall Synod, how an Arch-bishop, severall Bishops and Nobles did with loud praises to God openly acknowledge, that by the merits and intercession of poor S. Guthlac they in the same moment in which they were deli|berating about contributions to his decayed Monasterie, did find themselves miraculously freed from a painefull Palsey which not an hower before had tormented them: and there|upon made Vowes devoutly to visit his sepulcher and relickes.
24. It may suffise for a tast to have instanced in these two points of Catholick Doctrine, ve|hemently contested and charged with noveltie by Protestants. As much may be sayd for the rest, as the Sacrifice of the Msse, veneration of Relicks, Prayer for the dead, a Beleif of Purgatorie, c. Concerning all which I will not forestall the Readers enquiry and iudgment.
25. Now I conceive it cannot reasonably be esteem'd a preiudice to my pretention of de|monstrating a continued succession of Catholick beleif in our Island, though a Protestant reader should chance not unprobably to discredite it some particular Storyes contained in this book, touching Vsions, Revelations, Miracles, c. For surely it cannot be expected ha I should be caution for every story in it: Q. Curtius who writes the gests of King Alexander, did not esteeme it a disparagement to his history, when he plainly telles his readers (Plura equidem transcribo quam credo,Curt. l. 9. c.) that is, I doe verily transcribe into this my historie more things then I my selfe doe endoubtedly beleive: For I neither dare confidently assert such things as I doubt of: Neither can I think it fitt to suppresse such things as I have by tradition received.
26. In a work of this nature concerning matters which have hapned many ages since of which no new information can be had, the modern Historian being onely a Transcriber, ought not to make his owne particular sentiments to become a rule for others. The vertue requi|site in him is fidelitie in transcribing; yet with discretion in the Choice of Authours; not equallng obscure legendaries with Writers of approved learning and probitie: Nor the nar|rations of those touching matters received upon hearsay, with such of which they professe themselves Eye-witnesses, or to have received from persons of Eminent gravitie and authoritie.
27. Though it should be true therefore, that for example, S. Beda, or S. Aldelm, or any other of our ancient Classicall writers have been somwhat too credulous in Stories told them of Miracles, Revelations, Visions, or what you will, as long as there are upon record great multitudes of other passages confirming doctrines to which such stories have regard and which cannot with any reason be suspected, it will follow that in case among a hundred there were but one miracle truly related, or but one vision truly divine, the doctrines would remaine unquestionable.
28. Yea I may adde further: In case that, upon an impossible supposition, all such stories could be demonstrated to have been false, they would notwithstanding proove such doctrines to be true. For such a world of Miracles having been pretended (call it so) by severall per|sons in all ages, to have been frequently and publickly perform'd and beleived without any censure of them upon the ground of inconsistence with the received faith of the Church, it must necessarly follow, that the Church held such Doctrines as points of her common beleif, what ever becomes of the stories or Miracles themselves.
29. For my part therfore I cannot conceive any possible way left for any of our present Sectaries to invalidate the generall result of this History, unlesse each Sect dissenting from all the rest, as well as from Catholick faith, could luckily find out some old bookes or records of more authority then these, out of which to frame for each of them a Church History to shew that not the Roman Catholick, but their peculiar tenents have been the beleef of Gods Church from the beginning, confirmed in Councils, attested by Miracles, Martyrdoms, c. And indeed it would be a pleasant entertainment to read a Presbyterian Church History compiled by such a flowing penne as M. Prinnes, with large Margins full charged yet hundreds of quotations, and according to his custome, not one of them pertinent, ages confidently pretending to prove by Presbyterian Councils, Fathers, Miracles, c. that the Church of God ha's been alwayes governed by Lay-Elders, and ha's reiected Episcopacy as Anti-christian: Or an Independent Church Historie in like manner demonstrating, that there was anciently no subordination of Congregations either to Bishops or to Classes of Presbyters, c.
30. Now such an impossible taske as this they are in reason obliged to undertake, if they will hope to make any iudicious considering person, who has no design upon Church-lands, to beleive against the pretention of this Historie, that besides the Roman Church our Lord had alwayes from the begining another Glorious Church of a quite contrarie beleif, sett aloft upon a hill, to which all nations flowed. For it is not here as in Doctrinall controversies in which after that Catholicks have heaped together a world of texts out of the Fathers to iustifie their beleif, their adversaries will think to escape either by devising forced interpretations of those Texts, or by opposing a few obscure passages out of the same Fathers which they hope some will imagine not unfavourable to them. Whereas heere in Narrations concerning matters of fact and externall practises a thousand times renewed, and never censured, the wits and in|ventions of our Sectaries must needs be miserably at a losse, they having no matter upon which to exercise their subtilty, in framing disadvantageous sences, and being utterly un|provided of Authours or Records to tell storyes favourable to their pretentions.
31. Indeed what will be the fate of Church Histories written by Vncatholick Authours, we have seen in the voluminous work of four not unlearned Primitive Lutherans called the Centuriators of Magdeburg, who conspired together with infinite labours to frame an Historicall Collection of the Doctrines professed, and Rites practised in each age out of all ancient Fathers, Councils, and Ecclesiasticall Writers. For the bulk of it, it is not an unusefull work, for there we read disposed in common places the substance of what the fathers taught in every Cen|tury of yeares, touching the propagation of the Church (not the Lutherans Church I assure you) notwithstanding its persecutions, the manner of its Government, Rites, Synodes, Prin|cipall Doctours, as likewise the Heresies opposing and contaminating it, c. In all which there is found little pertinent to their quarrells with the Catholick Church: therefore in each Cen|tury there is moreover assigned a peculiar Chapter for that purpose, the title whereof is this, A DECLINING OF DOCTRINE: containing the peculiar and incommodious opi|nions, the stubble and Errours of Doctours (in each age:) which errors have been openly delivered by them in their writings. Now what incommodious opinions and errours were these, it is very commodious that we should briefly declare.
32. In the very first Century and in the writings of the Apostles themselves these Germans find opinions very incommodious to them: For not to insist upon many disgracefull phrases applied by them to S. Peter,Magdeburg. Cent. 1 l. 2. c. 4 Ib. c. 10. f 596 imputing unto him great imbecillities, ignorances, Errours, c. Touching S. Paul they say, It was certainly no small sliding in him that he yeilded to S. Iames to be purified in the Temple: for therin he shewed that he had not a right understanding (or made not a Iust account) of the abrogations of Moses his law. And againe treating of the Epistle of S. Iames,Ib. c. 4. f. 54. they feare not to write thus, The Epistle of Iames does not in a small measure swerve from the Analogie of Apostolick Doctrine, whilst it ascribes Iustification not to faith alone (as our master Luther teaches us) but to works. Moreover it stiles the law, a law of libertie: whereas it is a testament which generates to servitude. Neither doth the author of that Epistle observe an Apo|stolicall manner in teaching, c. Let us not wonder at the choller of these men against this holy Apostle, for it cannot be deny'd but his opinions are very incommodious to them and to their new fanaticall Doctrine of Iustification.
33. In the second Centurie we have but few monuments left of those Apostolick Fathers; onely a few Epistles and short treatises of those Glorious Martyrs,Id. Cent. 2. c. 10. f. 167. S. Ignatius, S. Irenaeus, and S. Iustin: yet not any of these in the Centuriatours iudgment have wanted their Errours, that is, incommodious opinions condemning both the teaching and life of their Patriarck Luther. In the Epistles of S. Ignatius (say they) there are certaine passages, which seem to decline to foule

blemishes. For he speakes incommdiously touching Virginitie. Yea moreover out of his Epistles it ap|peares that generally in that age Christians began some what more earnestly to love and esteeme the care of preserving Virginitie. These are foule blemishes indeed but yet these are not all: For besides these there are other passages which are dangerous, and as it were seeds of Errours: for he talks of a Christian sacrifice, as if he were a very Papist. Next touching S. Ireneus we may per|ceive by his writings (say they) that he had severall incommodious opinions and those of no small mo|ment,Ib. f. 58.64. for he admitts Free-will even in spirituall things. Likewise that passage savours of Novelty which we find in the published Copies, where speaking of the Roman Church he sayes, To this Church by reason of its more potent principality it is necessarie that every other Church, that is, all beleivers who soever they are should have recourse, in asmuch as the tradition which came from the Apostle has been entirely preserved in it. Lastly touching S. Iustin the Martyr, among the stains and Errours of his writings they reckon these:Ib. c. 10. f. 207 That he seems to maintain the libertie of mans will: And that the law is possible: for he sayes, it is no impossible thing for men who have a good will, to love God above themselves and their neighbours as themselves. Yea moreover he denyes concupiscence to be sin. Lastly in gene|ral they write that the doctrine of Iustification was delivered by the Doctours of this age too negligently and obscurely,Ib. c. 4. f. 45. that is, much otherwise than Luther delivered it.
34. In the third Century they find yet more things to displease them. The Doctours of this age (say they) for the greatest part admitt free will.Ib. Cent. 3. c. 4. f. 77. b. f. 80. Thus Tertullian, Origen, Cyprian and Methodius. Again, the most sublime article of Iustification is for the most part obscured by Origen and Methodius. And as for the doctrine touching Good works, the Doctours of this age did yet more decline from the true Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles (and Luther) then those of the former. For they inven|ted and inculcated many voluntary observances. Thus Tertullian doth immoderatly extoll chastity and continence. Origen attributes to good workes that they are a preparation to salvation and consequently a cause. And with the like errour was Cyprian misled, who ascribes to good works that they are the Guardians of hope, the stay of Faith and cause us to abide continually in Christ, to live in God, and to attain to heavenly promises and Rewards.Ib. f. 8. Then for Pennance, the doctrine thereof hath been wonderfully depraved by the Writers of this age: They impute remissions of sins to Contrition. Cyprian expressely affirmes that sins are redeemed and washed away by penitentiall satisfaction. Moreover the same Cyprian speakes dangerously  not according to the Tradition of Christ and the Apostles concerning unction in Baptisme, saying it is necessary that the person baptised should be annointed with Chrisme, that thereby he may become the annointed of God and have the grace of Christ in him. And concer|ning the Eucharist,Ib. f. 83. Cyprian does superstitiously faine that some vertue accrews thereto from the person administring it: for he sayes the Eucharist sanctified on the altar: And again: The Priest doth execute the office of Christ and offers sacrifice to God the Father. Which phrase of offring sacrifice is used also by Tertullian.Ib. f. 84. You may moreover (say they) observe in the writings of the Doctours of this age, Origen and Cyprian, not obscure signes of Invocation of Saints. And lastly touching the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome Cyprian affirms expressely and without any foundation of holy scripture, that the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged by all for the mother and root of the Catholick Church. Likewise Origen sayes, that Peter by vertue of Christs promise deserved to be made the foundation of the Church. The foresaid Cyprian hath moreover on this subiect other dangerous opinions, as where he tyes and limits the Pastorall office to ordinary succession: And for bids (inferiours) to iudge Bishops and prelates of the Church.
35. It is pitty to proceed any further, in producing out of the following Centuries the sometimes sad, but most often angry complaints  acknowledgments made by these honest German Writers, how generally their Patriark Luthers Doctrines have been preiudged and con|demned by the fathers and Doctours of Gods Church, and the Faith of the present Roman Church asserted. The further they proceed in their collection, a greater number of yet more Severe Iudges they discover, till in short tyme they cannot find one to speake a good word for them. And this, like a conscionable Iury, they attest: In so much as one would be tempted almost to suspect that they had been secretly bribed by the Pope to publish their own condemnation.
36. These things considered, I cannot fore see any probabilitie of a Debate likely to ensue touching this Historie, I mean for asmuch as concerns the doctrinall part of it; nor any con|siderable arguments to proove (against the result of it) that the points of Catholick faith have not been taught through all the ages comprised within its limits. And as for the ages following, that is, since the Conquest by the Normans, it is out of all dispute that our fore|fathers have been Romans, in a deeper degree perhaps then wee their children are now.
37. But I must acknowledge I am not secure against quarrels for as much as concerns the Christian practises of pietie and vertue commended in the Saints whose Gests are heere re|lated: and the reason is because our modern sectaries have a quite different notion of vertue and pietie, from that which Catholicks from the beginning to this age have enter|tained. Therefore such Readers missing in this booke storyes of Exploits performed in old tymes, such as they magnifie in their primitive red-lettred saints of their new fashioned Ca|lendars, and finding practises here exalted for vertues, which with their good-will they would renounce in their Baptisme, as works and pompes of Sathan: I shall not want adver|saries good store, of all ages and sexes.
38. For I confesse that among the hundreds of Saints commemorated in this book (of whom not a few are acknowledged for Saints even by the Protestants, and which is more, for Workers of stupendious Miracles) not one can be found of their new Mode. Not one can be found magnified as Inventours of new Doctrines opposite to the Common faith of the Church: Not one who to spread abroad such Doctrines armed subiects against their Princes, demolished altars, burnt Churches, violated Holy Virgins, or invaded the possessions of God: Not one who thought his Christian libertie could iustifie sacrilegious lusts, in breaking vowes of Chastity and soliciting others to doe the like. Here we shall not read of somuch as one Good-wife of the citty or country, not one chamber-maid, Prentice, or Groome disputing with Doctours and Bishops, and confuting all the Fathers and Councils of Gods Church, c. So that if for want of such qualifications as these all our antient Holy Bishops, Martyrs, Doctours and Vir|gins must be unsainted, there remains for us no remedie but the old uncomfortable one Patience.
39. Yet perhaps this defect or want of heroicall perfections will not so confidently, at least in publick be obiected against our Worthies, as the vertues for which we commend them. A continuall macerating of the flesh with abstinences, fastings, Watchings, Haire-cloathes, lying on the cold hard ground and the like, these austerities our moderne spiritualists will mock at, as uselesse us voluntary self-afflictions, concerning which they assure, God wil say, Who hath required these things at your hands? And they will be yet more angry, and doe hope that God will be so too, against consecrating ones self to perpetuall Virginity or continence in Mariage, against secluding ones selfe from all conversation with the world; against almost all use of the tongue except speaking to God; against an entire submission of the will to the Direction of another. and specially against renouncing riches, honours, Pleasures, c.
40. But such zealous Apologists for concupiscence shew that they can scarce frame to them|selves an intelligible notion of the force of that fundamentall veritie of Christianitie, that no|thing ought to be the obiect of our love, but God alone: Neither can they penetrate into the in|comprehensible depravation of our soules by Originall sin. What a poor superficiall con|ception have those men of the sence of those precepts, Love not the world, nor, c. And, Mor|tifie your members which are upon the earth: Or of those practises of S. Paul, I chastise my body, and bring it into servitude least, c. And the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world!
14 Neither ought we to wonder hereat: for none but perfect soules, know how imperfect they are. None but such have eyes to see the Rebellious obstinacy and rage of Corrupt Nature, when it is constantly and vigorously contradicted; or to discover its pernicious arts and subtilties to intrude it selfe, its own seekings and interests in all, even our best actions, so perswading unwarie soules that it is onely the divine love which moves them to performe many, yea most of their actions, when his love has the least share in them. If they did rightly com|prehend these things, they would cease to wonder at, and censure happie soules which being moved by God to aspire to his perfect love, shew such severitie and rigour against the inclinations of Nature. These Patrons of sensualitie would then understand that such auste|rities of theirs, considering their divine vocation, are not in them merely voluntary obla|tions, but that by an Internall light, and inward impulse of Gods spirit God requires them from them, since without such violence exercised against nature and sensuality they would fayle in their onely necessarie design of attaining to his perfect love.
42. Another, and which is the most noble exercise of these perfect soules is so little un|derstood by such Censurers, that they resolve it to be a meer fiction. This is their uncessan practise of pure spirituall prayer, or a quiet repose of Contemplation without any interruption, even scarcely in sleep. Now a Disbeleif of this Divine Gift is more excusable, and a man may say, more rationall, in these Enemies of Gods Church, because it being a Grace which never was found but in the Catholick Church, and there also onely in choice and perfectly retired soules, all aliens are uncapable of the practise of it, since it requires an entire submission of the soule to God and Superiours or directours appointed by him, and consequently being not able to practise it, they can have no true conception of the nature of it.
43. The most perfect manner of prayer in esteem with them is such a tedious, loud, impe|tuous, and uncivill conversation with God, as they see practised by their Preachers: which is no better than a meere artificiall sleight and facilitie easily obtained by custome, and a quick imagination, and may be in perfection practised by persons full of all inordinate, sensual, revenge full and immortified passions. Neither can this prayer possibly be un-interrupted, since it is little better than a corporall exercise, employing the sensible faculties principally. Whereas the Prayer of Contemplation conferred by Almighty God on his most favoured Saints excludes all Images of the fancy, yea and intime all perceptible actuations of the understanding, and is exercised in simple Elevations of the Will, without any force at all, yet with admirable efficacy: And thereby it may in time become continuall, so as in vertue thereof all other actions may be performed. Now to dispose a soule for such prayer, there is previously re|quired an entire calmnesse, and even death of the Passions, a perfect puritie in the spirituall affections of the will,  an entire abstraction from all creatures. And such onely as have attaind to this divine exercise of Prayer, doe perfectly understand and accomplish what our Saviour

and his Apostles command, saying: Pray continually: Pray without ceasing.
44. Vpon these grounds it is that, S. Hierome sayes, The lives of Gods Saints are a (perfect) interpretation of Scripture. For we have seen, how both the Precepts of Mortification, divine love, and Prayer (under which all Evangelicall duties are comprehended) have in and by the practises of Gods Saints been explained unto us in a sence sublime, Seraphicall and Divine. Whereas proud sinfull soules for feare of excluding and condemning themselves, are forced to apply unto them a meaning base, unworthy, terrestriall, and complying with their owne imperfections. And not content with this, they presume to censure and calumniate those upon whom God hath bestowed a clearer light to see his heavenly will, and a more potent grace to performe it.
45. Hitherto I have acquainted my Readers with the motive inducing me, to employ my thoughts and labours in a work of this nature, which being a simple narration of Actions and Events, is not probably obnoxious to quarelling or controversie, yet no lesse effica|cious to produce that which should be the End, but seldome is the effect of Controversie, unity in Iudgment, Peace and obedience. I will in the next place declare the Order and method ob+served in this following history.
46. All though for as much as concernes the contexture of it, it little differs from the form of Annalls, for it proceeds consequently and orderly from year to year, except when our ancient Monuments furnish nothing at all, Yet I thought most commodious, not to frame it one entire piece, without any separation, except of years, as Ecclesiasticall Annals use to be composed: but following the method observed by the ancient Greek Historians, Eusebius, Theodoret, Socrates, c. to divide it into bookes and Chapters, with the Arguments of each premised. For I conceaved that by such frequent pauses, the Readers mind would receive some refreshment, and his memorie a considerable benefit, when he shall find the occurrents of times and actions of persons not too often interrupted and delivered pee|cemeale, that is, no more of them at once then belongs precisely to each year.
47. The History consisting of thirty five Books comprehends such occurrents, principally regarding Gods Church, as hapned in our Island during four great revolutions: and it is there|fore divided in to four parts. The first part (in eight books) comprehends the time in which this our Country, having been first discover'd and after wards conquered by the Romans, was governed by them as a Province of that Empire. And it begins more than fifty yeares before our Lords comming, and continues till the four hundred and one and twentieth after his In|carnation. The second part (in four books) comprehends the time in which Brittany having been deserted by the Romans was governed by its owne native Kings the space of a hundred seaventy five years, till the yeare of Grace five hundred ninetie six. The third part in thirteen books relates Ecclesiasticall affaires after that the Saxons having invaded Brittany chased out the antient inhabitants, and settled in it seaven Principalities, called the Saxon Heptarchie: which lasted more then two hundred years, that is, till the yeare of our Lord eight hundred. And the last part in ten books pursues the same subiect after that the West-Saxon Kings having subdu'd the rest brought England into a Monarchie: In which state it continued governed by Saxon (or Danish) Kings till the yeare of Grace one thousand sixty six, in which the Saxon race ended in Harold, who was slain, and the King-dom entirely conquered by the Nor|mans.
48. Moreover for the Readers ease and benefit, there is placed at the head of every page the name of the Governour or Prince during whose Raign the occurrents there related, hapned. And thereto is added the year of our Lords Incarnation, to the end the Reader with one glance may see where he is, and with the people of what age he then con|verses.
49. In the last place, gratitude and even Iustice requires from me an acknowledgement, that the following History as to far the greatest part of it, is collected out of the three former volumes of Ecclesiasticall Annal not long since written by the late Reverend and Learned father, F. Michael Alford (alias Grifiith) of the Society of Iesus. True it is by the occasion of severall monuments and books more lately publish'd, as the Monasticon, The ten historicall Wri|ters, The Flores Historiae Ecclesiasticae gather'd with great diligence by the late most illustrious and Learned Bishop of Chalcedon, to which may be ioyned severall volumes of Manuscripts, which I found in the Library of our RR. FF. of the order of S. Benedict at Doway: I say by the help of these I have been enabled to make considerable additions through the whole work, and to correct severall passages, as related by the foresaid reverend and learned Father: Yet all this hinders not but that the generall fabrick of the work is to be as|cribed unto him.
50. Yea moreover I must professe that though I have a long time had in my thoughts and desires a good inclination to supply a great defect, by doing right to our Religion in furnishing our Country with a History in our owne tongue, like this, yet partly by reason of other avocations, and principally a want of courage and patience, necessary to one who should search into so vast and confused a Masse of ancient Monuments re|quisite thereto, I found no great difficulty to excuse my selfe. But when I save this

discouragement removed by so able a hand, and could have no assurance, that any other had the same intention, I then conceived it my Duty to effect what before I onely wished or but faintly purposed.
51. In consideration therefore of the obligation which not my selfe onely, but all Catho|licks, yea our whole Nation, has to the foresaid Venerable father for his unwearied labours in restoring, and with such advantage representing to the world as on a magnificent Threater, all the Worthies of our Nation once more, as it were, repeating their glorious Gests; I would it were in my power to raise to his memory a Pyramide answering his merits. But that task I must leave to a more skilful hand, who shall hereafter record to Posterity the occurrents of this present age, of which no doubt he will be esteemed a principall ornament. I must therefore content my self with preparing, as I have been able, these few materialls, for his monument.
52. R. Father Michael Alford had certainly in an eminent degree the two endowments which constitute an excellent Historian, Learning and fidelity: The former was the fruit of his wonderfull industry, which manifestly appeares to whosoever shall read his Annalls: and the latter had a more Divine originall, the grace of Gods holy spirit obtained by his constant prayers and devotions.
53. His Philosophie he heard at Sevill in Spain, and his divinitie at Lvain in Brabant. From whence he was sent to Naples where he spent two yeares in doing all offices of kindnesse to our English Gentry and Merchants which frequented that port. After this, five yeares more he past with great and generall approbation in the Penitenciariae at Rome. Where also he was admitted to his Profession of four Vowes. From Rome he was sent to Liege, to be Companion and assistant to the master of Novices: and thence to be superiour at Gat. That employment ended, he was directed Missioner into England, at a season when the rumour of the Bishop of Chalcedons coming thither caused a strict watch to be appointed in the Ports. So that at Dover he was upon that suspicion examined by the magistrate, and by his order conveyed to London. But his person not answering the description given of the other by the Queens inter|cession he was set at libertie, and afterward settled in a worthy family in Leicester-shire. There he constantly lived, employing his time in assisting his Catholick Neighbours, and what could be spared from that, in writing his Ecclesiastical Annals. In the year of Grace 1652. he went beyond seas with designe of perfecting his History: Where coming to Saint Omar, a lingring feaver seized on him being then near seaventy yeares of age, which un|dermined and at last consumed his decayed naturall strength.
54. Great abilities and learning will perpetuate ones memory on earth, but if unaccom|panied with Piety, it will be apt to swell the person with Pride which can find no place in heaven. This venerable Father knew this well, and therefore made it his cheifest care and study to adorne his soule with Piety and vertue. As he caried the name, so did he also a ten|der devotion to the glorious Archangell Saint Michael: of which he left a memorial divers yeares before his death, by a devout prayer and Picture devised by him, which he caused to be cutt at Antwerp, and dispersed to the honour of the Saint, not only as his Patron, but also the Standard-bearer of the Church against rebellious Heresy, which he also endeavoured to quell both by word and writing. For the space of two and twentie yeares before his death a part of his daily devotion was to lodge his soule every day in one of the sacred wounds of our blessed Saviour. And his infirmity encreasing upon him, he desired, four dayes before his death, to be put in mind if he chanced to forget his pious exercise. The last day lodged him in the heart, there he dyed in the house of  to live for ever in heaven, and there to enioy the happy reward of all his pious labours.
55. Having now (together with the forementioned monuments) named this reverend father Alford as the principall fountain from which the following History is derived: I have in him named all manner of Authours requisite therein, for not any have escaped his search. And having a well grounded assurance of his fidelity in his allegations from them, I have for the most part quoted them out of his books, yet not abridging mine own libertie of adding more then he has made use of or sometimes making other inferences from them then he has done.
56. And whereas among our Historians, frequent, occasion has been given to alledge in the following book severall of our Protestant Authours, I have some ground to suspect that I shall displease some men, by a fault called Civility, in not changing the titles which they give themselves, and are so stiled by the whole nation. For whereas I have generally writ|ten Bishop Parker, Bishop Vsher, Bishop Godwin, c. I am told I ought to have annexed some phrase of disparagement as Pseudo-Episcops, or Qui se dicunt Episcops, c.
57. But for my excuse or defence I must take leave to say. 1. that herein I follow not onely the example of the ancient best fathers in their disputes even against Arians, Pho|tinians, Novatians, c. but of the most learned Authour of the Protestants Apology. 2. I am assured that if my Accusers were personally to converse with these Protestant Prelats they would not after such a manner change their titles. Now I see no reason why an obligation should be imposed on any to be uncivill with his penne, and not with his tongue.

3. I doe not find thatever any Protestant esteemed such civilitie an advantage to them in the debte concerning their Ordinations: for to instance in a case in iust reason far lesse dispu|table then that, yet not long agoe actually and terribly disputed: If during the late Rebellion a faithfull subiect of the King should have petitioned for a Passe to goe through the Rebels quarters, no man would have suspected him of disloyalty because in his Petition to Fairfax, Cromwell, or Waller he stiled them Lords Generalls. Has not the King himself in addresses to the unlawfull Parliament done the like? Yet all this surely without engagement to ac|knowledge their authoritie to be legitimate.
58. Particularly as touching the forementioned Writers, it cannot be denyed but that we are much obliged to their diligence in the search of publick Records, and their sincerity in delivering what they found. True it is that B. Parker according to the Impulse of a Calvinisticall spirit often inserts malitious invectives against the Catholick Church, as being indeed the Patriarck of Calvinisticall Prelacy. B. Godwin is lesse cholerick and may be excused if now and then he seek some advantage, particularly upon the account of maryed Prelates. But as for B. Vsher his admirable abilities in Chronologicall and Historicall erudition, as also his faithfulnes and ingenuous sincerity in delivering without any provoking reflexions, what with great labours he has observed, ought certainly at least to exempt him from being trea|ted by any one rudely and contemptuously, especially by mee, who am moreover alwayes obliged to preserve a iust resentment of very many kind effects of freind-ship received from him.
59. And thus at last I conclude the subject about which my desire was to entertain my Readers, before they enter upon the following History: If this discourse be too tedious, they cannot in reason refuse their pardon, since we both know that I cannot detaine them against their will, nor any longer then they have a mind to it. God almighty pardon what|soever defects are in this Book and give that good successe to it which I onely desire and intend, that his holy Name may be glorified, and the Christian Readers soule advanced in a love of truth and peace. Amen.







ERRATA.
The Reader will be pleased to consider, that this Book having been printed in a Countrey where not one of the composers understood the least word of English, it may be esteemed a par|donable fault, if many Errours have been committed. The principall among which are here re|ctified: as for unconsiderable ones which have hapned by mistake at single Letters resembling one the other, and which will not stopp an intelligent Reader, he himself is desired to be the Correctour.
Page. 4. Col. a. Lin. 63. Oresius or Read, Oresius delivers, or. p. 37. col. b. l. 52. then to be de|signed from. R. then have been design'd for p. 81. col. a. l. 11. a freeidly R. a freindly p. 84. col. b l. 28 same tho Cap. R. the same Cup. p. 85 col. a l. 20. He his R. He is. p. 93 col. a l. 5 have dome R. have done. l. 52 Numbers Franks R. numbers of Franks. p. 98 c. b l. 6 Acts S. Albanus R. Acts of S. Albanus p. 107. c. b l. 41. Rudbur near R. Rudburns near. p. 110 c. a l. 52 he gan R. begun. p. 113 c. b l. 7 Constantis R. Constantin's. p. 50 c. a l. 20 the fame R. the same p. 57 c. a l. 35 Governour however R. of Governours, however. p. 180. c. a l. 1 man a a R. man of a p. 195 c. b l. 2 for more R. far more. p. 197 c. a l. 11 but onely R. being onely. p. 209 c. a l. 46 Kings last R. Kings lust. p. 225 c. a l. 2 writer R. writes p. 232 c. a l. 41 part reaches of Brat|tany which from R. part of Brittany which reaches from. p. 234 c. b l. 39 memory the R. me|mory of the. p. 249 c. b l. 59 by own order R. by his own order. p. 263 c. b l. 13 last R. lust p. 264 c. a l. 17 came of R. came out of. l. 28 (Dele) and more. p. 274 c. b l. 25 more the R. more then the. l. 64 (after Protestant (Dele) the 2. following lines.) p. 292 c. b l. 45 thom R. whom. p. 293 c. a l. 63 was freed his pain R. was freed from his pain. p. 39 c. b l. 35 letters the King R. letters to the King. p. 383 c. a l. 57 fasting R. fastning. p. 385 c. a l. 62 in our Church R. in her Church. p. 95 c. a l. 32 inheited R. inherited. p. 401 c. a l. 22 accessours R. Assessours. p. 423 c. a l. 51 month (of March) R. Moon (of March.) p. 427 c. a l. 6 our wayes R. your wayes. p. 429 c. a l. 5 Ethelbert R. Ethelred. p. 430 c. a l. 20 Kord R. Lord. p. 434 c. a l. 9 wast summes R. vast summs. p. 441 c. a l. 9 the Rome Synod R. the Roman Synod. p. 447 c. b l. 8 at Shepey R. at Selesey. p. 473 c. b l. 33 an within (Dele) an. p. 483 c. a l. penult. Catholick and R. Catholick Faith and p. 501 c. a l. 55 making mercy R. making merry. l. 52 Narratio and R. Narration. and. pag. 512 c. b lin. 11 Earn Island R. Earn Island. p. 524 c. a l. 21 hand R. and. p. 525 c. a l. 46 will make R. will I make. p. 527 c. b l. 54 drive violently R. drive him violently. p. 536 c. b l. 18 of an age R. of an ague. p. 571 c. b l. 32 elft R. left. p. 598 c. b l. 10 of hu R. of his. l. 31 charging its R. changing its. l. 60 own of name, and seaven R. own name, and of seaven. p. 679 c. a l. 38 were complied R. were compiled. l. 64 his longing R. his lodging. p. 716 c. b l. 22 all vast R. all wast. p. 720 c. a l. 16 West-Saxon Kings R. West-Saxon Kingdoms. p. 728 c. a l. 10 his vours to him R. his favours to him. p. 719 c. a l. 1 return ment back R. returned back. l. 8 sent for he R. he sent for. p. 743 c. b l. 65 his age R. of his age. p. 798 c. a l. 30 at a so that place R. at a place. p. 830 c. a l. 5 his New R. his Nephew. p. 836 c. a l. 16 acts piety R. acts of piety. p. 861 c. b l. 40 as Dorchester R. at Dorchester. l. 51 grates R. gates. p. 79 c. b l. 43 curied R. cured. p. 902 c. a l. 34 of S. Dunstan R. of S. Cuth|bert. p. 907 c. b l. 62 no man determine R. no man can determine. p. 935 c. a l. 23 slain King Edmund R. slain by King Edmund. p. 940 c. b l. 20 Cromton R. Bromton. p. 948 c. a l. a of whole R. of the Whole.





THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY VNDER ROMAN GOVERNOVRS I. PART.


I. CHAP.I. CHAP.

1. A generall view of the Government and Religion of Brittany when first disco|vered. 2. c. A proof of Gods mercy and Grace to our Nation.

1. _HAVING an intention, through the Divine assistance, to compile a plain orderly Narration of Church-affaires touching the infancy and growth of Chri|stian Religion in this our Island of Brittany; it will be expedient in preparation therto, to give the Reader a prospect of the State both of its ancient Civill Government and Re|ligion also, or rather most horribly impious Superstitions and Ceremonies: by a due consi|deration of both which we may clearly see, and ought thankfully to acknowledge the wonderfully blessed effects of the Divine Providence and Grace towards this our Native Countrey more plentifully then to any o|ther.
2. For though the Civill State here was in those times iniuriously invaded and usurped by the Romans: yet by Gods most wise, holy and mercifull Direction, the injuries and oppressions sustained by our Ancestours pro|ved an occasion of their greatest Happines, since by meanes of the correspondence and entercourse then intervening between this Island, formerly unknown, and the rest of the Roman Empire, to which it became sub|ject, a passage was opened for a free admit|tance of the Divine Light of saving Christian Verities, the victory of which over the Brit|tains Soules did abundantly recompence the servitude induced by the Romans over their Bodies and Estates.
3. And moreover the Omnipotence of Di|vine Grace was illustriously commended by its triumphing over a far greater opposition raised against it by the Devil in this, more then almost any other Nation. For here es|pecially was anciently erected the Shop and Schoole of most impious and inhumane Su|perstitions. The abominable Art of Magicall and Diabolicall Divinations, the most barba|rous Mysteries of Sacrifising to the Devil with humane blood, and, in a word, whatso|ever impieties Hell could suggest, were here invented and practised: the Inhabitants of this Island by the miserable advantage of their solitude and separation from the rest of mankind being at more leasure to enter|tain, and withall better enabled by Nature

with Study to promote and encrease those execrable Rites: For (as Tacitus relates from Iulius Agricola's observation,Lacit. in vit. Agricolae. who had suffi|cient experience to make a judgment) the Brittains were naturally endowed with quicker and sharper wits then their Neighbours the Gauls, c. And it was cheifly in the inventing of impious Superstitions that they gained a wretched reputation and authority among the adjacent Nations, who therefore sent their Youth into Brittany to be instructed in the Arts and delusions of Sathan,Caesar. l. 5. comment. as Caesar testifies. Such advantageous enablements, and withall such perswasive invitations had they to be more wicked, and greater ene|mies of God and true Piety, then any of their Neighbours.
4. But within a few Ages we shall see Sa|than like lightning fall from heaven: We shall see this our Nation and Countrey become the Schoole of Holiness and Vertue, the Nur|sery of Saints, the Refuge of persecuted Chri|stians, and a fruitfull Mother of Apostles to plant our Holy Faith in most of our confi|ning Regions. This was a change of the right hand of the most High. But before we can be spectatours of the manner how this won|derfull Change was made, we are first to take a view of the ancient primitive State of this our Island, by whom it was peopled, and how governed both in affaires Civill, and such as pertained to Religion.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. The ancient Inhabitants of Brittany: 3.4 c. Conquer'd by C. Iulius Caesar: yet with great difficulty. 5. His Motives for the invasion. 6. A small part only subdued.

1. IT is a great Proof against the ancient Philosophers, and our Modern Atheisti|call seeming-Christians that the world was not from eternity, because all the parts and Regions of the Earth have been successive|ly inhabited by Nations spreading them|selves by little and little from the East where man was created. Thus was this Island of Brittany first possess'd by colonies of the neighbouring Belgick Gaules, c. as appeares by the names severally given by them to the places where they respectively settled themselves, as the Atrebates, Morini, Belga, and severall other, situate especially on the Southern coasts: which argues these to have been later Plantations, though pre|ceding the Age in which this our Countrey was first discovered to the civill part of the world.
2. Now though the ancient inhabitants coming from severall quarters were divided in names and regions, yet they were all joyn'd in one common Title of Brittains, and one common language, the same with that of the Gaules. To fetch the name of Brittains from Brutus a supposed son of Sil|vius and great grandchild of Aeneas, savours of the doting fancies of our old Bards and Druids: more probable it is that they were call'd so from the ancient Gallick word Brith, which signifies colour'd or pain|ted, for so Caesar describes them to have been in his dayes. And for the same reason the Romans in following times called the Northern people of this Island, that is, such as had not been subdued by them, and ac|customed to their Civill Education and cloathing, by the name of Picts, because they retained their old fashion of colouring their Bodies, as beleiving that made them appeare more agreable to one another, and more terrible to their Enemies.Som. in Gloss. Or rather, as Mr. Somner observes, the name of Brit|tany seems to be derived from the old Brit|tish word Brydio, which signifies to boyle with rage: fitly applyed to all the Brittish Islands, as being encompassed with a Sea esteemed by the Ancients almost unnaiga|ble, by reason of the swelling furious waves with which it is most frequently agitated.
3. The first that discovered this our Island to the remoter parts of the civilis'd world, was Caius Iulius Caesar, who toward the lat|ter end of his ten years warr in Gaule tran|sported his Legions hither more then once. Two severall attempts he made in vain to conquer that part of the Island which he in|vaded: but at the third by meanes of the mis-intelligence between the severall petty Princes raigning here, he forced them to yeild and submit themselves to Tribute. Those who opposed him were only a few severall states in the Southern parts of the Island, who made choice of Cassibelin King of a few Provinces about London to be Ge|nerall in the warre:io. lib. 59. For as for the Nor|thern and Midland Countreyes of Brittany they were not at all engaged, nor suffred any prejudice by his conquest. Notwithstanding that small purchase which he made, and which he paints forth much to his own ad|vantage, was so highly esteemed by himselfe and the Roman Senate, that they ordained no lesse then twenty days of publick thanks|giving to their Gods for so great a victory: as beleiving that they had discovered a new world,Lucan. l. whose bounds were unknown to them: For till the next Age it was not known to be an Island.
4. Caesar in his description of this Attempt omits severall passages which were not for his advantage: but other Roman Historians of those times take notice of them: and particularly Lucan affirms that his affrighted soldiers turn'd their backs to the Brittains in search of whom they made so many voyages. And all the fruit of his victory accrewing either to himselfe or the Citty of Rome was very in|considerable, besides the glory of having been an

invader,Dio. ubi supr. Tacit. in vit. Agric. saith Dio. Insomuch as Tacitus con|fesses that though by one prosperous combat he terrified the inhabitants, and got some possession of the Sea coasts, yet he might be sayd rather to have discovered the Countrey to posterity, then to have given them the possession.
5. The Motives of his passing the Ocean thither in that warlike manner, besides his naturall ambition and thirst of Glory, which was boundles, was a desire of revenge a|gainst the Brittains, who sent succours to the Gaules against him, and thereby gave some stop and delay to his victories over them.Sueton. in Caesar. c. 47. Suctonius adds another Motive of Co|vetousnes, for says he, Caesar had a great hope of enriching himself with Brittish Pearles, the large|nes of which he did much admire.
6. This first conquest in Brittany, such an one as it was, hapned about five and fif|ty yeares before the Birth of our Saviour. And the effect of it was only obtaining a verball dependance of some few Southern Princes of the Island on Rome, testified by an inconsiderable Tribute: The Countrey in the mean time being altogether governed as before: for there were as yet no Garri|sons left there to keep them in awe: the petty Kings raigning still, enjoy'd their for|mer dominion over their subjects: which by acquaintance with the Romans became more Civil, and in that regard were indeed gainers by being conquered.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1.2. The Birth of Christ in the three and fortieth yeare of Augustus, when Cyno|belin was King in Brittany. 3 4 His three children. 5. Adminius the eldest is banish'd: and Togodumnus succeeds in the Kingdome: who denies Tribute. 6. The affairs of Brittany neglected by Au|gustus and Tiberius. 7.8. Caligula's fa|naticall attempt against it. 9. c. Clau|dius his invasion and conquest: conti|nued by his Generall Plautius, who after Togodumnus his death overcomes Cara|ctacus, and sends him prisoner to Rome. 16. His Successours victories. 17.18. Of Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes. 19. Suetonius Paulinus subdues the Isle of Mona. 20. c. The Iceni under Queen Boudicea rebell: and destroy eighty thou|sand Romans: but are defeated by Pau|linus. 24. Peace succeds.

Caes. Com|ment. l. 5.1. CAesar relates as one occasion or pre|tence for his invasion of Brittany, that Mandubratius a son of Immanuentius late King of the Trinobantes, (that is, Middlesex and Essex) who had been slain by Cassibelin, fled over into France and there demanded Caesars Protection, who brought him with him into Brittany, and restored him to his Principality. This Mandubratius seems to have been the same that Beda, Eutropius, c. call'd Androgeus, a title probably given him by the Brittains for betraying the liberty of his Countrey: for in that name according to the ancient Brittish la~guage, is imported one that is a criminall,Bed. l. 1. c. 2. facinorous person. This Androgeus or Mandubratius seems afterward to have been again expell'd: For in Augustus his days (Caesars adopted son,) we find Cy|nobelin a son of Cassibelin to have raigned in Brittany, and continued the payment of the Tribute imposed by Caesar, as appears by ancient Coyns which were the Numismata Census.
2. It was in the time of this Cynobelin (usually by Brittish Historians called Kimbelin,) and in the forty third yeare of Augustus his raign that the Sun of righteousnes arose, a light unto the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel: for then our Lord Iesus Christ the only eternal Son of God was born of a pure Virgin in Beth|lem the Citty of David.
3. The Seat of this King, as likewise of his Predecessours was Camulodunum (now called Maldon in Essex,Camb. l. Brit. Dio. lib. 60.) as Dio witnesses. Which Town received its name from Camu|lus, in an ancient inscription called the Holy and most powerfull God, answering to the Ro|man and Grecian God Mars.
4. According to the ancient Brittish Chro|nicles this Cynobelin had two sons, Guiderius and Arviragus, who raigned successively after him. But in the Roman Histories we find that Cynobelin had three sons, of quite dif|ferent names, to wit, Adminius, Togodumnus and Catarecus or Caractacus. It is hard to de|vine whence this so great diversity of rela|tions should proceed, whether the same per|sons had severall names, or whether these were severall persons, and Princes of seve|rall dominions in Brittany. Neither indeed is it much important in it self, and much lesse for our present design, that this ambi|guity should be cleared.
5. It may suffise us to be informed from the Roman Story,Sueton. in Calig. cap. 44. that in the raign of the Emperour Tiberius who succeeded Augustus, the eldest son of Cynobelin, called Adminius, was for some great crime banish'd by his Father: who dying presently after, his se|cond son called by the Brittains, Guiderius and by the Romans Togodumnus, succeeded in the Kingdome, and had the confidence to be the first who denyed to pay the Tri|bute to the Romans imposed on his Ance|stours.
6. That which gave him this confidence may seem to have been the neglect which Augustus had of preserving his interest in this Island. For though toward the middle of his raign, upon some provocations

he had had an intention to transport an Ar|my hither, which was diverted by other oc|currents of greater importance: yet grow|ing old he changed his mind, being so far from an ambition to extend his Empire, that he straitned the bounds of it,Tacit. Hist. l. 1. confining it with the River Euphrates on the East, and the Ocean on the West and North: by which this our Island was in a sort excluded from the Roman Empire. And this design which was an effect of Augustus his wisedome, was through sluggishnes and an attendance to sensuall pleasures continued by Tiberius, who for the space of the first two years never went out of his Palace,Suet. in Ti|ber. cap. 38. and du|ring the succeeding twenty years of his his raign never made progresse further then a few Cities neighbouring to Rome, the re|motest of which was Antium.
7. This slothfull disposition in Tiberius seems to have been the cause that our ba|nish'd Prince Adminius either did not ad|dresse himself to him for his restitution, or was neglected by him. But a more active nature in Tiberius his Successour,Dio lib. 59. Caius Cali|gula, encouraged Adminius to implore his protection. This he did when Caligula by his frantick lusts had emptied his Treasure, and having by his extortions empoverish'd all Italy, went with an Army into Gaule, meerly upon pretence of commotions in Germany to pillage that and the rest of the adiacent Countreyes. Afterward he made a shew as if he would passe over into Brittany, and continued his march to the Ocean, where he stay'd making no further attempts at all, yea being enraged against any of his Officers, whensoever they execu|ted any warlike design.
8. Here it was that Adminius submitted himselfe and all the right which he preten|ded to his Kingdome to Caligula: which so puffed up the mind of the vain Emperour that,Sueton. in Calig. as if the whole Island had been effe|ctually delivered up to him, he wrote boa|sting letters to Rome: but was so far from re|storing that banish'd Prince, that all he did was to range his Army in battel on the Sea coasts over against Brittany, planting his En|gins, c. no man imagining what he inten|ded: when upon the suddain he comman|ded all his souldiers to fill their helmets and bosoms with cockles and other fish-shells, calling this a conquest of the Ocean: and with those spoyles return'd in triumph to Rome.
9. But Caligula's next Successour Claudius pursued his design against Brittany more se|riously. Severall Motives he might have to renew an invasion,VVestmona|steriensis. Ann. D. 44. Oros. lib. 7. c. 6. Beda lib. 1. c. 3.
Sueton. in Cloud. c. 17. Dio. lib. 60 either for Guiderius his neglect of continuing his Tribute, as Mathaus Westmonasteriensis, or to shew him|selfe a Prince usefull to the Common|wealth, as Paulus Orosius, or because of fresh tumults in the Island. However in the se|cond yeare of his raign one Bericus a Brittish Nobleman being for sedition banish'd out of Brittany, as Adminius had been in the raign of Caligula, sollicited likewise Claudius to make an invasion to recover his rights there: Whereupon order was given to Aulus Plautius the Emperours Generall in Gaule to transport his Army into Brittany, which though with great difficulty, by reason of the souldiers unwillingnes, he performed. His army landed in severall places: and particularly Vespasian his Lievtenant-Gene|rall, in the Isle of Wight, which he subdued. The Brittains not expecting an invasion, were unprovided and dispersed: so that the Romans had much adoe to find and draw them out of their woods and fast-nesses. But at last they in severall battles overcame first Caractacus, then Togodumnus (or Guide|rius) sons of Cynobelin, who after the defeat of their Armies, escaping, retired to the place where the River of Thames disburdens it selfe into the Sea. There likewise by means of the German souldiers in the Roman Army, which were accoustumed to swimme armed over the most rapid Rivers, the Brit|tains were again defeated, and Togodumnus slaine.
10. After whose death, when the Brittains were so far from being discouraged with it, that they more earnestly and unanimously renewed the warre, inflamed with a desire to revenge that and their former losses, Aulus Plautius out of feare pursued the warr no further, but repaired to the Emperour, as he had been commanded in case any extraor|dinary difficulty interven'd. Hereupon Clau|dius himself in the fourth yeare of his raign resolved to make an expedition: for which purpose renforcing his Army, and making great provisions for the war, among which were Elephants also, he went down to Oslia, from whence sayling to Marseilles, and per|forming the rest of the journey partly by Land, and partly by Sea, he arrived at his Army, expecting him on the Banks of Thames:Maldon in Essex. which River having pass'd over, he faught the Enemy and had an entire Victo|ry, insomuch as he possess'd himself of Ca|mulodunum, the Pallace of the King: and shortly after he subdued many by force, and received others by a voluntary surren|dry. Whereupon he suddenly return'd to triumph in Rome, having spent in all these exploits only sixteen dayes in Brittany, the Government of which he left to Plautius. All these particulars are recorded by Dio,
11. Plautius after the Emperours depar|ture, pursued the war vigorously: so much to the Emperours satisfaction that he gran|ted him the honour of an inferiour sort of Triumph, call'd Ovation, in the procession whereof he graced him so far as to attend him himself on foot, walking by his side both in his going to the Capitoll and retur|ing thence. And so highly did he esteem this Conquest of Brittany, that he accepted among his own Titles, and gave to his only

son the name of Britannicus.
12. In the tenth yeare of Claudius his raign there was sent into Brittany, as Successour of Plautius in the Government of the Army Publius Ostorius, who finding great troubles and tumults in the Countrey by his di|ligence and courage quickly pacified them, disarming the Brittains, fortifying with Garrisons all the Provinces between the Rivers Antona (which seems to have gi|ven the name to South-hampton) and Severn. Thence advancing to the Eastern parts of the Island inhabited by the Iceni (that is, those of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge and Hun|tingdon) whom he found willing to enter into an association, but utterly refusing to admit Garrisons. Whereupon he subdued them by force, though severall other Pro|vinces, and some which had formerly sub|mitted, joyned themselves with them. And to strengthen the Romans possession, he pla|ced in Camulodunum a colony of the fourth Legion called Victrix.
Vid. Tacit. lib.13. From thence he turn'd his arms West|ward, against the Silures, inhabiting Here|fordshire and the Southern part of Wales. Here he found terrible resistance: for besides that these Silures were a feirce Nation, they put great confidence in Caractacus, who eight years before having been driven from the Trinbantes had his refuge among them, and became their Generall: A man by many heroicall exploits courageously perform'd, and by his admirable patience in suffrings become highly renouned, both among the Brittains and Romans. Notwithstanding by the advantage which the Romans had in their arms (for the poore Brittains were wholly unprovided of such as were defen|sive) Ostorius gained a memorable Victory, by which he became seised of the wife, daughter and brethren of Caractacus. As for himselfe he escaped by flight, and repairing to Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes (or Yorkshire,) he was by her perfidiously deli|vered up to the Romans, and sent prisoner to Rome, being for the fame of his courage a spectacle of wonder to all the Citties of Ita|ly through which he pass'd. All these par|ticulars together with his magnanimous be|haviour before the Emperour Claudius may be seen elegantly celebrated by Tacitus.Tacit. Ann. lib. 12. For as for the dreaming fables of Ma|thaeus Westmonasteriensis,VVestmon. A. D. 44. concerning a ma|riage formerly made between Caractacus (whom he confounds with Arviragus) and a daughter of Claudius call'd Genuisa, (never heard of among the Romans,Ibid. A. D. 52. c.) they de|serve not to be taken notice of.
14. Yet probable it is that which the same Authour relates that Caractacus having been restored by Claudius, both to his liberty and Kingdome, spent the remainder of his life in peace, shewing much love and re|spect to the Roman Empire, and exercising great justice and liberality to others, by which his glory was encreased through all Europe. Now what were the names and for|tunes of his Brethren is uncertain. Probable it is that one of them was that Cogidunus mentioned by Tacitus,Tacit. in A|gri. to whom the Roman Emperour gave severall Cities, with the Title of King: who (saith that Authour) remained even to the dayes of Vespasian entirely faithfull to the Romans, and induced others to the like fidelity:acit Annal. l. 2. Such being the received ancient cou|stome of that Empire to make use of Kings as in|struments of servitude.
15. During the absence of Caractacus, the Silures began new tumults, and with great multitudes encompassed the Roman Cohorts busie in building forts for Garrisons in their Countrey. In that combat the Prefec of the Campe, eight Centurions, and severall Companies fell: and had not the rest been releived by neighbouring Garrisons and quarters, they had all been destroyed. And afterward when the Romans went to forrage they were again set upon by the Brittains, they together with severall troops, and such Cohorts as were ready, were put to flight: But Ostorius opposing his Legions to the flyers and pursuers, turn'd the fortune of the day, and defeated the Brittains.
16. Ostorius dying presently after, Claudius sent in his place Aulus Didius, who arriving in Brittany, found that since Ostorius his death, the Legion under the command of Malius Valens had received a losse in a bat|tell against the Silures, whose insultings he repressed. But presently after in the Nor|thern parts of the Isle, a discord hapning be|tween a Queen and her husband, occasion'd a meeting of severall States adjoyning, call'd severally to assist each party,d. ibid.  lib. 3. Hst. and opened a way to the Romans to enlarge their Dominio~.
17. For artismandua Queen of the Bri|gantes (Yorkshire) having married Venusius a Nobleman of the same Province, after she had obliged the Romans by giving up to them Caractacus and by that correspondence encreas'd her wealth and luxury, began to despise her husband, and took into the so|ciety of her bed and throne his servant and Armour-bearer (Armigerum) Vellocatus. This caused great seditions in the Kingdome, the greatest part of the Province assisting Venu|sius, by whose help the Queen was brought into great straits, and forced to demand as|sistance from the Romans, who sent severall Cohorts and Wings of Horses, which after severall combats at last freed the Queen from danger,A. D. 60. but withall restored Venusius to the Kingdome again.
18. Didius afterwards dying in the fourth yeare of Nero the Successour of Claudius in the Empire: Verannius was next sent Praeto into Brittany, who made a few excursions into the woods, wasting the enemies Coun|trey, but was hindred from making any pro|gresse by death hapning to him within one years space.Tacit. in Agric.
19. In his place was sent Suetonius Paulinus, who pass'd the two first years of his Govern|ment very prosperously, subduing severall Provinces, and strengthning the Roman Gar|risons. And afterwards having a design to take from the Brittains the Isle of Mona (or Anglesey) which was a refuge for fugitives, he pass'd over his Army thither, which was astonish'd to see the horrible aspect of the Enemies forces, among which woemen ran up and down with torches in their hands, having their haire dischevelled, and gar|ments fashion'd on purpose to excite hor|rour. The Druids likewise, whose princi|pall eat that Island was, made processions with their hands lift up, and their tongues uttring dire curses and prayers: But the Romans, encouraged by their Generall, chan|ging their astonishment into contempt of such a fanatick multitude, charging among them quickly dispersed them: and after|wards settling Garrisons, cut down their Groves consecrated to most savage and exe|crable Superstitions.
20. But whilst Paulinus was exulting for the Conquest made by him in the Western parts of the Island, the Iceni inhabiting in (Norfolk, c.) the Eastern Provinces, re|belling against the Romans, brought a ter|rible destruction upon them fore-signified by wonderfull Prodigies:Dio. lib. 62. Tacit. Annal. l. 14. Curia.For saith Dio and Tacitus likewise, there were heard in the Counsell-Chamber of the Romans a noyse and murmur as of barbarous people laughing and rejoycing, and in the Thea|ter a houling and weeping of multitudes: Moreover there were seen houses floa|ting on the Thames, and the Sea between Gaule and Brittany had the resemblance of Blood, c.
21. The causes of that insurrection and rebellion Dio ascribes to the oppression and covetousnes of the Emperours Procurator, Decianus Catus, who would renew the for|feytures of Estates though formerly remit|ted by Claudius. But Tacitus relates a more likely and far more incensing provocation,Ibid. which was this.Prasutagus King of the I|ceni dying very rich, in his last Testament made the Emperour joynt-heire with his two daughters: thinking therby to se|cure his Kingdome and family fsom all injuries. But it fell out quite contrary: insomuch as his Kingdome was invaded and wasted by the Officers of the Army, and his family by the Emperours servants. Yea the Widdow Queen could not secure her self from stripes, nor her daughters from ravishment: the Nobility was spoyled of their estates, the Princes of blood were used like slaves, and the whole Kingdome reduced into the form of a Roman Province.
Hereupon they take arms, sollicite the Trinobantes and o|ther States not yet accustomed to slavery: being hereto chiefly encouraged by the ab|sence of Paulinus the Roman Generall.
22. An army being suddenly rais'd consi|sting of about one hundred thousand, Queen Boudicea, a Lady of high courage, would her self be the Generall: and lead them so courageously and prosperously, that she beseiged and took two of the firmest Colonies that the Romans had, Camulodonum and Veru|lamium, destroying all, and exercising most barbarous cruelties even upon the women, hanging them on gallowses naked, with their breasts cut off and sow'd to their mouthes, c. There are reckoned no fewer then fourscore thousand Romans de|stroyed in this insurrection.
23. Newes of so fearfull a Tragedy being brought to Paulinus in Anglesey, he present|ly march'd confidently through the midst of the Enemies till he came to London, a co|lony, rather rich with marchandise, then for|tified against a Seige. Therefore notwith|standing the supplications and teares of the inhabitants, he quits it, chusing to secure the whole Roman State with the losse of one Town, which was presently destroyed by the Enemy. He had with him not above ten thousand souldiers: notwithstanding making choice of a convenient place, back'd with a wood, and having a nar|row entrance which freed him from danger of surprise, he resolved to fight the Brittains camped in a plaine before him. And so much had a desire of revenge in|flam'd the courage of the Romans, that mar|ching in a close order, after they had spent their darts and piles, they peirced through the vast body of the Enemies, entirely rou|ting them: and neglecting spoyles, they spared none, not even women, nor cattle, but added them to the heapes of the slain. That which most expos'd the Brittains to so great a slaughter (for no lesse then seaventy thousand were slain in this battle) was that they had closed their own Army be|hind with their Cariages, in which besides their goods were placed their wives and children, so confident they were of Victo|ry. After this defeat the Queen Boudicea en|ded her life by poyson:Gildas de Ecd. called by Gildas, a crafty Lionesse, for her cruelty and perfidious|nes in managing the former war.
24. After this so signall a Victory, the Brittains during the whole raign of Nero, never attempted any revenge, but quietly submitted themselves to the Romans. If there were any tumults, they were caused by the Romans themselves. To Suetonius Paulinus succeeded Turpilianus, who ingra|tiated himself with the Brittains by the soft|nes of his Government, more acceptable, because compared with his Predecessours severity. After three years Trebellius Maxi|mus was sent Praetor, who being naturally slouthfull, and unacquainted with the arts of managing a campe,  moreover sordidly avaritious, became hated and despised by

the souldiers. Which hatred was encreased by Roscius Coelius Legat of the twentieth Le|gion, a man formerly of a crosse seditious nature. The discord between these two grew to such a height, Coelius objecting to the Generall his defrauding the souldiers of their pay, and Trebellius charging Coelius with sedition, and confounding the order of discipline, that most of the souldiers both Roman and Auxiliaries siding with Coelius, Trebellius was forced, being deserted of all, to fly to Vitellius then Generall to the Le|gions in Germany.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1. A particular description of the Supersti|tion of ancient Brittains.
2.3.4. Of their Preists, or Druids. 5.6. Of their Bards.
7.8. c. Of their Idols, Belinus, Dia|na, Belatucadrus, c.
11. Claudius the Emperour worship'd as a God. 12.13. c. Their inhumain Rites: forbidden by the Romans: 16. But not extirpated till Christianity came in.

1. HItherto we have given a brief of the State of Brittany from the time of its first discovery and conquest by Iulius Cae|sar to the end of Nero the sixth Roman Empe|rour and last of the family of the Caesars. In which compasse of time occurs some, though not much matter to furnish our History. But before we mention any parti|culars of it, it will be expedient to declare what was the Religion of the ancient Brit|tains, to the end that the horrour of that spiritual darknes which clowded this Island may give a greater luster to the celestiall light which through Gods infinit mercy be|gan to shine here.
2. For this purpose consulting former Writers, we find that among the Ancient Brit|tains, Gaules likewise, there were two sorts of people of greatest authority, whose em|ployment regarded their Religion: Those were 1. the Druids, and 2. the Bards: the for|mer were, as it were their Preists: the other their Prophets.
Druids. Plin. Hist. natur. lib 16. cap. 44. Lucan. lib. 1. Caes. l. 6. de ll. Gall. Isa. 1.29.3. The Druids were so called, if we beleive Pliny, from the Greek word , which sig|nifies an Oake: because, as Lucan and Caesar affirme, their dwelling was in Groves, and there they perform'd their Superstitious ceremonies: a practise of Idolatry ancient|ly condemn'd in the Iewes, and taught them by their neighbouring Heathens. But the signall Oake which the Druids made choice of for their veneration, was such a one on which Misletoe did grow: by which privy token, as they conceived, God mark'd it out, as of soveraign vertue for his service. Vnder this tree on the sixth day of the Moone (wheron they began their yeare) they in|vocated their Idols, and offred two white Bulls, filleted on the horns, with many o|ther ceremonies. To this Greek Etymology of the name of Druids subscribe many learned Authours, as Beckmanus, Fungerus, Casauon, Camden c.
4. Notwithstanding the Advice of Strabo deserves well to be embraced, who rejects the searching of Greek derivations, of appel|lations in use among Barbarous Nations. And indeed it is strange that so learned a Writer as Cambden, should herein follow Plinies conceit, since himself acknowledges that an Ancient Writer Alfricus testifies that among the Saxons the word Dry (from whence doubles the Druids were named) signifies a Magician: The Druids being to the Brittains the same that the Magi were to the Persians,Diog. Laert. in Proem. the Chaldeans to the Assyrians the Gymnosophists to the Indians, c. as Dioge|nes Lae+rtius observes. No man certainly will doubt but that the name of Druids pro|ceeds from the same fountain from whence the Discipline came,Caesar. Hist. Gall. lib. 6. Tacit. Ann l. 14. Plin. Hist. natur. lib. 30 c. 1. and that, according to the testimony of Caesar and Tacitus, was in|vented in Brittany, and from thence deri|ved to other Nations: insomuch as Pliny conceives that even the Persians themselves might seem to have learnt their Magick from the Brittains. The name of Druids therfore comes not from the Grecians but the Brit|tains, among whom never was mention made of any Grecian Colony: whereas both the forementioned Writers attest that Caledo|nia, which is now called Scotland, was an|ciently planted by the Germans, and that the Belga removed out of the Northern parts of France into this Island.
5. Next the Druids,Bards. Ammian. Marc. lib. 15 the Bards were in high esteem: who were the Prophets, Poets and Historians to the Britttains: For, saith Am|mianus, Marcellinus, their office was to compose in eroick verses the famous exploits of their An|cestours, which they sung to the people to the de|lightfull Musick of their Harpes. And this con|firms the saying of Fesus, that the word Bardus in the Gllick or Brittih tongue sig|nifies a Singer: as to this day the Welsh call such an one a Bard. Now the word Bard, a learned Modern Phlologer derives from the Ancient Teutonick terme Bardo or Wardo,Abr. Vandermyl. in Glos. sig|nifying to see or observe: so that they may seem to be called in the same not on that the Prophets among the Iewes were called Seers (.) Another late Writer con|ceives the term Bard to come from the Ger|man Waerde, signifying still with us a Word and a Song, as the Greek term  doeth: so that a Bard is , a Song-maker. This was the cheif employment of the Bards: though besides this their taske was likewise to conserve in memory the Genealogies and Descents of families.
6. A great influence they had on the minds of the Brittains to encourage them to contemne death by making the argu|ment of their Songs to be the Immortality of the soule by transanimation, conceiving that the soules of dying men pass'd afterward into other Bodies; being either prefer'd to better, or condemn'd to worse, according to their former good or ill behaviour. So that the esteemed most happy Death, was to dye valiantly for their Countrey and Su|perstition. These two Orders therfore of Druids and Bards were (as it were) the An|cient Clergy of our Idolatrous Britains, the In|venters and Propagators of that which they called Religion: the Dogme's and Rites where|of they never committed to Writing, by which policy it became more venerable, be|cause more Mysterious, to the Vulgar.
Cambden. Godvvin.7. It is certainly a great mistake in some learned Writers, who affirme that the Druids did instruct the Ancient Brittains in the knowledge and worship of one one|ly God:Gildas de Ex|cid. Britan. wheras Gildas the most ancient of our Brittish Historiographers, relates that they had (Portenta Diabolica pen numero Aegyptiaca vincentia) Idols of a monstrous Diabolicall figure and those in so great a number that they almost exceeded the multitude even of the Aegyptian Deities: whose Pictures remained to his dayes drawn with deformed faces within and without the walls of their decayed Cit|ties.
8. The principall among the Brittish Gods, at least those which remain upon record, were 1. Belinus, by whom they meant Apollo o the Sun: 2. Diana, that is, the Moone. And 3. Camulus, the God of warre, answering to Mars: An inscription to whose honour we mention'd before. From him Camalodu|num (or Maldon) received its name. 4. The name of Belinus seems derived from Baal or Bel, the Deity soveraignly worship|ped in Assyria and other Countreyes of the East, and which signifies the Supreme Lord. Out of a speciall veneration to this Deity as anciently the Eastern Princes took their names, as Belshazzar or Balthazar, Ierubbaal, Meribbaal, and in other Countreyes Asdrubal, Hannibal, c. so in Brittany likewise Belenus or Belinus; which we find a part of the names of King Cassibelin and Cynobelin.
9. And as for Diana, a particular proof of the great devotion born to her by our An|cestors appears by a Monument neare S. Pauls in London,Cambd. in Middlesex. call'd in old Records Dia|na's Chamber, where in the dayes of King Ed|ward the first, thousands of the heads of Oxen were digged up, which men skill'd in Antiquity well understood to be proper Sacrifices to Diana, whose great Temple was built thereabout.
10. Besides these we find other Deities, perhaps of an inferiour degree, adored by the Brittains. Thus an ancient Inscription me~tions a certain unknown God called Be|latucadru, worshipped in the Northern parts about Yorkshire and Cumberland. The name seems to import this to be some Off-spring or of affinity to Belinus. Moreover there is found another Goddesse call'd Andate whose speciall vertue and employment no man knows. Some learned Writers are of opinion that this is the same with Adraste the God|desse of Revenge,Dio. lib. 62. in vaine invoked by Bou|dicea in her last battel against the Romans, as Dio relates. It is further probable that the Gallick Deities, Hesus figured in the shape of a Dog (like Anubis,) Taranis the God of Thunder, answering to Iupiter, and Teu|tates, the Guide of travellers and inventer of Arts, like Mercury, were adored like|wise in Brittany, it being the fountain of I|dolatrous Theology.
11. After the conquest made by Claudius, the Emperour, of the Southern parts of this Island, Caractacus (by some Writers concei|v'd to be the same with Ariragus) in gra|titude for his release from captivity and re|stitution to his throne, introduced a new fashion'd Religion into his Kingdome, consecrating an Altar to the Emperours worship,Tacit. in Senec. de mor|te Claudij. with this Inscription, The Altar of eternall Domination, which he placed in a Temple at Camulodunum, erected to this Mortall Deity, whose Religious service was every Month solemnly performed by Preists called Augusales,Pontic. Vi|runn. lib. 4. or Imperiall Priests, peculiarly appointed thereto. And indeed it cannot be denied but that Caractacus had far greater obligations to this his visible Deity then to any of his Ancient false Gods. However, this vainly pretended Propheticall Inscription proved unsuccesfull, for in his next Successours dayes both the Temple and Religion were demolish'd by Queen Boudicea when she ruin'd the Colony where it stood.
12. As touching the speciall Rites of the Ancient Brittish Superstition,Caesar. com|ment. lib. 6. we find in Cae|sar that their Priests or Druids had the sole authority in ordring both the Publick and private Sacrifices: yea moreover that they determined all both publick and private Controversies. If any dispute hapned about possessions of Lands, if any facinorous Act, as murder or the like, had been committed, the Druids appointed the punishment, as likewise rewards in case of any honourable exploit. And their Decrees in all cases were so indispensably obliging, that if any pri|vate person or community refused to sub|mit to them, the highest penalty could be inflicted was Excommunication, or forbid|ding their presence at the Sacrifices. Which Censure, upon whomsoever it was denoun|ced, rendred them in the esteem of all men, as impious and detestable wicked persons, whose conversation and presence all would avoyd, as thinking them contagious.
13. Mention was made before of their superstitious veneration of Mistletoe grow|ing on Oakes, which they esteem to be a

speciall gift of God.A. D. 44. The rite of gathering which is thus discribed by Pliny.Plin. Hist. Nat. lib. 16. c. 44. Having af|ter diligent search found where the Misleto growes, they prepare Sacrifices and Banquets, and two white Bulls they bring under the Tree, whose horns they there first bind with fillets of linnen. Then the Druid or Priest cloathed with a pure white garment mounts the Oake, and with a golden Sickle reaps the Misleto, which is recei|ved into a white vestment. And this being done they offer their Sacrifices, with Songs, as Ovid saith, and Prayers that God would make his Gift prosperous to them: For they ascribe great vertue to it, imagining that by drinking it leep'd in water their barren cattle become fruitfull, and that it is a remedy against all poysons.
14. But these Rites argue only vanity and folly: others they had which were barba|rous and execrable. For as Tacitus relates, they made their Altars flow with the blood of Captives taken in the war,Tacit. yea for want of Cap|tives they spar'd not their own brethren: and consulted their Gods by searching into the en|trails of men. Which custome of theirs is thus described by Diodorus Siculus, When the Druids,Diod. Sic. l. 6. saith he, doe consult about matters of great importance, they observe a wonderfull cu|stome, and for the horriblenes of it incredible, which is this: Having mortally wounded a man with a sword, they divine future events by the manner of his fall, by the tearing of his mem|bers, and the flowing of his blood. This skill they attain'd by long observation.
15. These more then inhumane Diabo|licall practises, which ought to have rendred the Brittains an object of hatred to all man|kind, found neverthelesse not only excuse, but approbation from other Nations. In|somuch as our Barbarous Countrey-men were considered as persons of exemplary Devotion to their Gods, yea as Masters and Doctours of sublime Mysteries, skilfull in a hid|den Theology: so that their neighbours the Gaules, Celtes, c. repaired to Brittany as the Academy wherein a Religion was taught that had the vertue to save men by murder, and honour God by destroying the perfe|ctest of his creatures. Yea even the Romans themselves, though otherwise trayn'd up in a morall civility beyond other Nations, yet out of a pestilent curiosity ingrafted in our corrupt nature, became many of them Disciples of the Brittish Druids, and practi|sers of these execrable Superstitions. Inso|much as the Emperour Claudius was forced by rigorous Edicts to forbid the whole Re|ligion of these Druids. Augustus had for|merly interdicted the exercise of it to his own Cittizens: But Claudius extirpated it not out of Italy only, but the whole Nation of the Gaules. However his Lawes extended not their force into Brittany, for we find, as hath heretofore been related, these Druids with their horrid Superstitions in their Ar|my in Anglesey (the peculiar schoole of that Religion) when they fought against, and were subdued by Ostorius Scapula during the raign of Nero,A. D. 46. who succeed Claudius.
16. But what the Roman Emperours with all their authority could not, Almighty God by degrees effected, sending a new celestiall Light to dissipate the more then Egyptian darknes wherein our Countrey had been involved. What speciall servants and Mini|sters in those primitive times God employed to work so happy and wonderfull a change, it is now seasonable to declare, with as much perspicuity as the subject will beare. For considering how in those holy times men did busy themselves far more with leading devout lives, and exercising an A|postolicall charity to save their own and other mens soules, then with writing Books, or rai|sing Monuments to acquaint posterity with the history of their actions: And moreover those few Writings and Monuments which were then extant, afterward by strange revo|lutions of times, and almost totall extirpa|tion of the Brittains by Heathenish Saxons, c. were lost and defaced, some few relicks of them remaining only in the memories of the Natives, and by a Traditionary suc|cession delivered and recorded by Writers of the following Ages: These things con|sidered, it is not to be expected that we should give an exact Narration of matters so obscurely and imperfectly transmitted to us. However since most of the Testimo|nies to be produced are drawn from Au|thours not contemptible, many of them ha|ving no interest at all which might move them to be inventers of fables, and without any gain to themselves, yea with danger to their own soules to become seducers of po|sterity, the following History, even of the most ancient, and therefore least clearly de|livered affaires touching the Primitive Chri|stianity of our Island, may reasonably exact beleife in the Readers minds: especially considering that those Modern Writers a|mong us, since the late change of Religion, who voluntarily deride and contradict what shall be here delivered, doe not so much as pretend to any Monuments ancient|ly exhibiting a contrary Narration, but re|solutly conclude that to be certainly false, which cannot approve it selfe to be in all points and circumstances evidently true. But their disbeleife can be no preju|dice to any one who judges by reason, and who will proportion the degree of his as|sent to the merits of the proofes and alle|gations: the rather because it is manifest that those deriders of our ancient Monu|ments are thereto incited by interest and partiality, because by them they see their own Novelties discovered and exploded.



V. CHAP.

1. Christian Religion very early entred in|to Brittany: even in the time of Tibe|rius Emperour.
2. S. Iames is sayd to have preached in Brittany.
3 Saint Peters coming from An|tioch to Rome, a cause of the early sprea|ding the Gospell in Brittany.
4. Saint Leo's testimony concerning Gods design in bringing Saint Peter to Rome.
6. The Captivity of King Caractacus another cause.
7.8. c. Of Claudia Ruffina a Christian Lady: married to Pudens a Ro|man Senatour.
11. Of Pomponia Gracina a Roman Lady, accused for Christianity.
12.13.14. Of Saint Mansuetus, a Disciple of Saint Peter, a Brit|tain.
15. Of S. Beatus a Brittain, a Disci|ple also of S. Peter.

1. THis our Island of Brittany, though call'd by the Romans another world, as being divided from the whole then dis|covered habitable Earth, yet by the riches of Divine mercy received the beames of the Sun of righteousnes, before many other Countreys nearer approching to the place where he first rose. Yet we cannot hastily assent to our ancient Historiographer Gildas, who seems to testify that immediatly after our Saviours Ascension in the raign of the Emperour Tiberius, the Gospell was publi|shed in this Island: His words are these, In the meane time Christ that true Sun, from the supreme everlasting Tower of Heaven,Gild. de Ex|cid. Brit. and not this visible firmament afforded his beames, that is, the knowledge of his Precepts, to this Island stiff-frozen with cold, separated at a great distance from the visible Sun: This, we know, he did toward the latter end of the raign of Ti|berius Caesar: at which time his Religion was freely and without any impediment propagated to mankind. There is no doubt but that the Light of the Gospell even in those dayes extended it selfe beyond the Confines of Iudaea, and the Mystery formerly hidden, that all Gentiles without exception might be admitted to the participation of Grace and sal|vation by our Lord Iesus Christ, was then dis|covered to the Apostles, who, together with other Disciples, did accordingly congregate severall Churches among the Heathen Ido|laters: And that perhaps is all that Gildas intended in this passage, signifying that many zealous Apostolicall persons were then, as it were, in their way to Brittany, whither in effect they arrived not till seve|rall yeares after.
2. Again Flavius Dexter (if the Chro|nicle lately published under his name, be indeed his) affirms that the Western parts of the world, and this Island by name was within eight yeares after our Saviours Re|surrection illustrated by the Faith of the Gospell: For saith he, In the one and for|tieth yeare of Christ (being the third of Caligula's raign) Saint Iames returning out of Spain visited Gaule,Flav. Dext. ad Ann. D. 41. Brittany and the Towns of the Venetians, where he preached the Gospell: and so came back to Ierusalem to consult with the Blessed Virgin and Pe|ter about matters of very great weight and importance. And he is therein seconded by Freculphus Lexoviensis,Frecul. tom. 2. l. 2. cap. 4. who affirms that the same Apostle enlightned the people of Spain, and other Regions of the West with the Beames of Christs Gospell.
3. These Testimonies considered, with|out offring any violence to reason, a man may beleive that within the space of eight or nine years after our Saviours Ascension the zeale of the Primitive Chri|stians might have carried some of them so as to make them Messengers even as far as to Brittany, of the blessed News of Salvation, which was now to be prea|ched indifferently to all Nations: though who those, certainly most wellcome per|sons, were, and what speciall effects their preaching might have had, be now un|known. However during the raign of the Emperour Claudius, who by his victory over the Brittains opened more freely a passage for strangers into this Island, there are extant more particular and evident proofs, that Christianity entred here a|mong us. For promoting of which we may observe two great advantages: the first was the coming of S: Peter at that time from Antioch to Rome: and the se|cond was the leading captives thither Ca|ractacus a famous Brittish King, with his Queen, Brethren, and, no doubt, a great multitude of attendants.
4. As touching the former, the an|cient Fathers (saith Baronius) doe gene|rally agree to what Eusebius (a Grecian Ecclesiasticall Historian, not at all par|tiall for Rome) delivers in this passage of his Chronicle,Euseb. Chron. An. D. 44. saying, In the second yeare of Claudius (which was the four and for|tieth of our Saviours Nativity) the A|postle S. Peter, having founded and setled the Church of Antioch, went to Rome: where preaching the Gospell he continued Bishop of that Citty the space of five and twenty years, that is, sayth S. Hierom, till the last yeare of Nero.

The particular affaire obliging the Apostle to that voyage,Hierom. de Script. Eccl. in Petro. Arnob cnt. Gent. lib. 2 as the same Father af|ter Arnobius, c. affirms, was the pursuing Simon Magus the Prince of all blaspheming Hereticks, against whom this Prince of the Apostles was from the begining match'd in combat: whose impieties he discovered, and by true miracles rendred ineffectuall the o|thers Sorceries, till in the end, during the raign of Nero, by his Prayers he dissipated the fiery Chariot carried by Devils in the aire into which the Magician was mounted, and in the sight of all Rome tumbled him down, all broken, into a precipice lower then the Earth it selfe.
5. But besides this, the Divine Providence had a more illustrious and universall design in disposing this journey of S. Peter to Rome: whch cannot better be expressed then in this discourse of S. Leo the Great his most wor|thy Successour, whose words are these: When the twelve Apostles after having received by the Holy Ghost the power of speaking all Tongues,Leo M. Serm. 1. atal. Apostol. had undertaken the Employment of com|municating the Gospel to the whole world, for which purpose they by common consent distributed the severall parts of it among themselves: The most blessed S. Peter, the Prince of the Apostoli|call Order was design'd to the principall Tower of the Roman Empire, to the end that the light of Divine Truth, revealed for the salvation of all Nations, might more efficaciously spread it selfe from the head to all the other members of the Body. For what Nation was there, some of whose inhabitants were not at Rome: or what Region could be ignorant of what passed in that Citty? Here the opinions of humane Philosophy were to be trampled under foot: Here the vanities of earthly wisdome were to be dissipared: Here the abominable worship of Devils was to be confuted: here the impiety of all Sacrileges was to be de|stroyed: For in this one Citty, by a most super|stitious diligence was heaped together in one masse whatsoever had been in any other parts of the world, instituted by the vain errours of men. To this Citty therefore thou, O most blessed Apo|stle S. Peter, wast not afraid to come, and having the Apostle S. Paul afterwards a companion of thy Glory, (who as yet was busied in the ordering of other Churches) thou courageously entredst into this forrest replenish'd with raging beasts, and this Ocean, horrible both for its depth and tempestuousnes of its waves: yet thou entredst it with a far greater resolution then when for|merly at our Lords command thou didst walk upon the Sea: Neither didst thou feare Rome it selfe, Mistresse of the world, who before in Caiphas his house wast frighted by the Priests Maid servant: And yet was not the Emperour Claudius his power, and Nero's cruelty far more formidable then Pilats Tribunall, or the Iews violence? It was therefore a (new) Power of Divine Love in thy soule that was victorious over all induce|ments to feare: neither didst thou esteem any terrour could deserve to be apprehended, when thou wert imployed in procuring the eternall sal|vation of those who were committed to thy Love.A. D. 46. Thus S. Leo: and thus doe many other Fa|thers expound the Oeconomy of Divine Wisdome in sendig S. Peter to Rome: Many effects of whose Pastorall sollicitude in sen|ding from that Metropolis of the world into all other Western Regions diligent labou|rers in Gods Vineyard, and some particu|larly into Brittany, we shall presently men|tion from the authority of ancient Re|cords.
6. A second not inefficacious Expedient furthering the effusion of Evangelicall Light into Brittany was, as hath been sayd, the cap|tivity of the Brittish King Caractacus and his family, whose magnanimous behaviour there, together with the Emperour Claudius his favourable treating, and, as it is belei|ved, restoring him to his Principality, we have already related out of Tacitus.
7. Among other attendants of this Cap|tive Prince, ancient Ecclesiasticall Monuments celebrate the memory of Claudia Ruf|fina, a Brittish Virgin, and, as learned Wri|ters probably judge, one of the Daughters of King Caractacus, who by her vertue and Christian Piety, being a Disciple of S. Peter, became a more illustrious Ornament to our Countrey, then Caractacus was by his heroi|call magnanimity. She seems to have recei|ved a change of her Brittish name into Clau|dia, from the Emperour whose captive she was, for such was the Roman custome: to which was added Ruffina, from her husband Rufus.Martial. l. 4. Epigr. 13.  lib. 11. Epigr. 4. This is the same Claudia Ruffina which the Poet Martial afterward so highly com|mended for her illustrious birth, beauty and exquisite perfection both in the Grecian and Roman literature, expressly declaring that she was a Brittain. This the Epigrammatist writes in a short Epithalamium compos'd upon her marriage with Pudens a Roman Senatour.
8. Now who this Pudens was, is not e|vident in Antiquity. Severall learned Wri|ters of our own Nation, and some Externs likewise, doe confidently pronounce that this was that famous Senatour Aulus Pu|dens concerning whom Baronius thus writes,Baron. in No. ad Martyrol. It is delivered by a firme Tradition of Anti|quity that the house of Pudens at Rome was the place of the first entertainment of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles: and that there new con|verted Christians began their assemblies to celebrate Divine Mysteries: Which house was erected into a Church, by the most ancient Title of Pudens. The Church it selfe yet remains. wherein is extant this antique Inscription, In this holy and most ancient Church dedicated by the Holy Pope Pius, by the Title of Pastour, heretofore the house of Saint Pudens a Sena|tour, and the Hospice of the Holy Apostles, there rest the bodies of three thousand Mar|tyrs, which the Holy Virgins of Christ, Puden|tiana and Praxedes, buried with their own hands.
9. If this was the same Pudens mentioned by Martial as husband to our Claudia Ruffi|na, our Countrey has yet greater reason to glory in the title we have to her. And that he was the same, that passage of S. Pauls se|cond Epistle to Timothy affords a not con|temptible proofe, where among the salu|tations sent to Timothy from Rome, the Apo|stle in the same short verse joyns together Pudens and Claudia,2. Tim. 4.21 saying, Eubulus and Pu|dens and Linus and Claudia, and all the Bre|thren salute thee. Notwithstanding it cannot be denyed, but that the difficulties oppos'd to this are considerable: because that Pu|dens who first entertained S. Peter, and was the happy father of four illustrious Saints, Saint Timotheus, Saint Novatus, Saint Pu|dentiana and Saint Praxedes, has in an|cient Ecclesiasticall Monuments, a wife of another name assign'd to him, namely Pris|cilla: Notwithstanding this being the name of Pudens his Mother, it is not unprobable that Claudia in succeeding times might for her husbands sake assume his Mothers name. However matters in this point stood, it can not be denyed that our Countrey has a great Obligation to a late Noble and Learned Writer, Francis Moncaeus Lord of a Signory call'd the Cold Valley,Fr. Moncaeus. who has published a Discourse full of ancient literature entitled, Ecclesiae Christianae veteris Britannicae incunabu|la Regia: in which he confidently pretends out of Antiquity to demonstrate this our Claudia Ruffina to have descended from the Royall blood of Brittany, and to have been the Wife and Mother of Saints far more glorious. And moreover this one proof hereto may be added, that our Ancient Hi|stories report that Timotheus the eldest son of Pudens came into Brittany,Nacler. in Legend. S. Timoth. where he converted very many to the Faith, and at least dis|posed King Lucius to his succeeding Conver|sion. Now it is very likely that it was out of regard to his Mother a Brittish Lady, that this Apostolicall Saint made so particular a choice of Brittany, to be the Province in which he desired to exercise his Christian zeale and charity.
10. It only remains to be spoken of this Claudia Ruffina what we find in the Martyro|loge of England upon the seaventh of Au|gust, where we read these words, A Comme|moration of S. Claudia,Martyrol. Anglic. 7. Aug. a Brittish woman, who was caried to Rome during the Raign of the Em|perour Claudius, and afterward in the yeare of our Lord one hundred and ten, dyell at Sabinum a Citty of Vmbria..
11. It is an ambition scarce excusable, upon groundlesse suspicions to lay claim to Saints and Patrons, as some modern writers would entitle the Wife of Plautius, who in Claudius his time (as hath been sayd) triumphed for Victories over Brittany, to an Apostolicall office of converting many in this Island when she was here with her Husband. Her name was Pomponia Graecina: and according to Tacitus his relation, he was accused of a strange Religion (externae Superstitionis) forbid|den by the Roman Laws:Tacit. Annal. l. 13. the cognizance of which pretended crime was by the Senat permitted to her husband, who according to an ancient Insti|tut in force at Rome, in the presence of her kin|dred sate as Iudge of the fame and life of his La|dy, and in conclusion pronounced her innocent. This Account given of her by Tacitus has induced learned Writers to beleive that this extern Superstition layd to Pomponia Graecina's Charge was no other then the Profession of the Christian Faith, the fruits of which in her practise being perfect humility, obe+dience, chastity and all other celestiall ver|tues, it is no wonder that her husband should so easily absolve her. But that she should be a companion of Plautius when he was sent General into Brittany, was a|gainst the Roman Laws and Custome, as the same Tacitus elsewhere declares.acit. Annal. l. 3. Probable it is that staying at Rome, in regard of her hus|bands authority in Brittany, she might be visited by Claudia Ruffina, and other new converted Brittains, and by such means be made partaker of Evangelicall light, and become a Disciple of S. Peter.
12. But a more unquestionable Disciple of S. Peter we find in ancient Ecclesiasticall Monuments, by birth a Brittain, by name Mansuetus, and by office an Apostolicall con|verter and Patron to the Citty of Toul in Lorrain, being the Metropolis of a people cal|led Leuci.sengren. ent. 1. par. 1. dist. 3. A. Mirman. in hear. conf. Concerning whom Isengrenius, as likewise Arnoldus Mirmannus out of old Re|cords gives this Testimony, that he was by Nation a Scot, born of a Noble family, a Disciple of Simon Bariona (that is, S. Peter) Cheif of the Apostles, companion of S. Clement Bishop of Metz, and consecrated by S. Peter the first Bi|shop of Toul, a Citty of the Leuci, in the forty ninth yeare of Christ, and in the raign of Tiberius Claudius Caesar.
13. Now wheras he is called a Scot, this is to be understood, as King Lucius in An|cient Records is called a King of England, that is, of that Countrey which was afterward call'd England: For as Mr. Cambden well ob|serves after most diligent disquisition, the name of Scots is not to be found in any An|cient Writer till the Age of Constantin the Great, about which time they are supposed to have settled themselves in the Northern parts of Brittany. So that it may confidently be affirmed that S. Mansuetus was a Northern Caledonian Brittain, who either in the com|pany of Adminius a Brittish Prince, or Beri|cus a Noble man of the same Countrey, or as an Attendant of Caractacus went to Rome, where he was converted by S. Peter, and as hath been sayd, design'd by him the Apo|stolicall Bishop of Toul, probably at the re|quest of some Proselytes of that Coun|trey.
14. A yet more authentick Testimony both of the life and death of this Holy Bishop

is extant in the ancient Gallican Martyrologe on the third of September, where we read this passage:Martyrol. Gall. ad 3. Septemb. At Toul a Citty of the Leuci, there is on this day a commemoration of S. Man|suetus a Bishop: who was of Noble birth, by Ori|ginall a Scot, and one of the first Disciples of S. Peter: by whom being baptized, he devested himself of his former Heathenish name, and as|sumed the Title of Mansuetus (or Meek) from the Meeknes of the Lamb of God, which he imi|tated: He by the same S. Peter was sent to en|lighten this Citty with Evangelicall verities. At his first entrance whereinto, he found it so wholly given up to abominable Idolatry, that his preach|ing and exhortations would have produced little fruit, had not Divine power promoted his endeavours by a wonderfull Miracle: by whose assi|stance this Preacher of salvation restored to life and health a son of the Governour of this Citty, who from a high Tower beholding certain horse|troops exercising themselves, fell down to the ground all bruised and torn. Vpon occasion of this Miracle the Governour with his whole family and a great number of the Cittizens joyn'd them|selves to the flock of Christ, and were signed with the saving Character of Baptisme. After which the word of God had a free course, and great multi|tudes, not only of the Inhabitants of this Citty, but also of the Countrey adioyning were esta|blished in the knowledge of salvation. Thus S. Mansuetus enioying a firm peace, erected and consecrated a Church to the Holy Trinity, under the Patronage of S. Steven the first Martyr. He likewise ordained here Ecclesiasticall Ministers, and having instructed the people generally in the knowledge and practise of all manner of Piety, in the fortieth yeare after he had begun the exercise of his Apostolicall Office he quietly closed his eyes in the sleep of death,A. D. 89. and so attained to the frui|tion of eternall rewards with Christ, whom he al|ways only thirsted after.
15. A third holy Brittish Disciple, though not Convert, of S. Peter's Antiquity records, to wit, one both in Title and reality Bea|tus (or Blessed.Merss l. de Sanctis. Guilleman. lib. 1. rerum Helve. c. 15. Paal. de vir. illustr. p. 1.) Of this Saint mention is made by severall Writers, some of them averse from Catholick Religion: Yet none of them speak of him without admiration.The summe of his Acts recorded by them is, as followeth. He became a Christian in Brit|tany, converted by some unknown Pri|mitive Beleiver. Before his Conversion his name was Suetonius, being born of no|ble parents. Out of Brittany he under took a voyage to Rome, moved therto by other devout Christians, to be instructed more perfectly in the holy Faith by the Blessed Apostle S. Peter: by whom being baptised, as a testimony of his present happines, and hopes of a future accomplishment of it, he was called Beatus. After he was sufficiently instructed, he was esteemed worthy to be employed in the Apostolicall office of in|structing others. In his return toward his Countrey passing through Helvetia (now called Suizzerland) he neglected not to dis|perse the good seed with which he had been furnish'd at Rome,A. D. 60. and perceiving that very many in that Countrey chearfully embra|ced the true Faith, he rested there, pursuing his journey no further.
Thus he became the Apostle of the Helvetians, illustrious for his Piety, holines and miracles. In his decli|ning age, having distributed all his sub|stance to the poore, he retir'd himselfe to the exercises of a contemplative life, chu|sing for his habitation nere a village called Vrbigenum, (Vnderseven) a Grotte, in a Mountain, out of which with the sign of the Crosse he expelled a dangerous and cruel serpent. It is not certain in what place he dyed.Bed. Marty|rol. 9 Maij Martyrol. Rman. 9. Maij. S. Bede makes only this mention of him, At Rome is the commemoration of S. Beatus a Confessour, on the ninth of May. But the Roman Martyrologe thus, In the Town Vindecinum (or Vendosme) is celebrated the deposition of S. Beatus a Confessour. But the Ec|clesiasticall Writers of Germany, the Annals of the Helvetians and Monuments of the Church of Constantia doe unanimously a|gree that he dyed in his solitude neer Vnder|seven in Helvetia in the hundred and tenth yeare of our Lord,A. D. 110. when the Emperour Tra|ian raigned.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1. Testimonies of S. Peters preaching in Brittany.
2. Proved by the Catalgue of the Provinces of the severall Apostles.
3. And by the testimony of Pope Inno|centius the first.
4. S. Paul sayd to have preached in Brittany.
5.6.7. Simon Zelotes reported by Nicephorus to have preached in Brittany: but disproved by C. Baronius.
8.9. The time of S. Peters coming in to this Island, uncertain: as likewise his Gests.

1. IT was no doubt a great mercy which God extended to this our Island that he was pleased so early to enlighten it with his Divine Truth,A. D. 60. and moreover to trans|forme its barbarous inhabitants into Apo|stles and Messengers of salvation to other Countreys also: But a far greater blessing yet did God bestow on it by directing hi|ther his Apostle, him who was the Prime of the whole order, S. Peter himselfe, whose ac|cesse to this Island is attested by Ancient Monuments, and by Writers who had no in|terest at all to induce them to partiality. Those who formerly had preached the Gos|pell here were persons though of great ho|lines

and zeale,A. D. 60. yet such as for want of an Apostolicall Episcopall Character could one|ly preach unto  baptise those with whom they conversed: But wheresoever any of the Apostles themselves came, or persons suffi|ciently qualified by them, they provided for posterity also: The former could only beget children, but the other could beget both children and Fathers, establishing in the places where they preached a constant order and Government, which might last to the worlds end.
2. When the Apostles before their separa|tion divided by lott among themselves the severall Regions of the world,Nicph. hist. lib. 1. cap. 1. the West became the portion of Saint Peter, as Eusebius quoted by Metaphrastes testifies, saying, S. Pe|ter spent twelve yeares in the East,Metaphrast. 29. Iun. and twenty he pass'd at Rome, in Brittany and other citties in the West. Which passage though it be not extant in any Books of Eusebius now re|maining, this does not prejudice the va|lidity of this authority, since as S. Hierom writes in his Catalogue,Hierom. in Catal. Eusebius publish'd an infinite number of volumes, and among others an Vniversall History, together with an Epitome of it, severall Books likewise of Martyrs, and other works. Of which a great number are by the iniury of time perished. And in some of those we may  ought reasonably to judge that those words were found, rather then to imagin that such a Writer as Simeon would voluntarily feign such things from his own brain, since he had no interest in the glory of Brittany, and besids was one who for his Sanctity is venerated in the Greek Church.
Id. Ibid.3. The same Authour out of ancient Mo|numents adds furcher, S. Peter (says he) out of the East came to Rome: from whence he went to Millan, and Photice, which are Citties in the continent. In which places having constituted Bishops and Preists, he pass'd into Brittany: In which Island having made a long abode, and con|verted to the Faith of Christ severall Nations of unknown names, he had a Vision of Angells, which sayd to him, Peter, the time of thy dissolu|tion is at hand, and it is necessary that thow goe to Rome, where thou must suffer the death of the Crosse, and so receive the reward of righteous|nes. Having received this Revelation he glori|fied God, giving thanks for the same, and conti|nuing certain dayes among the Brittains, during which he enlightned many more with the word of Grace, having constituted Churches, and or|dained Bishops, Preists and Deacons, in the twelfth yeare of the Emperour Nero he return'd to Rome. To this revelation made to him in Brittany the Apostle has regard in his second Epistle,2. Pet. 1.14. saying, I know that shortly I must put off my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Iesus Christ hath shew'd me.
4. Hereto wee may adde an important te|stimony of S. Innocent the first Pope of that name, who writing to Decentius Bishop of Eugubium hath this passage, Who can be igno|rant, or not observe that that which hath been delivered to the Roman Church by Peter Prince of the Apostles,Innocent. P. Epist. ad De|cen. and is there observed to this day, ought to be obediently kept by all, and that no|thing ought to be introduced or super-added by any which doth not come from the same authori|ty, or seems to be practised in imitation of any other? Especially since it is manifest that through all Italy, Gaules, Spain, Africk and Sicily, as likewise the interiacent Islands, none ever insti|tuted any Churches, but only such as the Vene|rable Apostle S. Peter or his Successours did or|dain Preists (and Bishops.) If any would con|tradict this, let them produce Records testifying that any other of the Apostles can be found or heard to have taught in those Provinces. Therfore if no such Records can be produced, they must be obliged to submitt to the observation of that which the Roman Church teaches and practises, from which without doubt they received their Originall: This they must doe, least while they affect strange observances, they may seem to di|vide from the Head of Ecclesiasticall Institutions.
5. This positive Assertion of so ancient, learned and Holy a Pope, to witt, that none of the Apostles besids S. Peter, and his suc|cessours, did constitute any Churches in the West, may seem to receive an attaint from that which S. Paul says, his intention was to preach the Gospell in Spain, which that he did effectually execute, the ancient Tradition of that countrey, together with the assertions of severall Authours doe testify: And most certain it is that he taught many years in Rome: yea there are not wanting ancient Monuments witnessing that he came into Brittany likewise, teaching  ordaining here.
6. Notwithstanding if wee consider the extraordinary condition of S. Paul's Apo|stleship, wee will see that nothing here alled|ged will prejudice the forecited testimony of S. Innocentius: For S. Paul being a Super|numerary Apostle adjoyned to the twelve, had no speciall Province assignd to him, but was at liberty to exercise his office through all Provinces, yet so as that he left not any particular Church denominated from him: for though he was in a particular manner Bishop of Rome, yet the Chaire of Rome was always called by Posterity the Chaire of S. Pe|ter only, and all the Churches constituted in the West, even where S. Paul preached, yet regarded S. Peter as their Head and cheif Patriark.
7. Therfore though Nicephorus relates that Brittany was the lot of Simon Zelotes, and the Greek Menology adds that he was here cruci|fied by Infidells,Baron. yet saich Baronius, this they affirm without any testimony of the An|cients:A. D. 44. who witnes that this Simon the Cana|nite preach'd the Gospell in Mesopotamia, and from thence went into Persia, where he re|ceiv'd Martyrdome. So that the Greek Me|nology, and Nicephorus seeme to have transcri|bed that passage out of an Apocryphall Au|thour, Dorotheus.
8. S. Innocentius his testimony therefore re|mains untouched, That the whole Western part of the world was S. Peters peculiar Provin|ce: This he says is manifest: and the same is confirmed by the consent of many Provin|ces and kingdoms. Severall Roman Bishops his Successours likewise doe expressly attest the same, and particularly as touching our Brittain Churches.Vid. Mal+mesb. l 3. d Pontif. Chor. To this purpose Pope Iohn the fifth, almost a thousand years since, wri|ting to Ethelred and Alfred Saxon Princes here, sayth, Wee doe reioyce hearing of the en|crease of your Religion through the cooperation of Divine Grace, and perceiving the fervour of your Faith: Which Faith you first received by the preaching of the Prince of the Apostles, God gra|ciously illuminating your minds, and the same Faith you still effectually hold fast. The same hath generally been acknowledged by our Brittish and Saxon, Kings: Hence Kenulphus, King of the Mercians in the yeare of Grace seaven hundred ninety Six,Baron. Ann. D. 769. writing to Pope Leo the third saith, From the same root that the Apostolick dignity was derived to thee, the truth of Christian Faith came likewise to us. Therfore wee think it expedient humbly to in|cline our eare and obedience to thy holy com|mands, and with our utmost endeavour to execute what soever thy Piety shall think fit to enioyn us. Yea King Iames himselfe did not doubt in a publick Audience to affirm, that Rome was the Mother of all Churches: And again, That if a contestation were once more renewed between the East and West about the Prerogative of place and Seat, he would stand for Rome and the West. Lastly hereto we may adde S. Peters own te|stimony in a Vision hapning in the dayes of S. Edward the Confessour, wherin himselfe professed that he had preached the Gospell in Brittany.
9. Now in what particular yeare it was that S. Peter left Rome, and passing through severall Provinces came at last into Brittany, it is not easy positively to affirm. Whether he left Rome upon the Emperour Claudius his Edict banishing all Iews from thence, or afterwards in the beginning of Nero's raign, as Baronius inclines to beleive, is doubtfull. But that he was absent thence when S. Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, seems un|questionable, since S. Peter is omitted in the Catalogue of his salutations.
10. The particular Acts of S. Peter during his long abode in Brittany, though in those dayes illustrious, are now swallow'd up in the darknes of oblivion: all ancient Mo|numents of this Nation by so many revolu|tions having been consumed. Certain it is that a far freer scope was allowd for the publishing of Divine Verities in Brittany then almost any other part of the Western World, because Nero's persecution of Chri|stianity did not extend hither, so that this Island was a Sanctuary for all those who either to avoyd the cruelty of Magistrats, or to find an opportunity of a quiet solitude for Contemplation, would repaire hither. And this may be attributed, partly to the li|mited power of the Romans here; likewise to the Clemency and Civility of the Brittish Princes then living, particularly taken noti|ce of by historians, and lastly to the great distance of this Countrey from the other parts of the Empire. Such advantages had Truth and Piety to settle themselves here in Brittany, more then in any other place: and a proofe most remarkable hereof we have in the quiet uninterrupted Solitude of Glas|tonbury, where, within a few years after this, was erected the first Schoole of Contem|plation, which continued the glorious ha|bitation of a world of Saints in all Ages from the beginning of Christianity till al|most our unhappy times.


VII. CHAP.VII. CH.

1. c. Further Testimonies of S Peter and S. Pauls preaching in Brittany, from Isengrenius and some ancient Fathers.

1. ISengrenius a learned Chronologist men|tioning the affairs of Brittany in his first Century,Ingren. cent. 1. p 7. dist. 8. and in the yeare of our Lord Sixty five, fitly expressed them thus: the exaltation of the Brittish Church under Nero: adding wi|thall, that many Churches were built through this Island by S. Peter, the prime of the Apostles.
2. Indeed Gods good Providence so dis|posed for our good,A. D. 67. that Nero, the most abominable Emperour, yea person, that ever lived, though he was a plague and ma|lediction to Rome, Italy, Greece and most other Provinces, yet was an occasion of wonderfull blessings to Brittany: For a te|dious impatience to see his horrible actions almost forced S. Paul also to quit Rome, and disperse the precious seed of the Gospell among other Western nations even as far as Brittany. This is attested by witnesses of great antiquity and authority, and seems agreeable to the design of the Holy Ghost when by his command S. Paul and Barnabas were separated unto him for the work unto which he had called them:Act. 13. 2. . 47. Which was to carry the light of the Gospell to the utmost ends of the earth.
3. Now that S. Paul, the Doctour of the Gen|tiles, made good that title even to the Brit|tains, we find acknowledged by Protestant Writers also, with an intention therby to ex|clude S. Peter. But how inconsequently they argue, hath been already declared: and the Brittains themselves though anciently they gave to both these prime Apostles a most high veneration, yet they never calld their Church the seat of S. Paul, but only S. Peter. Hence our ancient Historian and Satyrist

Gildas in veighing sharply against the disso|lutnes of the Brittish Clergy in his time,Gildas in Clerum. sayth that many of them did usurp the Chaire of S. Peter with defiled feet: thereby shewing that the whole Ecclesiasticall Order here did re|ceive their Originall and Preist hood with a right of succession from S. Peter, the Ordi|nary Supreme Pastour in a speciall regard of the Western parts of the world, and who likewise prevented S. Pauls coming hither severall years.
4. Particular Witnesses in Antiquity of S. Pauls preaching the Gospell in this Island are Theodoret, S. Hierome and others. The former of these Writing on the hundred and sixteenth Psalm, saith, Blessed S. Paul breifly teaches us to what Nations he had preached saving Truth,Theodoret. in Psal. 116. saying, From Ierusalem round about unto Illyricum he fill'd all nations with the Gospell of Christ. And after this he came into Italy, and continued his iourney even to Spaine: Moreover he brought salvation to the Islands also lying in the Sea.Hieron. in Isa. S. Hierom likewise men|tioning the travells of S. Paul saith, He went (out of the East) as far as Spain: and from the Red sea, that is, the Southern Ocean to the Western Ocean. But more expressly Venantius Fortu|natus in his Poem of the life of S. Martin, speaking of S. Paul,Ven. Fortu|nat. de vit. S. Mart. saith, He pass'd the Ocean, and through all Regions and accessible Islands, those which are inhabited by the Brittains and the utmost Thule, his Trumpet proclaimed the Gospell.
5. For this reason our English Martyrologe doth deservedly reckon S. Paul among the Apostles of Brittany, in that regard profes|sing a particular acknowledgment and ve|neration to him.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Testimonies of the Acts of S. Aristobulus a Disciple of S. Peter, and an Apostle to the Brittains.

1. THere is moreover still extant in Ec|clesiasticall Records the Memory of an illustrious Disciple of S. Peter or S. Paul, who probably accompanied one of them into Brittany,  who after many years labour in our Lords vineyard was consummated here: and that is the Blessed Apostolicall Saint Ari|stobulus. Concerning whom we read this passage in the Greek Menology: Aristobulus was one of the Seaventy Disciples, who was a follower of S. Paul,Menolog Graec. 15. Martij. preaching the Gospell, and ministring to him in all places where he travel|led: By whom likewise he was ordaind a Bishop for the Region of the Brittains. But in another Edition of the same Menology, translated formerly by one William a Cardinal, and in|serted by Canisius in his second Volume of Antiquities, we read that this S. Aristobulus was ordained not by S. Paul,Menol. Graec. ubi supr. but S. Barnabas: for this is the tenour of that Passage: The commemoration of S. Aristobulus a Bishop of Brittany, and Brother of the Blessed Apostle S. Barnabas, by whom being ordained a Bishop he was sent into Brittany, and there preaching the Faith of Christ, and constituting a Church, he attaind the glory of Martyrdome.
2. Moreover a Fragment published lately by B. Vsher under the name of Haleca B. of Caesar Augusta (Sarragoe) S. Aristobulus is declared to be the Disciple of S. Peter:Vsser. Antiq. Brit. fol. 9 These are the words, Among the Brittains is cele|brated the Memory of many Martyrs, and prin|cipally of S. Aristobulus one of the seaventy Disciples, who was also call'd Zebedaeus, the Fa|ther of Iames and Iohn, Husband of Maria Sa|lome: who together with S. Peter went to Rome: And there leaving his family, he was sent a Bishop into England, where he dyed a Martyr, in the second yeare of the raign of the most cruell Emperour Nero.
3. Now wheras S. Aristobulus is every where named Bishop of the Brittains, without any particular Citty assigned for his Sea, this doth argue that in those times of zeale and simplicity, Apostolicall men did not confine the~selves to any determinate place, but like clouds hoverd up and down, being in a sort present to all, and dispensing showres sea|sonably every where. Thus S. Augustin our Apostle, at first was ordaind Bishop of the English Nation, as Bede calls him, till more Provinces being converted,Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 27. he confind him|selfe to a particular Seat.
4. Arnoldus Mirmannus,A. Mirman. with other Au|thours likewise, extend the life of this Brittish Apostle to the ninety ninth yeare of our Lord: affirming that he dyed in Brit|tany. And wheras both in the Greek Menology, and the Fragment of Haleca, as likewise in the Roman Martyrologe he is sayd,Martyr. Rom. 15. Mart. after perfor|ming the course of his preaching to have been consummated by Martyrdome: this is to be in|terpreted according to the expression of the Primitive times, in which those were called Martyrs, who for the propagation of the Gospell went into forraign parts, there ex|png themselves to all dangers, and dying in such an Employment: though their death was not violent.
5. And such was the condition of S. Ari|stobulus, concerning whom this is further added in the Greek Menology:Menol. Graec. ubi supr. Aristobulus ha|ving been ordained Bishop by S. Paul, was sent into Brittany, a region of most cruell and savage men: By whom he was sometimes tormented with stripes, and sometimes also dragg'd up and down the common Market-place. He perswaded many to adioyn themselves to Christ. And having constituted Churches, and ordaind Preists and Deacons there, he happily ended his life.
6. In the English Martyrologe this is added, That he dyed at Glastonbury, a place far enough removed from the Trinobantes,Mart. Angl. 15. Mart. where the

Romans exercised their power. Probable it is, that having spent so many years in the laborious exercise of his Apostolick Office, he in his old age retired himself into that place of solitude and Recollection, there quiet|ly disposing himself for his leaving the world. This was indeed a practise very fa|miliar to like Saints. For thus in the fol|lowing Age Fugatius and Damianus sent hi|ther by Pope Eleutherius to convert King Lu|cius and his subjects, retired at last to the same place. And afterward the like was done by S. Patrick, who being a Native of Brittany, after having spent many years in propagating the Gospell in Ireland, at last returned back, and took up his finall rest at Glastenbury.
7. This is that Aristobulus mention'd by S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, saying, Salute those which are of the household of Ari|stobulus.Rom. 16.10. And the reason why he did not sa|lute him by name, doubtles was the same for which he omitted the saluting of S. Pe|ter: because he was at this time departed from Rome into, or towards Brittany.
8. Thus far did the Gospell make a pro|gresse in Brittany in the very infancy of Chri|stianity before the death of S. Peter and S. Paul, as may be gathered out of the few Re|licks of Ecclesiasticall Records not wholly ex|tinguish'd. A great accesse to which felici|ty of this Island accrew'd by the coming hither of S. Ioseph of Arimathea and his com|panions: which though hapning toward the end of Nero's raign, yet because most of the occurents pertaining to their Gests be|long to the times of severall Emperours suc|ceeding, we will refer them to the follow|ing Book: And for the present it will suf|fise that we have demonstrated that some of the Apostles penetrated as far as into Brit|tany to plant the Gospell here.Vsser. in Pri|mord. fol. 1053. Theodor. Gaecar. af+fect. lib. 9. A Truth te|stified expressly by Theodoret, as B. Vsher hath well observed: For he comparing the Apo|stles of Christ with the most famous of the Grecian and Roman Lawgivers, shews how much they were to be prefer'd. For all that those Heathen Lawgivers could doe was to in|duce some particular Provinces or Common|weales to accept of their Laws, which all other Countreys reiected: Whereas, says he, our Ga|lilaean fishermen, Publicans and Tent makers carried the Evangelicall Law to all Nations: in|ducing not the Romans only, or those which li|ved under their Empire to accept the Laws of our crucified Lord, but the Scythians also, and Sarmatians, Indians, Ethiopians and Persians, together with the Seres, Hyrcanians, Brittains, Cimmerians and Germans. And this they did not making use of arms or armies, but by perswasion of wrds, and demonstrating the great utility of the Laws which they preached: and for the preaching of them exposed themselves to great danger.

Finis Libri primi.




THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.

1.2. S. Ioseph of Arimathea and his Com|panions principall Apostles of Brittany.
3.4.5. c. This confirmed out of Au|thentick Records by English Embassa|dours in the Councils of Pisa, Siena and Constance, c.
9. Likewise by an Ancient Charter of King Henry the second.

1. _VPON that precious founda|tion of Faith and Piety which had been layd by the Holy Apostles in Brittany, their Dis|ciples and Successours rais'd up a Temple to our Lord, a Temple though of no such amplitude as we find in the following age, yet not so unconsiderable, but that the fame thereof reached into forraign Countreys, as Arnobius who wrote above thirteen hun|dred years since,Arnob. lib. 2. cont. Gent. Tertull. A|pol. and Tertullian likewise ob|serve.
2. Now the most eminent of the Primi|tive Disciples, and who contributed most to this heavenly building, was S. Ioseph of Ari|mathea, and eleaven of his companions with him, among whom is reckoned his Son, of his own name. These toward the latter end of Nero's raign, and before S. Peter and S. Paul were consummated by a glorious Mar|tyrdom, are by the Testimony of ancient Records sayd to have entred this Island, as a place for the retirednes of it, the benignity of the Brittish Princes, and the freedom from Roman Tyranny, more opportune, and better prepar'd for entertaining the Gospell of Peace, then almost any Countrey under the Romans.
3. But before we enquire into the occa|sion of the arrivall of these Sons of Light, or relate any of their particular Gests, the pre|judice which in these later times has pos|sess'd many minds against Tradition, obli|ges me in preparation to the History follow|ing, firmly to assert this Truth in generall; that such Apostolicall persons did indeed by their zeale and industry cultivate this bar|barous Island, and this with better successe then perhaps any other Nation addicted to Idolatry.
4. Now a more efficacious Proof hereof cannot reasonably be desired then the testi|mony of a person eminently conversant in our Ecclesiasticall Monuments, and whose aversion from the Roman Church will cleare him from all suspicion of partiality: And this is the late Protestant Archbishop of Armagh, Doctour Vsher, who in a Collection of An|tiquities regarding the Primitive Churches of Brittany, treating of this very argument hath this passage:5.Vsser. de Primord. Eccl. Britt. pag. 22. We must not omit to take notice that in the Generall Synods assembled by our Euro|paans,

whensoever the Controversy was agitated touching the dignity and preeminence of the Brittish Kingdom in opposition to the French and Spaniards,A. D. 63. the Oratours of the English Nation did usually appeale to this Tradition concerning S. Ioseph of Arimathea. This question was dis|cuss'd first in the year one thousand four hundred and nine in the Councill of Pisa: and again eight years after in the Councill of Constance: out of which there is an extract of a most famous Disputation concerning the dignity and magni|tude of the Kingdoms of Brittany and France, be|tween the Embassadours of both in the Councill; which was printed at Lovain in the yeare one thousand five hundred and seaventeen. The said Extract taken out of Originall Acts of that Coun|cill, and preserv'd in the Citty of Constance, was published by the care of Sir Robert Wingfeild Knight and Embassadour from King Hen|ry the eighth to the Emperour Maximi|lian: and which is still extant in two Manu|scripts of the same Councill. It was in the thir|tieth Session that this Question was moved, Whether it be agreable to reason and iustice that the Kingdom of England should enioy equall Pri|viledges with that of France? And for the dig|nity of the English Church, it was among other things alledg'd, that presently after the suffring of our Saviour, Ioseph of Arimathea an honou|rable Counsellor, who took down from the Crosse Christs body, together with twelve companions, betimes in the morning entred into our Lords Vineyard, to wit, England, and converted the in|habitants to the Faith: To whom the King then raigning assigned for their sustenance twelve Hides of Land in the Diocese of Bath: All which twelve Preachers, as ancient Records wit|nes, were buried in the Monastery of Glastenbury, situate in the same Diocese. And with those twelve Hides of Land afore mention'd, the sayd Monastery was anciently endow'd and founded. This was alledged by the English Oratours for their Kingdome: Whereas France recei|ved not the Faith till the time of S. Diony|sius, by whose Ministery it was converted.
Alph. Gar|zias.6. Likewise in the Councill of Siena, in the year one thousand four hundred twenty four, the same Allegations were propos'd by Richard Fle|ming Bishop of Lincoln, and founder of Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford, when this Controversy was re|new'd by the English in the presence of Pope Martin the fifth, against the Spaniards, Scots and French. But principally in the Councill of Basile, in the year one thousand four hundred thir|ty four, this contention came to great heat. For then the Embassadours of the King of England, as well in the publick Council before the Bishops, a in the Congregation deputed for Reformation, pro|tested that they were to be prefer'd by reason of their more ancient reception of the Christian Faith: for they affirm'd, that the Noble Coun|sellor Ioseph of Arimathea together with others, in the fifteenth year after the Assumption of the glorious Virgin Mary came into England, and converted a great part of it to the Faith of Christ. And no long time after the Passion of our Lord Pope Eleutherius converted the whole Kingdom entirely to the Faith. This account gives Al|phonsus Garzias who was Advocat for the right of Spain in that Council.
7. And though he endeavours to enervate the reasons alledged by the English Oratours, yet his objections are so weak, that they ra|ther establish them. For all that he opposes to the story of S. Ioseph is an old trifling Le|gend reporting, that when Titus entred Ieru|salem, he saw a certain very thick wall, which he commanded to be peirced through: and within they found a certain old man who call'd himself Ioseph of Arimathea, and sayd that he was clos'd up there by the Iews, because he had buried Christ: and that till that time he had been nou|rished with heavenly food.
8. But common reason will shew how little force such a particular ungrounded story ought to have against the Tradition of a whole Nation:Vsser. ib pag. 25. Therefore the English Oratours in opposition hereto gave full assu|rance that in our most Ancient Books and Ar|chives, especially in the Records of the most fa|mous Abbey of Glastonbury, it is expressly de|clared that Ioseph with his companions, being persecuted either by Herod or the Roman Presi|dent, were brought into this Island: where he preached the things which he had seen and heard of Christ, and by his preaching converted many. who being converted bestowed on him a world of rich gifts: all which he left to the Church e|rected by him in the honour of Christ. The which Church built by S. Ioseph was afterward transfer'd into a Religious Monastery and Ab|batiall dignity: and by that famous Monastery the praises of our Lord have been continued to that present day.
9. Thus publickly, and with so great Au|thority was this Tradition concerning S. Ioseph's preaching and converting the Brit|tains, confirm'd in severall Generall Councils. And more particularly as touching the An|cient Records testifying the Truth of this story, we find them with great advantage mention'd in an illustrious Charter extant to this day,Vid. Harps|feld. in saec. 1 cap. 2. which was given by our King Hen|ry the second at westminster to the Abbay of Glastonbury: In which Charter the sayd King signifying his intention to rebuild that Mona|stery not long before consum'd by fire: And to re|new all the Priviledges confer'd on it by his Pre|decessours, King william the first, and second, and his Grandfather King Henry the first: as likewise by more Ancient Kings, S. Edgar the Father of S. Edward, King Edmond and his Father Edward, and his Grandfather King Alfred, King Bring|walth, Hentwyn, Baldred, Ina, the famous King Arthur, Candred, and many other Christian Kings: yea, moreover by Kenewalla in former times a Pagan King of Brittany: For this pur|pose he affirms that he caused a diligent inquisi|tion to be made of the sayd Priviledges and Charters, which were presented and read in his presence: all which he confirmed and rene'wd to the same Church anciently call'd by some the Mo|ther

of Saints, and by others the Tomb of Saints: because it had been built by the very immediat Disciples of our Lord, and in the beginning de|dicated by our Lord himselfe, as Venerable An|tiquity doth testify. This testimony is given by King Henry the Second in his sayd Charter. All which considered, to deny so great a blessing conferd on our Nation, as the arrivall here of S. Ioseph, can only be an act of passion and unexcusable partiality.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2.3. The time and occasion of S. Iosephs coming into Brittany not cleared by an|cient Writers.
4.5.6. Bishop Godwins mistake, wrong|fully grounded on Freculphus.
7. The Holy Graal, an old sence|les Legend.

1. HAd it not been for that visible la|sting Monument of Glastonbury, per|haps posterity had never been acquainted with the name of so illustrious a Patron of our Nation as S. Ioseph, since no Books of that Age, if any were written, are now ex|tant, and the wonderfull changes in the very constitution of this Island, by a succes|sion of severall new Nations, would pro|blably extinguish all ancient Traditions.
2. These things considered, it will be dif|ficult to give any rationall or satisfactory Account of the precise time and occasion of S. Iosephs arrivall in Brittany: and much lesse of the particular Acts of himselfe and his companions, during the space of so many years as interven'd between their first com|ing and deaths.
3. Those Modern Writers which have most studiously searchd into Antiquity, and with greatest candour and sincerity reiected se|verall fabulous inventions of some of our Authours who wrote not many Ages since, doe agree that S. Ioseph first entred Brittany in the raign of Nero, when Suctonius Paulinus was Pretr here: at which time great oppor|tunity was afforded for such a Voyage, by reason of severall Troops and companies of soldiers sent out of Gaule to re-inforce the Roman Army, as likewise the coming hither of Nero's freed servant and favourite Poli|cletus with a great retinue, c.
4. But what particular occasion or Mo|tive might induce S. Ioseph to undertake such a journey and employment, is altogether uncertain. Our late Protestant Historians to exclude any relation, dependence or obli|gation that our Countrey might have to S. Peter, are willing it should be beleiv'd that he was commissiond from S. Philip the Apo|stle, then preaching in Gaule.Godvvin in Convers. Brit. To this effect Doctour Godwin late Bishop of Hereford writes thus; Freculphus Lexoviensis, saith he, gives the reason why S. Ioseph pass'd ouer into Brit|tany. For when S. Philip the Apostle (or, as others rather thinke, the Evangelist, for the Acts of these two are much confounded and mingled in history) preach'd the Gospell in Gaule, he had much conestat on with the Druids, the cheif Doctours of whose superstition lived in Brit|tany. Therfore being inform'd that our Island was by a very narrow sea divided from the conti|nent of Gaule, he thought it very expedient to send hither twelve Preachers, the Cheif and President of which was S. Ioseph, who in the sixty third yeare of Christ began their employment of converting the Brittains. Thus writes the Bishop, pretending Freculphus for his war|rant.
5. Wher as Freculphus treating of S. Philip neither mentions S. Ioseph nor the Druid's,Freculphus. nor Brittany: all that he writes being onely this, S. Philip preach'd Christ to the Gaules: and moreover brought to the light of knowledge and secure Haven of Faith certain barbarous Na|tions, neighbouring to darknes, and ioynd to them by the swelling Ocean. Afterwards in Hiera|polis a Citty of Phrygia he suffred death by cru|cifying and stoning. This passage Freculpus extraited out of Isidor, and consequently it is to be interpreted according to Isidors mind, who by the Gaules (or Galatae) understood that Nation then inhabiting Asia, not Eu|rope: and by the barbarous Nations neigh|bouring to (Northern) darknes, the Scythians, divided from the Galatians by the Euxin Sea. Besides, according to the co~sent of Antiqui|ty S. Philips Martyrdom hapned many years before the time mention'd by the Bishop.
6. Let the Apostles name therfore, who sent S. Ioseph and his companions into Brit|tany, remain in obscurity to Protestants: though the forecited Text of S. Innocent first Pope of that name expressly affims that none converted any of these Western and Northern Na|tions but only S. Peter or his Successours, or such as were delegated by them. His co|ming cannot be questiond, nor that he came with the authority of a Spirituall Pastour and Apostolick Preacher.
7. As for his six hundred companions which a senceles Legend upon the authority of a more senceles old Book call'd the Holy Graal, says came along with him, some men and some women: as lkewise the arrivall of a certain Prince of Media call'd Nacianus, whom S. Ioseph had formerly baptis'd in a Citty call'd Saram, and who was sent by our Lord with an army to deliver S. Ioseph out of prison, into which a wicked King of Northwales had cast him: which King is sayd to be mentiond in a Book found by the Emperour Theodosius in Pilats palace at Ieru|salem: Such foolish dreames as these, as they are not with out scorn to be recited, so neither ought they to be made use of for the disgracing or discrediting sober History prudently grounded on Tradition.



III. CH.III. CHAP.

1. S. Ioseph first addresses himself to the Brittish King.
2.3. c. The Kings name was Ar|viragus: whether he and Caractacus were the same person.
7. He is sayd to be the Founder of the Vniversity of Oxford, by the advice of Olenus Calenus, an Hetrurian Au|gur.

1. THis Tradition informs us that S. Io|seph at his first abord in the Western parts of this Island with his companions, as|sumed the confidence to repaire to the Brit|tish Kings presence raigning there: to whom he gave an account of the design of his journey, which was to bring the happy newes, and to offer the only assured means of eternall happines to all that would em|brace it. It is not to be doubted but this Message gravely and modestly delivered by one filled with the spirit of God, and also of a venerable presence, one that renoun|ced all worldly designs of power or riches, Professour of a Religion sufficiently recom|mended in that it deserved the hatred of Nero, a Prince then infamous beyond any ever mention'd in former Histories, such a message, I say, could not but at least be heark|ned to without displeasure, if not with fa|vour, at least by such a King as this is descri|bed by our ancient Annals.
2. His name was Arviragus: (the same no doubt who in an ancient coyn is called Arivog:) but from what Ancestours he was descended, is not clearly enough re|ported in History:Alford, from Plorileg. Certain Modern Writers will needs make him the same with Caracta|cus before spoken of, suppos'd likewise by them to be the same with Cogidunus the youngest son of Cunobelin: from whom also they are willing to deduce King Lu|cius in a direct line, who raigned in the fol|lowing Age: By which art they indeed give some grace to their Histories, by a distinct sorting of actions and occurrents to the pre|cise years of Kings then suppos'd to raign in this Island.
3. It cannot truly be denied but that the Character given by Historians to Caractacus and Arviragus is very much agreeing in re|semblance: For as Caractacus is described by Tacitus and Dio to be a Prince of great courage, magnanimity and Beneficence, and moreover a freind to the Romans: so like|wise is Arviragus represented by others. For thus doth a Writer learned in Antiqui|ty describe him:Pitsius de Scriptor. in Arvirago. Arviragus, saith he, was well acquainted with those arts which adorn and dispose the mind to humanity. Neither did he alone himselfe love learning, but was also a sin|gular favourer of those who were learned, c. He was valiant and couragious in warre, mild and clement in peace. He was in his conversation affable and chearfully pleasant, liberall in be|stowing gifts, and always most deare to his sub|iects.
4. But the resemblance of their Chara|cters is not a proof sufficient to render their persons one and the same, unlesse we must be obliged to beleive that Brittany was a soyle too barren to produce more then one brave and commendable Prince. And there are in ancient Records severall grounds of more then a suspicion that they were di|stinct Kings, raigning in severall parts of this Island, and in severall times also.
5. It cannot be denyed that in Brittany there were very many petty Kings and Prin|ces, independent of one another, some of them subject to the Romans, and others free. In Caesars time there were in Kent no fewer then three. As for Cynobelin and his family, their Dominions, for ought appears, were confind to the Trinobantes, that is Essex and Middlesex, whereas Arviragus raigned in the Western parts upon the Confines of the Bel|gae, in the Provinces of Dorsetshire and So|mersetshire: Which argues that he was of a different race.
6. But moreover this King Arviragus seems to have raigned much later then Ca|ractacus, who after his captivity by the Em|perour Claudius is suppos'd to have been sent back to his Kingdom, though no Ro|man Writers speak of his restitution. Wheras the Roman Satyrist mentions Arviragus as a Prince of great renown in the dayes of Do+mitian, the seaventh Emperour after Claudius:venal Sat. and as an enemy very formidable to the Ro|mans, which certainly Caractacus never was: For upon occasion of an enormously great fish, a Mullet, presented to Domitian, he brings in, a flatterer making that Present an Omen of some great conquest to follow, Thou shalt take captive some great King, says he, or the famous Arviragus shall be umbled down from his Brittish chariot, c. By which expression it seems more then probable that Arviragus, though bred up in the Roman ci|vility and literature, yet upon advantage of the great factions succeeding in the Empire after Nero's death, shook off his chains, and renounced his dependance on the Romans. Certain it is, so great and famous a King he was, that without any wrong to Caractacus he might be mistaken for him.
7. Among other illustrious Monuments of his affection to literature, and munifi|cence for promoting it, this is recorded, that he was the Founder of the famous Vni|versity of Oxford: For thus writeth a modern learned Authour:Pits. de Scri|ptern. Aca|dem. Oxon. It is the opinion of some that in the seaventieth yeare after the Nativity of our Lord the Citty of Oxford was built, during the

raign of King Arviragus. And that then there came into Brittany a certain Hetrurian Prophet, or Augur, named Olenus Calenus, concerning whom Pliny in his naturall History Writes: and that this man layd the foundations,Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 28. yea and perfected the building of it, from his own name calling it Calena: which name was continued to it till the entrance of the Saxons into Brit|tany: after which is was called Oxenford.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1. c. Arviragus, though not conver|ted, affords to S. Ioseph, c the Isle of Glastonbury for a place of retreat: and twelve Hydes of Land for their nourish+ment.

1. TO this renowned King Arviragus S. Ioseph and his Companions addres|sed themselves, and expounded their Mes|sage. The successe hereof was, though not a Conversion of the King himselfe, yet a free leave to publish their Doctrin among his Subjects. And herein we ought with|trembling to adore the most holy, but with all most secret judgments of God. It is pro|bable that there could not be found a mind in all this Island at that time better dispos'd, as far as nature and human education could dispose a soule, for the entertaining of Sa|ving Truch, then in King Arviragus: Yet though by his kindnes to the Professours of it, he tacitly shewd his approbation therof, he did not receive from heaven the Gift of Divine Faith to submitt therto: So unhap|pily prevalent is worldly Power and Riches against the Spirit of Christianity, which teaches Humility and a contempt of such transitory vanities.
2. The King not content only to giue per|mission to these Apostolick Preachers to convert and save his subjects, was pleas'd moreover to extend his liberality to them so far as to afford them a place of retreat, commodious for their quiet and holy De|votions, and sufficient for their sustenance, that so without distraction and sollicitude they might attend to the worship of the true God, and the instruction of all those that were willing to seek it. Yet we cannot without injury to the zeale and charity of these our Primitive Fathers imagin that they were willing to spare their labour and tra|vells to make Christ known to many which enquired not after him. No doubt they be|hav'd themselves as all other holy Missio|ners did in those dayes, through all places  to fly from the wrath to come: and made use of that Retreat, allowd them by  King, only as a place of repose after they had been spent with toyling in Gods harvest, in which place being sepa|rated from worldly conversation they might purify themselves before their deaths, that so they might be admitted into Gods presence to receive the Crown of all their labours.
3. The Seat assignd by King Arviragus to S. Ioseph and his Companions was an Island, rude and uncultivated, call'd by the Britons for the colour of it Iniswytrin, that is, the glassy Island, compass'd by the River Bry, and situated in Somersetshire. In succeeding time being cleard from bryars, draynd and cultiuated, it was by the inhabitants nam'd Avallonia, for the plenty of apples and other fruit growing there. But in after ages when the Saxons had possess'd themselves of those parts they resum'd the former Title and call'd it in their own language Glaston or Glascon, whence the famous Monastery of Glastonbury, begun after a homely fashion by S. Ioseph, but in future times with a prodigious magnificence enlarged, tooke its name.
4. In the same place there was by King Arviragus and his Son Marius allotted a certain proportion of ground for the nou|rishment of these twelve strangers, con|taining, according to their ancient mea|sure, twelve Hydes of Land. Now this term Hyde is by our Writers sometime call'd a Manse (Mansa, Manentium) sometime a Fa|mily: by others it is call'd a Plough, contain|ing as much as one Plough and Oxen could cultivate in one yeare, or as could nourish a small Family. And within this proportion seems to have been contained a certain fen|ny, but rich peice of ground which the Saxons afterwards call'd Godney,Cambden in Somerset. that is, Gods Island, as being the first portion of ground which in the Christian Church was conse|crated to Gods service.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1. S. Ioseph at Glastonbury build's a Church.
2.3.4. c. This confirm'd by ancient Testimonies, as an Epistle of S. Patrick, here produced.
11.12. Observations from that Epi|stle.
13, 14. An Objection answerd.

1. THe first thing that our New blessed In|habitants did in their new Habitation was to build and consecrate to the worship of the only true God a Temple or Church, in which so great was the fervour and piety of our Primitive Christians, that is was de|servedly call'd the Mother of Saints.
2. This Church erected by S. Ioseph, moved thereto by Divine Revelation, as our An|cient Records testify, was also dedicated to the honour of the most blessed Virgin Mary: and moreover was immediatly con|secrated by our Lord himselfe. Of these things the Testimonies are so ancient and of such authority, that severall Protestant Writers refuse not their assent to them. We will here produce the attestation of Authours and Monuments, which cannot reasonably be excepted against.
3. The first is of S. Patrick, the so illu|strious Apostle of Ireland. He after many years Labours spent in his Apostolicall Office there, thirsting after a quiet retired life of Contemplation, in the year four hundred thirty nine returning into his native Countrey Brittany, made choice of Glaston|bury, a then famous schoole of Sanctity, for his abode, where he spent his last thirty years in Prayers, Fasting, Watching and all other Penitentiall austerities. Now ha|ving by Tradition been inform'd that in that place many Primitive Saints had been en|terr'd, desirous to find out and honour their Relicks, he caused the ground to be broken in severall places, and thought fit to give an account to posterity of what he found there: This he did in Writing, pre|serv'd hitherto with great care, and approv'd not only by ancient and modern Catholick Authours, but by learned Protestants also. The tenour of it is as followeth:Antiquit. Glaston. A. D. 430.4. In the name of our Lord Iesus Christ. I Patrick the poor humble servant of God in the four hundred twenty fifth yeare of the Incarna|tion of our Lord being sent by the most holy Pope Celestin into Ireland, by the assistance of di|vine Grace I converted the Irish people to the way of Truth. And having establish'd them in the Catholick Faith, I at last am return'd into Brittany: where as I beleive, by a speciall con|duct of God, who is the life and the way, I arri|ved at the Island Ynswitrin: Where I found a holy ancient place chosen and sanctified by God to the honour of the immaculate Virgin Mary the Mother of God. There also I met with certain Brethren of holy Conversation, instructed in the rudiments of Catholick Faith, who were the Suc|cessors of the Disciples of the holy Saints Pha|ganus and Diruvianus, whose names, considering the merits of their lives, I assuredly beleive are written in heaven. And because the Iust shall be had in perpetuall memory, out of the tender affection which I bore to the sayd Brethren, I resolved to commemorate their Names in this my Writing: the which are Brumban, Hiregaan, Bremwal, Wentreth, Bantomeweny, Adelwolred, Loyot, Wellias, Breden, Swelwes, Hinlornus, and another calld Hin. These being born of Noble pa|rentage, and desirous to adorn their Nobility with works of Christian Faith, made choice of an Eremiticall life. And because I found them of humble and quiet spirits, I chose rather to live with them as an abiect in the worlds esteem, then to dwell in Courts of Princes. Moreover being all of us of one heart and one soule, we thought it best for us to live, eat and drink in Community, and to sleep in the same habitation: and thus, though much against my will they would needs make me their Superiour, who was not worthy to untye the latchets of their shooes.
5. Whilst we thus lead a Monasticall life toge|ther according to the Rules of Ancient approved Fathers, the foresayd Brethren shewd me certain Writings of S. Phaganus and Diruvianus, wherin was declared that twelve Disciples of the Holy Apostles Philip and Iacob built the sayd ancient Church to the honour of the foresayd Blessed Virgin, by the appointment of the blessed Arch|angel Gabriel And moreover that our Lord himselfe from heaven dedicated the sayd Church to the honour of his Mother: as likewise that three Pagan Kings (to wit, Arviragus, Marius and Coellus) bestow'd upon them twelve portions of Land. I found also in other Writings of a later date, that the holy Saints Phaganus and Diruvia|nus obtain'd of Eleutherius, who sent them into Brittany, thirty years of Indulgence: As I my selfe likewise obtain'd from Pope Celestin of pious memory, twelve years.
6. A long time after this, being accompanied with my Brother Wellias, we with great difficulty ascended to the top of a Mountain situated in the sayd Island: And being come thither, we found an Oratory very ancient, and almost wholly ruin'd: which yet seem'd to me very commodious, and chosen of God, for the exercise of Christian deve|tion: Into which being entred, we were refresh'd with so wonderfully sweet a savour, that we thought our selves in Paradice. After this we went out and returned again into the Oratory, searching with great diligence all places: and at last we found a Volume of a Book in which were written the Acts of the Apostles, together with the Gests of Saint Phaganus and S. Di|ruvianus: which volume was much perish'd. Notwithstanding at the end thereof we found a Writing, which imported how the foresayd S. Pha|ganus and Diruvianus, being thereto moved by a revelation of our Lord Iesus Christ, had built the sayd Oratory to the honour of S. Michael the Archangel: to the end that he in that place should receive honour from men, who by Gods command was to lead men into everlasting and heavenly honours. Being much delighted with this writing, we endeavoured to read it to the very conclusion: and there we found that those vene|rable Saints Phaganus and Diruvianus had re|mained in the sayd place the space of nine years, and had obtained thirty years of Indulgence for all faithfull Christians who with a pious affection should visit that place in honour of Saint Mi|chael.
7. Having found so rich a Treasure of the Di|vine goodnes, I and my Brother Wellias spent three months in fasting, prayers and watching, and ob|tain'd a power over Devils and wild beast. Ad on a certain night being asleep there appear'd to me our Lord Iesus, in a vision saying to me, My servant Patrick, know that I have chosen this

place for the Honour of my Name, and that men here may reverently invoke the assistance of my Archangel Michael. And this shall be a sign to thee and thy Brethren, to the end they may yeild beleife to what I have told thee: Thy lef arme shall be wither'd, till thou hast declare the Vision to thy Brethren which dwell in the Cells below, and shalt return hither again: And so it came to passe.
8. From that time forward we appointe that two Brethren should reside in that place for ever: except succeeding Prelats in future time should for some iust reason ordain otherwise.
9. This present Writing I committed to th custody of my two Brethren Arnalph and Ogma who were Irishmen, and came with me out of that Countrey: This I did, because upon my exhortation they were content humbly to remain in the sayd Oratory. Another Copy of it I layd up in the Chest of the Blessed Virgin Mary, for a monument to posterity. I Brother Patrick also with the advice of my Brethren doe grant a hun|dred days of Indulgence to all those who out of a pious intention shall with Axes and other instruments cleare the passages of the foresayd Mountain on all sides from bushes and trees, that devout Christians may have a freer entrance piously to visit the Church of the most Blessed and ever Virgin Mary, and the foresayd Oratory.
10. This is the Epistle or Writing left by S. Patrick as a Monument of the goodnes of God towards this our Nation so early in the very beginning of Christianity. Some part of which Epistle is quoted almost three hundred years since by Capgravius in the life of S. Patrick: And it is entirely extant i the famous Library of Sir Iohn Cotton, in two severall Manuscripts, one of the Anti|quities of William of Malmsbury; and ano|ther of a Monk call'd Iohn, who made extrait out of the same William, and a certain Wri|ter call'd Adam Domerham. And concern|ing this Epistle thus writes Gerardus Vossiu,Voss. de Hist. lat. vid. M. Bibliohec. . 5. p. 3. sol. 793. vid. Cambden. Britan. in Glaston. Somerset. This Epistle of the Legation of S. Patrick we found some years since amongst the Manuscript Collections of Marianus Victorius Bishop of Reate of pious memory, who faithfully transcrib'd  out of a very ancient Manuscript belonging to Glastonbury, many years before, when he attended Cardinal Pole sent Legat into England. In which Epistle some passages are very agrea|ble to Protestant Writers: and others very of|fensive.
11. It pleases them much to read that S. Ioseph and his companions were Disciples of the Apostles S. Philip and Iacob: because that may quit them of any special obliga|tion to S. Peter. But they may consider that though these Saints were indeed Disciples of those holy Apostles, adhering to them in their peregrinations, yet it will not follow thence that they received a Mission from them to plant the Gospell in Brittany. Since it is apparent by an unquestion'd Tradition of both the Eastern and Western Churches, that those two Apostles suffred Martyrdom severall years before their coming into this Island: so that if they were sent by any A|postles hither, it could be done only by S. Peter or S. Paul, to whom the Western Empire owes the blessing of Christian Doctrin, as S. Innocent, before mention'd, testifies.
12. But whereas in this Epistle mention is made of a power of conferring Indulgences for a certain number of years, granted by S. Eleutherius Pope to S. Phaganus and Diru|vianus and by S. Celestin Pope to S. Patrick, this much offends some of our Modern-Pro|testant Controvertists. Notwithstanding it is certain that the Church has a power to dis|pence and relaxe the severity of Ecclesiasticall Censures: Which Power though in some in|feriour degree residing in every Bishop, yet by a tacite consent seems by a more exten|ded Priviledge to be devolved on the Su+preme Pastour, who may communicate that Power on others, in whose Piety and pru|dence he may place some confidence.
13. A late Prtestant Historian imagins he has an objection unanswerable against this Epistle and the authenticknes of it,D. Fuller. Ob. taken from the Names of such solitary Monks as Saint Patrick affirms that he found there: severall of which, saith he, seem to be Ger|man or Saxon, and not Brittish names, and consequently improperly assign'd to times so ancient, and so many ages anticipating the arrivall of the Saxons here.
14. But,Sol. in case it be granted that any of these Names be properly German, it is well known that severall Belgick Gaules of a German extraction peopled a great part of our Island, and since they gave the Names and Titles to many of our Provinces, it needs not to be esteem'd a wonder if they left to posterity some Names likewise o their persons.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2.3 Saint Iosephs building a Church at Glastonbury confirmed by S. David, and a Miracle.

1. A Second Witnes of the Sanctity of this Mother-Church of Christianity built by S. Ioseph at Glastonbury in honour of our Blessed Lady, as likewise of the won|derfull Priviledge confer'd on it by our Lord himselfe, who was pleased personally to consecrate it, is the Illustrious Bishop of Me|nevia, S. David, the extirpatour of Pelagianism in Brittany. His testimony is extant in the Antiquities of Glastonbury collected by Wil|liam of Malmsbury, in these words:2. Saint David with seaven other Bishops, of whom he was Primate,Antiquit. Glaston. came to Glastonbury, invited thereto by the Sanctity of the place;

place: and had a resolution solemnly to conse|crate an ancient Church there erected to the honour of the Blessed Virgin-Mother of our Lord. Having therefore provided all things requisite for the performance of that sacred Ce|remony; on the night immediatly preceding the intended Dedication he, as nature requi|red, yeilded to sleep: in which our Lord Iesus appeard to him, and mildly demanded of him the cause of his coming thither. This with|out delay S. David declar'd unto him: But our Lord presently turn'd him from his resolu|tion of dedicating the Church, saying to him, That must not be done. And taking the Bi|shops hand, he told him, that many years since he himselfe had dedicated it to the ho|nour of his Mother: therfore that holy Cere|mony ought not to be profan'd by any mans repeating it. And having sayd this, with his finger he peirced through the Bishops hand: Telling him that this should be a sign that that ought not to be again renew'd, which him|selfe had formerly anticipated: And withall he promis'd him that the next day when in reciting the Canon of the Masse he was to pro|nounce those Words [Per ipsum,  cum ipso  in ipsum By him and with him and to him be all honour and glory to thee, O God the Father, in the Vnity of the Holy Ghost,] he should have restord the integrity and sound|nes of his hand. The terrour of this Vision quickly drove sleep from the Bishops eyes: whereupon with great earnestnes he examined whether that were indeed reall which our Lord seem'd to have done to him: And having found it so, he wondred at it, and expected what would be the issue. The next day all that were present with admiration saw and touched the prodigous wound. Hereupon all the Prepa|ration for a onsecration came to nothing: and the miracle divinely wrought being made known publickly to all the Hearers, encreas'd the ad|miration. And in conclusion, when Masse was celebrated the Bishops hand was restord to its former soundnes.
3. This miracle is not forgotten nor contemn'd even by some Protestant Writers: though in repeating it, they willingly omit the name of Masse, which having banish'd from their own Churches, they are loath it should appeare of so great Antiquity, and which is more considerable, dignified by our Lords mentioning it, and working a won|derfull miracle during the celebration of it.


VII. CHAPVII. CHAP.

1.2. A third witnes is our H. Apostle S. Au|gustin the Monk. The fashion and ho|melines of that Church.

1. A Third Witnes of equall authority, though later date, is S. Augustin the Apostle of our Nation, who in an Epistle to S. Gregory the Great mentions the summe of what hath been hitherto related, as a Tra|dition receiv'd in those days. A part of this Epistle is recited by three Protestant Bishops, as a firm argument of the Primitive anti|quity of Christian Religion in our Island.Antiquit. Br. God vvin in Catalog. Episcop. Ang. Vsserij Pri|mord. Eccles. Britann. The words of S. Augustin are these: In the con|fines of western Brittany there is a Royall Island, by an ancient Name called Glascon: It is largely extended, being encompassed with waters aboun|ding with fish, and rivers in many places stand|ing in pooles, commodious for many uses of hu|man life, and (which is most considerable) it hath been dedicated to the exercises of Sacred Duties. For there the first Professours of Christian Religion found (as the report is) a Church not built by the skill of men, but prepared by God an fitted for human salvation. The which Church was afterward by many miracles, and many my|sterious operations demonstrated to have been consecrated by our Lord the Creatour of the world, to his own glory, and the honour of his most Blessed Mother the Virgin Mary. To this Church was after|wards added an Oratory built of stone, which was dedicated to Christ and his holy Apostle S. Peter.
2. And hereto agrees that which we read in the life of S. Ioseph:p. Capgrav. in vita S. Iosephi. The foresaid Saints conver|sing together in that Solitude, after a little time were admonish'd in a Vision by the holy Archan|gel Gabriel, to build unto the honour of the holy Mother of God and perpetuall Virgin Mary, a Church, in a place shewd from heaven to them. Whereupon they in obedience to those Divine ad|monitions finish'd the building of a Chappell, the walls wherof on all sides were made of rods warled or interwoven. This was done in the one and thir|tieth yeare after the Passion of our Lord, and in the fifteenth after the Assumption of the glorious Virgin Mary. Here we may see, saith D. Fuller,D. Fuller. the simplicity of Primitive Devotion, and the native fashion of Brittish buildings in that age, and some hundred years after. For we find that Hoel Dha King of Wales An. D. 940. made himself a Palace of Hurdleworke call'd Tyguyn, or the White house, because to ad|vance it above other houses, the rods, wher|of it was made, were unbark'd, having the rind strip'd off: Which was then counted gay and glorious. This homely building however, suiting with the simplicity of the builders soules, did deserve, and was indeed preferd in the veneration of all succeeding times, before the magnificent structures of squared stones and marble, adorn'd and enrich'd with gold and precious stones, which in following ages by the Devotion, though perhaps mix'd with some vanity of lesse perfect Christians, were splendidly erected.



VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. A fourth Testimony of ehe Building a Church at Glastonbury by S. Ioseph, from an Ancient Inscription at Glaston|bury, here produced.
3.4. c. Sir Henry Spelmans Excep|tions against that Inscription, an|swer'd.

1. THe last Testimony justifying most of the particulars before mentioned touching this Primitive Church built by S. Ioseph of Arimathea is taken from a very ancient Inscription cut in brasse, and here|tofore fastned to a Pillar in Glastonbury Church. Which Inscription Bishop Godwin ther|fore rehearses that he may demonstrate that S. Ioseph indeed came into Brittany: and after him Sir Henry Spelman caused it to be entire|ly transcrib'd, and put into his Collection of our Brittish and English Councills. The te|nour of it is as followeth:2. In the one and thirtieth year after the Passion of our Lord twelve Holy men,Spelman Co|cil. Britan. among whom Ioseph of Arimathea was Cheif, came to this place: and here built the first Church of this Kingdom: Which Christ, in the honour of his Mother, himselfe dedicated, together with a place for their buriall: as S. David Bishop of Menevia testified, who having an in|tention to consecrate it, our Lord appearing in a vision by night to him, forbad him: And moreover for a sign that our Lord himselfe had formerly dedicated the Church together with the Church-yard, he with his finger bored through the Bishops hand, which was next day seen by many persons so peirced. After|ward the same Bishop by Divine Revelation, and upon occasion of the encreasing number of Holy persons there, added a Chappell to the East-side of this Church, and consecrated it in honour of the Blessed Virgin: the Altar of which he adorned with a Saphir of inestima|ble valew, for a perpetuall Memory hereof. And least the place or quantity of the former Church by such Additions should come to be forgotten, this Pillar was erected in a line drawn by the two Eastern angles of the sayd Church southward, which line divides the fore|sayd Chappell from it. Now the Length of it from the sayd line toward the West was sixty feet, the Breadth twenty six: And the di|stance of the Center of the sayd Pillar from the middle point between the foresayd angles contained forty eight feet.
3. This ancient Inscription carefully re|corded by Sir Henry Spelman in his Col|lection of Councils, is notwithstanding censured by him as a thing borrowd from fabulous Legends: by which he condemn's his own superfluous curiosity to preserve it. And wheras he endeavours by severall reasons to make good his Censure, they being prudently examined will appeare insufficient.
4. For first of all he doubts whether any Christian Churches at all were erected so early.Ob. And indeed if by Churches he means such magnificent Structures as were made when the Christian Faith ceased to be persecuted,Sol. it is certain there were formerly no such. But that there were even at Rome it selfe places as|sign'd for the meeting of Christians to exercise the Duties and Rites of their Re|ligion, this is attested by all Ecclesiasticall Histories.
5. Again he positively affirms that if there were any Churches,Ob. yet that they were not en|compassed with ground for buriall: no men|tion occurring of any such before the time of S. Cuthbert: and the Roman laws forbid|ding burial within Cities. But the former allegation is a manifest mistake:Sol. for long before S. Cuthberts dayes, King Ethelbert our first Converted King, and S. Augustin our first Apostle were buried in the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul: And Constantin the first Christian Emperour was buried among the Relicks and and bones of the Apostles and Martyrs. Hereupon S. Augustin and S. Maximus Taurinensis shew that it was usu|ally the desire of ancient Christians to joyn their Sepulchers to those of Saints and Martyrs,Aug. lib. de cura pro mart cap 18: Maxim. Tour. Homil. d. Martyr. as expecting great security to their soules thereby. And as for the old Roman Law forbidding buriall within Citties, it was long before this antiquated. And however, Glastonbury in those days was far from being a Citty, or even a Village: it was rather a mere desart and solitude. Ther|fore without any breach of the Roman Law, our Lord might provide for S. Ioseph a place of buriall, who had before lent him his own Sepulcher.
6. But besid's this,Ob. he excepts against the Rite of Consecrating Churches mention'd in this Inscription, which he thinks to be of a far later date.Sol. And no doubt many ceremonies and solemnities were by the Church added to that Rite in following Ages: But that generally the houses in which Christians in the Primitive times met for the exercise of their Religion were by some Ceremonies dedicated to that use, as by Erecting a Title, fixing a Crosse c, the most ancient Records of the Church doe testify.
7. Lastly that which most displeases Sir Henry Spelman is the Dedication of this Church to the Honour of the Blessed Virgin:Abb. a Devotion he thinks not in use till severall ages following.Sol. Notwith|standing, that even in this very age

this was not the only Example of such a Veneration exhibited to the most Holy Virgin Mother of our Lord, the ancient Churches of Spain will assure us, which by a Tradition uni|versally received among them, attested in all their Liturgies  severall of their Councils, re|late that there were even from the first en|trance of Christianity into that Kingdom se|veral Churches erected to her honour: Among which the most famous is that Tem|ple at Saragoa called del Pilar,Caesar Au|gusta. or of the Pil|lar, celebrated above a thousand years since by S. Maximus Bishop of that Citty, who composed severall Hymns to celebrate that most venerable house, called Angelical, be|cause the Pillar on which her statue was fixed was brought thither by the ministery Angels.
8. The foresayd Inscription therfore, con|taining litle more then what hath been ju|stifyed by Witnesses of great authority, S. Patrick and S. David, ought to enioy its title to our beleife, the substance of it not having been questiond for above a thousand years, but on the contrary admitted in Councills, confirm'd by ancient Records and Charters, esteem'd by the whole state of this Kingdom so authentick, that to honour that most ve|nerable Church, and in gratitude to our common Patron the Founder of it, posses|sions, Gifts and ornaments of inestimable valew have in all Ages been offred.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1. King Marius succeed's Arviragus.
2.3. c. In his time is the first mention of the Picts. who they were: and why so called.

A. D. 731. ABout ten years after S. Ioseph's en|trance into Brittany, King Arviragus dying, his son Marius succeeded him in the Kingdom, resembling his Father, as in cou|rage and other Princely vertues, so likewise in his kindnes to these Holy strangers, for he not only confirm'd Arviragus his libera|lity to them, but moreover extended his own, as we read in Capgrave.
2. In this Kings time we first find any men|tion made of the Picts: as if they were a Na|tion in the Northern parts of Brittany, di|stinct from the Brittains.Florileg. ad Anu. D. 73. Mathew a Monk of Westminster sirnamed Florilegus, thus writes of them, In the seaventy fifth yeare of Grace, saith he, Roderick King of the Picts coming out of Scythia landed in the Northern coast of Brit|tany, and began to wast that Province. But Ma|rius King of the Brittains meeting him in war|like manner, slew him And afterwards gave unto the conquered people which remain'd alive, that part of Albany which is called Catenes a desart uninhabited countey.A. D. 73.
3. In like manner S. Beda thus relates the coming of the Picts into Brittany.Bed. Hist. l. 1. cap. 1.
In the beginning, says he, this Island was inhabited only by the Brittains, from whom it took its name. And they enioying the possession of the greatest part of the Island, beginning from the Southern parts, it hapned that a certain Na|tion called Picts, as the report is, coming out of Scythia, adventured to Sea in long boats, not many in number, and being toss'd by tempests beyond the coasts of Brittany, came into Ireland, entring into the Northern parts of it: and finding in inhabited by a Nation call'd Scots, desired of them permission to plant themselves there: but were refused. Now Ireland is of all Islands next to Brittany the largest, being placed Westward from Brittany, not reaching so far Northward as it, but extended further toward the South over against the Northern parts of Spain, yet so as that a vast Ocean divides them. The Picts therfore, as we sayd, arriving in that Island by Sea, made their request to have a Seat granted them there. But the Scots answerd, that the Island could not nourish them both: Notwithstanding, sayd they, we can give you proffitable counsell what to doe. We know that Eastward from us there is another Island, which upon clear dayes we can discover with our eyes. If you will goe thither, you may gain possessions for your selves there: or if you find resistance, we will afford you succours. Hereupon the Picts sayling into Brittany possess'd them|selves of the Northern parts: For the Brittains were seised of all more Southernly. Now the Picts being destitute of wives, requested the Scots to bestow some on them: wherto they yeilded, but upon this condition: that whensoever the title to the Principality among them was que|stionable, they should prefer the Descendants by the femal sexe, before the males: Which is a custom to this day observ'd among the Picts. And in processe of time after the Brittaine and Picts, this Island receiv'd a third Nation of Scots, in the Northern parts possess'd by the Picts.
4. The authority of S. Beda deserves cer|tainly to be esteem'd of great weight: and were it not for that, our Modern learned Writers would not doubt to affirm, that the Nation which about these times began to be called Picts, was no other then the Na|tive Brittains inhabiting the Northern parts of this Island. Anciently all Brittains were indeed Picts, that is a people which delighted to paint themselves with woad, figuring upon their bodies the shapes of severall wild beasts, as beleiving that would render them more formidable to their Enemies. Thus Caesar, and other more ancient Roman Authours describe them. But when all the Southern parts of the Island were either pos|sess'd by the Romans, or became dependent on them, the inhabitants left their barba|rous custome of painting, and conform'd themselves to the Roman fashion. Those Brittains therfore inhabiting the Northern

parts continuing in hostility with the Ro|mans,A. D. 75. and constant to their old customs of painting, begun to be considered as a new distinct Nation, divided in saction from the civilis'd Brittains, and for that reason had the new name of Picts appropriated to them: being indeed Brittains,Cambden de Pictis. as Mr. Cambden would willingly conjecture, were he not discourag'd by S. Bedes authority. And this conjecture he fortifies by severall argu|ments: especially because all the names of places, and other things among the Picts are purely Brittish. And such Roman Histo|rians as mention the Picts seated in Caledo|nia, a part of Scotland, yet call the Caledo|nians, Brittains.
5. But this is more then sufficient to be written on a subject which is not our busi|nes: but only so far as may give light to Ecclesiasticall affairs of those times. For which reason we shall in the progresse of this story speak likewise of the Scots, another Nation, which e're long entred into the Provinces possess'd by the Picts, and gave name to the whole Countrey.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. A Monument of King Marius his victory over the Picts. The mistake of Malmsburiensis, c. touching King Marius.
3. Berwick, whence call'd.

G. .1. KIng Marius having slain Roderick King of the Picts, or Northern Brit|tains, erected a stone, or Pillar, as a Mark of his Triumph, in the Province which was afterward called by his name Westmaria, or Westmerland The Title inscrib'd in which Pillar, saith Gef|frey of Monmouth, continued the memory of that victory to the present day.Vsser. Pri|mord. Brit. f. 581. Yea, saith B. Vher, before the Brittish History was by Gef|frey translated out of the Brittish into the Latin tongue, a much graver Authour, Wil|liam of Malmsbury in the Prologue of his third Book touching the Gests of Brittish Bishops, makes mention of the same in this manner;Malmsb in Prolog. l. 3. Pontific. In the Citty Lugubalia, common|ly call'd Carlile, there is a room or parlour built of stone, and vaulted over, so firm that neither any iniury of weather, nor fire purposely kindled with wood, could destroy or weaken it. The Pro|vince is call'd Cumberland, and the Inhabitants Cumbrians. In the front of the sayd Parlour this Inscription may be read, To the Victory of Marius. Though Mr. Camden affirms that in some Copies it is, To Mars the Conque|rour.
2. But it is a great mistake of the same Authour, applying the foresayd Victory of Marius, to the Roman Consul Marius, as if these Cumbrians were the Cimbrians driven out of Italy by Marius,A. D. 82. and in their flight resting in that Province. It seems he had not read the ancient Brittish History translated by Geffrey of Monmouth;Polychron lib. 4. cap. 9. which expresly at|tributes it to the Brittish King Marius, as saith Ranulphus Cestrensis in his Polychroni|con.
3. When Roderick King of the Picts was slain,I. Rossus VVrvvic. ap. Vsser. f. 581. his souldiers, being onely nine hun+dred which remain'd alive, chose another for their Captain, called Berench, from whom the Town of Berwick receiv'd its name, saith Iohn Rosse of Warwick. But o|thers more probably refuse this Etymology,Cambden in Ostadin. affirming truly that the Countrey and peo|ple call'd Ottadin, where Berwick is sea|ted, were at this time under the Romans Dominion. Besides the word Berwick sig|nifies a Village which is an Appendix to some other place of note,Ingulph. Hi|stor. whence Ingulphus calls that Town only a Mannour or Farm:


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2.3. A brief of Roman affairs from the end of Nero to Vespasian.
4.5. Trebellius Maximus Prpretour in Brittany: after whom succeeded Ve+ctius Bolanus.
6. Then Petilius Cerealis. 7. Next Iulius Frontinus.
8. After whom Iulius Agricola.

1. IT was in the days of Coellus the Son o this King Marius that S. Ioseph accoding to ancient Tradition ended his la|bours and mortality,A. D. 82. in the eighty second yeare of our Lord, concurring with the se+cond yeare of the Emperour Titus son of Ves|pasian. Now before we treat of the particu|lars touching this our Holy Patriark's death, it will be convenient that we first give a breif account of Roman affairs in this Island occurring between the end of Nero and that time.
2. Nero by self-murder having revenged upon himself all the execrable crimes com|mitted, especially toward the latter end of his raign, as the killing of his Mother, the burning of Rome, and imputing that most facinorous act to the innocent Christians, a|gainst whom he raged with a most sa|vage cruelty, a cruelty extending even to the extinguishing of the two most glo|rious Lights then shining in the world, S. Peter and S. Paul: the family of the Caesars ending in him, there followed in the Roman Empire most terrible seditions, no fewer then four Emperours within the space of two years having been chosen by severall Ar|mies, to wit, Galba, Otho, Vitellius and Vespa|sian,

by whose contentions against one ano|ther the Roman world was all torn in peices, and Italy especially was almost drowned with the blood of severall armies meeting there, and without any consideration of their affinity mutually butchering one ano|ther: Till in the end Vespasian being the con|querour, Peace was at last restored.
3. Now during these furious conten|tions, only in Brittany the Roman armies were uninteressed, and consequently free from either doing or suffring mischeifs.Tacit histor. lib. 1. And the reasons given by Tacitus hereof were partly their distance from the cheif Scene of these Tragedies: and partly because having been exercised with severall expe|ditions against the unquiet Brittains, they were taught to direct their hatred rather a|gainst their enemies, then any party among the Romans.
4. Trebellius Maximus who had been sent Propretor into Brittany, by particular factions in the army was forced to fly out of the Countrey, and had recourse to Vitel|lius newly proclam'd Emperour. In his place succeeded Vectius Bolanus,Id in vita agris. who saith Tacitus, governed with more mildnes then was fitting in a Province so feirce and apt for commotions.
5. Assoon as Vespasian was declared a pre|tender to rhe Empire, the Roman Army in Brittany quickly express'd great favour to|wards him, as one who had been made Lea|der of the Second Legion there by the Empe|rour Claudius, and perform'd severall exploits with great reputation.
6. After three years spent by Vectius Bo|lanus in a quiet government of Brittany, there was by Vespasian, who had then been three years Emperour,d. ibid. sent to succeed him Petilius Cerealis: who presently, upon what provo|cation it doth not appeare, assailed the Na|tion call'd Brigantes, took their cheif Citty York the most populous then of all Brittany, as Tacitus affirms: and fought many battels, some of them very bloody, conquering a great part of rhat Province, and engaged the Romans in a war with the rest.
7. In the sixth year of Vespasians raign Iulius Frontinus was sent in the place of Cerealis, du|ring whose governme~t the Silures inhabiting the Western parts of Brittany rebell'd against the Romans: whose Countrey he with great courage invaded, and though partly by their valour, but principally by difficulties of passages they brought him to great extremi|ties, yet in the end with wonderfull con|stancy he conquered all opposition, and en|tirely subdued them. And to restrain them from future commotions, he fortified in their Province the Citty call'd Isca, placing one of his Legions there: from whence it took the name of Caer-Leon, or the Citty of the Legion.
8. After Frontinus the Government of the Roman Army was committed to Iulius A|gricola in the ninth, which was the last year of the raign of Vespasian. Whose worthy ex|ploits and signall vertues both in war and peace have been most nobly described by his son in law Cornelius Tacitus, in a Book purposely written of his life. Which ex|ploits because they were perform'd after the death of St. Ioseph and his companions, we will delay the giving a breif account of them to the next Book: and we will con|clude this with relating some considerable circumstances attending the death and bu|riall of those Apostolick Saints and Patrons of our Nation.


XII. CHAP.XII. CH.

1. S. Ioseph dyed and was buried at Glaston|bury: This not contradicted by the Ro-Martyrologe.
2.3. S. Ioseph an example both of a Pa|storall and Monasticall life.
4.5 The particular place where S. Ioseph was buried unknown.
6. One Iohn Blome upon a suppos'd in|spiration, petition'd that he might search it.
7. His action censured.

1. IT is a received generall Tradition in this Island that S. Ioseph ended his days in his solitude of Avallonia, or Glastonbury, and this on the twentie seaventh of Iuly, in the eighty second year of our Lords In|carnation. Notwithstanding in the Roman Martyrologe on the seaventeenth of March we read thus,Martyrolog. Rom. 17. Mart. At Ierusalem is the commemora|tion of S Ioseph a noble Counsellor of Arima|thea, and a Disciple of our Lord, who took down his Body from the Crosse, and buried it in his own new Sepulcher. But hereby is evinc'd neither that he dyed then, nor at Ierusalem: but only that on that day his memory was celebrated there: as in the same Martyrologe there are severall examples of the like.
2. Now though this holy Saint dyed at Glastonbury, we are not to imagin that he spent his days there: since the design which brought him to Brittany was to preach the Gospell, and convert soules. Bishop Godwin without any authority would inform us,Godvvin in atal. cap. 3.
that he and his companions perceiving that their preaching had little or no effect among the rude Brittains, and despairing of doing any good, gave themselves at last to a Monasticall contempla|tive life. But we should wrong their charity and Apostolike zeale if we should think they would so soon faint, and be weary of their holy employment. It is more then proba|ble that they would frequently retire into this their solitude, to the end by undistra|cted Prayers to renew their courage and pa|tience in their Apostolike employment, as

likewise to repose after their labours: so we read in the Gospell that the Apostles after their Mission perform'd,Mr. 6.30. return'd to our Sa|viour, who for their refreshment was plea|sed to withdraw them from a common con|versation into a desert, there to repose.
3. We may likewise prudently judge that it was the speciall design of the Divine Pro|vidence to make choice of these particular Saints to be not only Preachers of his word, but examples also of a Monasticall Conversa|tion, in an Island so commodious for it. Ex|cepting S. Mark in the deserts of Egypt, we doe not find any other of the Primitive Di|sciples which seem'd to have had such a de|sign. There wanted not indeed from the beginning many who relinquish'd their worldly employments, and gave their riches to the poore, that without any impediments they might wholly give themselves to God, and being freed from all distractions pra|ctise the exercises of Divine Contemplation: But this they did apart, in their own houses, and not in Community, as S. Ioseph and his Companions did, wherin they were imita|ted by their Successours. So that Brittany was the almost only place in the world where the Christian Faith began with a Monasticall Profession. And we see also that when that Profession by persecution ceased, the same Faith likewise was banished.
4. That S. Ioseph and his companions also were buried at Glastonbury in, or near the Church built by him, we are in|formed by the Great Table of Glastonbury mention'd by Bishop Vsher,Vsser de Pri|mord. Eccl. Brit. fol. 29. where it is sayd, In this Church doe repose the bodies of the twelve Disciples of our Lord, of whom S. Ioseph of Arimathea, who buried our Lord, was the Cheif and Superiour. Many Pagans also con|verted to the Faith of Christ, and baptised by them, doe rest there likewise, the multitude of whom is for their number so great, that they cannot be reckoned.Ibid. fl. 72. The same likewise is af|firm'd by the Authour of Eulogium.
5. As for the particular place in which the Tomb of our Saint was seated, most pro|bable it is that it was in a Cave under ground in a Chappel afterwards built and dedica|ted to his honour: as this Epitaph im|ports,Ad Britones veni postquam Christum sepe|livi:
Docui, requievi.
That is,After I had buried Christ, I came to the Brittains:
Here I taught them, and here I was bu|ried.
6. Notwithstanding his Relicks could not be discovered: insomuch as some ancient|ly doubted whether he was indeed buried at Glastonbury. To cleare which doubt a cer|tain devout Catholike in the days of King Edward the third presented a supplication to the King,A. D. 1345. Vid. Vsser. Primord. Eccl. rit. p 29. and obtain'd leave to search after it. The Kings Patents for that purpose are still extent: wherein it is sayd, A Sup|plication hath been made to us by Iohn Blome of London, that whereas, as he affirms, he hath received a command from Heaven diligently to seek till he could find the venerable Body of the Noble Counsellor Ioseph of Arimathea, which reposes in Christ, being buried within the li|mits of the Monastery of Glastonbury, and which for the Saints honour and edification of many, is to be discovered in these times. And whereas also in ancient Records it is contained that his Body was there buried: We in case it be so, being desirous to bestow due honours to the Monument and Venerable Reliques of him, who express'd so great piety and charity to our Redeemer dying, that he took his Body from the Crosse, and pla|ced it in a new Monument which he had built for himselfe: and hoping that by the revealing of his holy Relicks, greater grace and favour shall be shewed by God to us and our whole Kingdome: We thereforefore have given and granted per|mission, as much as lyes in us, to the sayd Iohn lome, to digg wheresoever he shall find expe|dient within the precincts of the sayd Monastery, in order to the searching out of the sayd pretious Relicks, according to the iniunction and Reve|lation made to him: Provided notwithstanding that he shall doe nothing which may damnify our Beloved in Christ the Abbot and Convent of the sayd Monastery, or endanger ruine to the Church. For which purpose he is to desire and obtain the permission and assent of the sayd Ab|bot and Convent for whatsoever he shall there doe. Witnes the King at Westminster the eighth day of Iune.
7. What effect this search had, does not appeare by History. Which is a sign and pre|sumption strong enough, that Iohn Blome mistook a dream for a Revelation. His de|votion and good will may deserve at least pardon, if not commendation: but Chri|stian prudence required that he should have committed to the examination and judg|ment of Superiours or Spirituall persons, his pretended Revelation before the publication of it, and much more before he did presume to engage the King in the execution of his imaginations.



XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1.2.3. S. Ioseph brought with him two ves|sels fill'd with the blood of our Saviour.
4. The like reported of the Master of St. Iohns in Hierusalem.
5 6. c. The truth thereof asserted by Bishop Grosthead.
8.9. Why S. Ioseph would have those vessels buried with his body.

1. THE same Monuments which inform us of the life, death and buriall of S. Ioseph at Glastonbury (a Tradition unque|stion'd in all ages by Brittains, Saxons, Danes and Normans:) the same doe likewise te|stify that S. Ioseph brought with him into Brittany two silver vessels fill'd with the blood of our Saviour Iesus Christ, as we read in Cap|grave: which most precious Vessels by his order were buried with him in his Tomb. Thus among others writes the Authour of Eulogium cited by B. Vsher.Vsser. Pri|mord Eccl. Brit. p. 575. And the same in publick Tables hath been transmitted to po|sterity by the Monastery of Glastnbury for a perpetuall memory of so rich a trea|sure.
2. Severall proofes hereof were extant even to the dayes of Queen Elizabeth, which the foresayd learned Bishop Vsher hath col|lected: And among others he recounts this:Id. ib. p. 28. Adde hereunto, saith he, the narration of William Good a Iesuit: who during the raign of King Henry the eighth was born, and in his child-hood bred up at Glastonbury. Who affirms that at Glastonbury there were extant in his time brasse-plates ingraven for perpetuating the me|mory of these things, likewise Chappels, Grottes, Crosses, Arms, and the observation of the Festi|vall of S. Ioseph on the sixth of the Calends of August. All these remain'd as long as the Monks enioy'd the most firm Charters of Kings: but now they are all buried in the ruins of the place. Yet never did any Monk know the certain place of the Sepulcher of this Saint. They sayd that it was hid extreamly deep under ground, or in some place of the Mountain neighbouring to the sharp-mountain call'd Hamden-hill: And that in future times when the Body should be found; the whole world would repair thither in devotion, being invited with the multitude and greatnes of the miracles that should be wrought. And among other things, sayd he, I remember that I saw in a Stone-crosse, which in the raign of Queen Elizabeth was demolished, a plate of brasse, in which was written, That in the thir|tieth yeare after the Passion of our Lord, Ioseph of Arimathea with eleaven or twelve compa|nions came into Brittany, and that permission was given them by King Arviragus to abide at Glaston, then call'd Avallonia, like simple soli|tary men: And that he brought with him two silver Vessels of no great capacity, in which were contain'd a portion of the blood and most sacred water which flow'd out of Christs side after he was dead. And that a Crosse was erected there many years before, to shew the length of the Chap|pel which the same S. Ioseph built of rods wa|led, to the honour of the most Holy Virgin: the which length is measured by a line drawn from the middle of that Crosse unto the side of a Chap|pel afterwards built of squar'd stones. And on the out-side of the wall of this Chappell erected to the honour of the most blessed Virgin were in|graven in a stone in most ancient Characters these two words, IESUS, MARIA. These things are likewise confirm'd by the ancient Arms of the same Monastery, which are a white Scutcheon upon which is erected straight down|wards the stock of a Crosse, green and knotted: and from side to side are the arms of the Crosse of the same colour: There are likewise sprinkled all over the field drops of blood: and on both sides of the stock under the wings of the crosse are pla|ced two viols gilded. These were always call'd the Badges of St. Ioseph, who is piously beleived to have dwelt, and peradventure been buried there.
3. Now that S. Ioseph together with Ni|codemus did indeed out of respect and ve|neration gather the Blood of our Lord, and that for diverse ages the same blood was piously worshipped by devout Christians both in the East and West, ancient Histories and Martyrologies doe testify.
4. And on this occasion we must not o|mit what is related by Matthew Paris,Math. Pa|ris. A. D. 1247. in the one thousand two hundred forty and sea|venth year of our Lord: Then the Master of the Temple and Hospitall of S. Iohn of Ierusalem sent a certain portion of the blood of our Lord shed on the Crosse for the salvation of the world, in a certain most beautifull crystall-glasse by a Brother of the Temple well known: The which present was confirm'd by the testimony of severall Persons, to wit, of the Patriark of Ierusa|lem, of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and other Prelats together with Noblemen dwel|ling in the holy Land. Thus writes that Hi|storian: and consequently declares at large with what honour and reverence King Hen|ry the third, together with the whole Clergy and Nobility entertain'd the sayd holy trea|sure.
5. Moreover whereas doubts and scru|ples were by some spread among the peo|ple concerning the reality and truth of that blood: Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, the glory of that age and of our Kingdom for Piety and Learning, gave full satisfaction to doubting minds by a narration of the Fact, which that Historian himself being pre|sent heard, and committed to writing, to this effect: Ioseph of Arimathea,Ib. in Addi|tion. fol. 161. (sayd the Bishop) a noble Counsellor, being one of the hearers of Iesus, or rather a Disciple who bore speciall affection to him, out of tender compas|sion

was very solicaton how his most venerable body might be preserved from the rage and fury of the Iews. For he was a most  of him, as Nicodemus likewise was. But these and other rich men had erad their affection to him for fear of the Iews, least being accu|sed they should loose their essas, and incrre the hatred of their treymen: such a  of itude does accompany riches.
6. When Iesus therfore was crucified and dead, Ioseph went boldly to Pilat (which shews him to be a person of consideratio) and begd the body of Iesus: which was granted him. He then notwithstanding the murmuring of the Iews, with all honour and reverence took down the most holy body from the Crosse, which was all oer in severall manns mangled and bloody. And having a linnen Cl very fine hang|ing own behind  neck over his shoulders, least he might irreverently touch that most holy Body with his naked hands, he carefully and devoutly wiped with it the sacred wound  yet  and distilling. Moreover making  of the sayd  instead of a sponge, ha|ving drawn the nayles out of the wounds which were all dyed with blood, he wiped and clean|sed them as the Crosse it selfe.
7. Now when the sayd Ioseph had carried the Body of Christ not far from Golgotha, or Calvary (where he had been crucified) to the place where his sepulcher is now worshipped, there he layd it in a New tomb, where never any body had been layd, which had been de|cently cut out of a rock, and where himselfe intended to have been buried. But before he buried it, he washed the holy Body which, at hath been sayd, was many ways wounded and covered with blood:L. 22.44. and this first in regard of his bloody sweat, of which we read, His swear was like great drops of blood falling down to the ground. Again by reason of his whip|ping, for he was scourged most cruelly, so as not only to leave marks in his body, but to make the blood run down: Besides this, his Crown of thorns which the Iews violently press'd upon his head, with a great number of pricks did not only ing his head and forehead, but deeply wounded and severed it with blood: Moreover the ayles made wide holes through his hands and feet: And lastly the soldiers spear did not only wound, but opened a wide passage into his side, being thrust into it, at least once, if not severall times. For these rea|sons the foresayd venerable Counsellor Ioseph carefully washed his body. Besides that such was the custom of the Iews before their bu|rialls: as it is still, when persons of any consi|deration are to be buried, particularly Reli|gious men. He wash'd it therfore, because it was moreover to be embalmed. He wash'd it, because he had an intention and religious de|sign to appropriate the same blood to his own devout use, and to reserve it as a treasure and most precious Medecine for his soul. And moreover he neglected not the water become red with a tincture of blood, he would not cast it away, but kep it in a clean vessell. But far more reverently did hee reserve the pure blood distilling from the wounds of his hands an feet. And above all he did with wonderfull reverence and holy feare receive into a most precious vessell the blood mix with water which he carefully pressed out of his right side, which he iudged to ssue from the vessells adioyning to his heart: this he esteem'd a treasure unvaluable, and in a speciall manner to be reserv'd for himself and his Successours. Such was the discourse of that Venerable Prelat, copied by the Historian his Auditour.
8. It may perhaps seem a wonder; why S. Ioseph would ordain that such a precious Treasure should be buried with his Body. For surely naturall Reason and the practise of all Ages doth dictate to us, that it is an argument of our affection and respect to a dead freind to be willing to reserve any thing of valew belonging to him, to esteem it because of such a relation, and for ren|dring him In a sort always-present to us: especially when by speciall deserts we are obliged to be mindfull of him; and without our own great danger cannot neglect to commemorate his benefits: All which con|siderations and many more have place in this example. So that to find fault with, and condemne the primitive Devotion in paying a respect and Veneration to the Relicks of Saints, and above all, of this Saint of Saints, is to renounce human reason, yea to range one's selfe in the society of Evill Spirits, which only abominated and durst not ap|proach neare unto them. But why then did S. Ioseph take order that such most precious adorable Relicks should be buried with him, and hid from mankind?
9. The true reasons hereof may be, first because if in such times, before Christianity had been establish'd in this Island, they had been consign'd to any particular persons, either a loosing of profanation of them could scarce have been avoyded. Whereas a certainty that they were reserved in that place would be an occasion to stir up the Devotion of present and succeeding Chri|stians to frequent it, and reap benefit by the vertue of them. And again S. Ioseph had no doubt the same design herein, that the Emperour Constantin afterwards express'd, as Eusebius informs us, who with great care made a collection of the Relicks of the Apo|stles, which he richly adorned, and com|manded they should be layd up in his Tombe,Euseb. in vit. Constan|tin. l. 4 c. 60. to the end that being dead he might be made par|taker of the prayers which there in honour of the Apostles should be offred to God.



XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1. S. Phagan  to S. Ioseph .
2. Such a succession  Lucius: afterward the plate was  and .
3. The memory of S. Ioseph renew'd there in after ages.

1. WHen S. Ioseph was dead, thee suc|ceded in the prefecture of that holy place S. Phagan, who is sayd to have con|ed there the space of thirty years. For  did not end in Brit|tany with S. Ioseph: On the contrary the  Kings favouring, and the people applauding the piety and devotion of those primitive Saints, such a solitary contem|plative life was in high esteem among them: so that after the decease of S. Ioseph and his companions, others succeeded both to the right of the possession bestowd on S. Ioseph, and the imitation of his manner of life.
. Such a succession continued till the : At which time a free and  of the Gospell being  couraged, it is  of that  by charity   and without   care of perfectionating their  both their Devo|tions and  in converting and sa|ving the soules of others. For about that time  we find related in the life of S. Ioseph, that place was become a den of wild beasts, which was before the habitation of Saints.
. Howbeit in succeeding ages, when there was no such necessity of so great a number of labourers in Gods vineyard, by reason of the extension and fruitfullnes of it the Memory of S. Ioseph was renewd, and devout Christians with great fervour visited the Church dedicated to the honour of the most Blessed Virgin: Then their libe|rality was plentifully enlarg'd to adorn that place, which they esteem'd the fountain and Originall of Christian Religion in Brittany, as we find it call'd in our Kings ancient Char|ters.




THE THIRD BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAP.

1.2.3. c. About the time of S. Iosephs death Iulius Agricola came to be Gover|nour of Brittany. His gests and Victories.

Tacit. in vit. Agricolae.1. _THE death of S. Ioseph hapned little after the time that Iulius Agricola was sent Pretor into Brittany, in the last year of the raign or the Emperour Vespasian. At his first entrance he was entertained with sedi|tions in the Army, and commotions in the Countrey. The former he by his prudence and authority easily quieted: and the other by his courage and diligence.
Id. Ibid.2. It was the Province of the Ordovices (or Inhabitants of Northwales) that taking example from their neighbours the Silures, endeavoured to shake off the Roman yoke. The first Act of their Rebellion was to invade and utterly rout certain Troops of horse quarterd amongst them. Hereupon Agri|cola, though then newly arrived, and the Winter already beginning, yet assembled the Legions, and march'd into their coun|trey. Which diligence of his so discouraged them, that they durst not oppose him with an Army: inso much as he freely wasted and destroyed almost the whole Province.
Id. 16.3. That which made his conquest entire, was an impression which he made into the Isle of Mona (or Anglesey:) from the pos|session wherof Suetonius Paulinus had been recall'd by the rebellion of Boudicea Queen of the Trinobantes. The Ordovices thought themselves secure in this Island, because Agricola was unprovided of boats to passe his army. But this defect he supplied by his wisdome and constancy: For chusing among his Auxiliaries such as were most skillfull in swimming, and in the water could both carry their arm's and direct their horses, he made them passe over into the Island. Hereby the Enemies were so asto|nished, that they humbly begg'd peace, and deliver'd up the Island to him.
4. After this victory Agricola's care was to govern the Province peaceably:Id. 16. for which purpose he restrain'd the avarice of the Ro|man soldiers, and defended the Natives from their injuries. Yea moreover having terrified them with marches through all the difficult passages in the Island, he by his cour|tesy  civility invited them to take pleasure in living peaceably. For which purpose he incourag'd them to conform themselves to the Roman fashion of life, by building houses, Temples and Market-places. Yea he allured them to imitate even the vices of their Conquerours, in magnificent banquets, baths and other instruments of Luxury. He likewise caused the children of the Brittish Nobility to be instructed in literature, pre|ferring their witts and naturall endow|ments

beyond the capacities of the Gaules:A. D. 87. By which means not only the Roman tongue became familiar to the Brittains, from which formerly they had a great aversion, but they aspired also to learn and practise Elo|quence.
Id. ibid.5. Such was the employment of the two first years of Agricola's government. In the third he march'd Northward, there discove|ring new Nations and Provinces, whose countrey he wasted as far as the river Taus (or Tweed.) And the summer following he continued his conquests as far as Bodotria (or Edinborow-frith) Eastward, and Glotta (or the Frith of Dunbritton) Westward: and the narrow space of land between them he strengthned with forts and garrisons, so that the only Enemies remaining uncon|quer'd, which were the Caledonian Brittains, were driven beyond those Northern limits. In the foresayd streits neare a town called by Ptolomy Coria (now Abercurven) there is to this day extant an ancient Structure of squard stones, call'd by the Inhabitants Iulius Hot, fancied by them to have been built by Iulius Caesar, who yet never came near this Province: but in all probability rais'd by Iulius Agricola, as a Monument of his Conquests.
6. In the fifth year of his Expedition he subdued the Northwest Provinces of Brit|tany looking towards Ireland:Id. ibid. into which parts he drew most of his forces, as if he had had some thoughts of invading that Island: from whence a petty Prince, ex|pell'd by a Sedition of his Subjects, repaired to him: whom with a shew of freindship he detaind, intending when an opportu|nity offred it selfe, to make use of him in a design upon that Island.
Id. ibid.7. The following yeare he spent in a march northward from Bodotria (or Edin|borough) on purpose to find out the limits of the countrey: for hitherto it was not known to the Romans whether Brittany was an Island, or no. And both to secure his march and carry provisions, he caused his Navy to keep pace with his land Army: a spectacle of great terrour to the poore Brittains. Who therupon united all their counsells and forces to endeavour by this last attempt to free themselves from dan|ger by the Romans.
Id. ibid.8. Their first exploit was to assault the camp of the ninth Legion, separated from the rest. But the watchfull Generall came upon them when they were ready to break into the Camp, and at last, though with great difficulty, dispersed them.
9. The Caledonian Brittains fayling in this, resolved to decide the whole controversy by a generall Combat.Id. ibid. Wherupon they as|sembled all their forces on a Mountain, call'd Grampius, which divides the whole countrey (since call'd Scotland) into the Northern and Southern Provinces. Their Generall,A. D. 94. specially elected for this warre, was called Galgacus, eminent both for his Nobility and courage, who omitted no ar|guments which might inflame his soldiers valour: especially insisting on this, That the Romans by their shipping having discove|red that Brittany was an Island, they had no|thing behind them but the Sea and rocks, to which by flying they might have re|course.
10. Agricola on the other side having brought his Army in sight of the enemy, rais'd their courage by showing that they were now come to an end of all their la|bours and dangers: that this Victory would bring them all manner of security and plen|ty: And however, that in case they should be overcome, it would not be inglorious to their memory, that they dyed in the ut|most bounds of the Earth and Nature.
11. The battell was fought with valour on both sides proportionable to the neces|sity: but at last the Brittains were entirely defeated, and though in the chace through woods and fast places their rage made them turn upon their pursuers, and kill not a few of them, yet they were so wholly bro|ken, that for many years after their im|potency made them quiet.
12. This combat was fought in the eighth and last year of Agricola's Government: For in the beginning of the year following, which was the fifth of Domitians raign, he returned to Rome: having triumphall orna|ments decreed him by the Senat: and though in appearance he was honourd by the Emperour, yet his glory and vertues rendred him the object of the Tyrants Envy and hatred, and within a few years the sacrifice of his cruelty.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. Of the Successours of Agricola in the Government of Brittany.
3. Roman Legions continued in Brit|tany.

1. AFter Agricola's departure out of Brittany it does not evidently ap|peare in History who succeeded him. And no wonder, since so entire a conquest of the Nation had been gained by Agricola, that whosoever follow'd him could not afford any considerable exploits to furnish a Hi|story.
2. Some Writers say that Cneus Trebellius was the next who succeeded in the Govern|ment during Domitians raign: Others, that it was Salustius Lucullus mention'd by Sue|tonius in these words, Domitian, saith he, put to death Salustius Lucullus, who had been

Generall of the Roman Army in Brittany,A. D. 100. for this only crime, because he had suffred lances of a new fashion contrived by himselfe to be called Lucullean Lances.
3. This is all that any of the Roman Hi|storians mention touching Brittany, during not only the remainder of Domitians raign, but also the two Emperours, Nerva and Traian, which succeeded him. The Roman Legions continued still in the Countrey, though all their employment was only to prevent any insurrections among the Brit|tains. Iosephus the Iewish Historian gives us an account of the number of those Legions, writing thus,oseph. apud Camden. Brittany is compass'd with the Ocean, being a new discover'd world, little lesse then ours. The Romans now inhabiting there have reduced it to the obedience of their Em|pire: and four Legions are sufficient to over-awe and keep in order the Island, though abounding with great multitudes of inhabitants.


III. CH.III. CHAP.

1.2. S. Clement Pope: He sends Bishops in|to Gaule.
3.4. Of S. Taurinus Bishop (Ebroi|censium) of Eureux: not (Eboracen|sium) of York.
5. The Legation of Brittany to Saint Clement.

1. ANcient Ecclesiasticall Monuments doe suggest little or nothing to Hi|story relating to Christian Religion in Brit|tany, during the space of time between the end of Nero, and the death of Domitian, con|taining twenty eight years, from the sea|ventieth year of Christ to the ninety eighth.
2. Toward the latter end of that time S. Clement, sitting in the Chair of S. Peter, ex|press'd his generall care over the Church, both toward the East and West: for by a most divine Epistle to the Church of Corinth he prevented a schism threatning its ruine,Ire. lib. 3. cap. 3. and, as Irenaeus saith, he repair'd their Faith much decayd, by declaring to them the Tradition, which he freshly had received from the Apo|stles.
3. Moreover he supplied these North|west Regions, principally the Gaules, with Pastors and Bishops, sending S. Nicasius to Rouen,Martyrlog. Rom. 11. August. S. Eutropius to Xaintes, S. Lucian to Beauvais, and S. Taurinus to Eureux. Con|cerning this last we read thus in the Roman Martyrologe, Among the inhabitants of Eureux in Gaule there is on the eleaventh of August a commemoration of S. Taurinus Bishop, who ha|ving been ordain'd Bishop of that Citty by Saint Clement Pope, by his preaching the Gospel pro|pagated the Christian Faith in those Regions, and being illustrious by the Glory of his Miracles, af|ter many labours sustained for the Truth,A. D. 110. he slept peaceably in our Lord.
4. Particular notice is to be taken by us of this Saint, because of a mistake of certain modern Historians, who from a resemblance of the words Ebroicenses and Eboracenses, af|firm this S. Taurinus to have been Bishop of York.Cent. Mag|deb. 2. cap. 10. f. 222. For thus doe the Centurists of Mag|deburg write, S. Taurinus was Bishop of York and dyed a Martyr under the Emperour Adrian, Licinius being then Prefect of the Countrey: Yea moreover not only Bishop Godwin, but S. Antoninus likewise affirm that S. Taurinus, and S. Nicasius also, pass'd over into Britta|ny. Neither indeed is it altogether without example that Bishops in those days, out of a common zeale to mens salvation, should change their Seats, and remove their resi|dence whither greater necessities and want of spirituall Light did call them.Broughton hist. l. 1. c. 36. n. 5. And if any credit may be given to the assertion of a Modern Historian, that S. Clement formerly accompanying S. Peter preach'd the Gospel in Brittany, it is not to be doubted but that his care was to promote the good work be|gun by himself.
5. Yea I find an ancient Manuscript quo|ted by the R. F. Alford,Alford. vol. 1. p. 95. wherein is contai|ned, how the Church of Brittany in the year of Grace one hundred, sent a Legation to S. Clement, desiring him to communicate to them the Order and Rites of celebrating Di|vine Service.Baron. ad A. D. 102. And Baronius affirms it to be an ancient Tradition that S. Clement set down in Writing the Order of offring Sacrifice instituted by S. Peter, which was afterward in use through the whole Western Church.Isid. l. 2. de offic. And long before him S. Isidore affirms the same. True it is that in following times it was lengthned, by ad|ditions made to it.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1. Brittains sayd to have been divided into Ecclesiasticall Provinces by Pope Ana|cletus in the raign of Trajanus.
2. Such a Division much later.

1. IN the raign of the Emperour Traian, S. Anacletus the Successour of S. Cle|ment in the Chaire of S. Peter is sayd to have divided Brittany into five Provinces and Me|tropoles, ordaining Bishops and Primats in each: and hereto we find our Protestant Arch-Bishop Parker to have given his as|assent.Antiquit. Britan. s. 24. The ground whereof is a certain Decretall Epistle long since publish'd under the name of the sayd Pope, in which a divi|sion of Provinces is indeed mentioned, yet without any application to Brittany. But the authority of that Epistle being much suspected, yea renounced by severall, not only Protestant but Catholike Authours, lit|tle

credit is to be given to that relation grounded by some upon it touching the sayd Division:Girald. Cambr. de Menev. Eccl. jure lib. 2. though Giraldus our Welsh Historian undertake to set down the parti|cular names of the Provinces: calling one Britannia prima, which is the Western part of the Island: the second he names Britannia secunda, containing the Province of Kent: the third Flavia, which is the middle part of Brittany, which after the entrance of the Saxons was called Mercia: The fourth Maxi|mia, containing Yorkshire: and the last Va|lentia, under which were comprehended all the Northern Provinces beyond the Brigantes.
2. But certain it is that these Titles were not assign'd,Vid. Am+mian. Mar|cel. lib. 28. cap. 18. nor this Division made till se|verall ages afterward, under the raign of the Emperours Valentinian and Valens. As for the present age of Traian, Brittany was then divided only into two Provinces call'd the First and the Second, or as Ptolomy names them, the Greater and the lesse, and Dio, the Vpper and Lower Brittany: The former of these contain'd the Southern parts as far as the River Thamisis, first possess'd by the Ro|mans: and the other, the Western Provinces of Cornwall, Wales, c.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1. Tumults in Brittany: neglected by Tra|jan.
2 3. Of King Coellus raigning there: his Character.
4. The Emperour Hadrian quiets Brittany: as his Coyns testify.
5. This he did, not in person, but by his Officers.

1. TOward the latter end of Traians raign,Spartian. in Hadrian. c. 5. among other Nations which rebelled against the Roman Empire, Brittany is reckoned for one by Spartianus: But the Emperour finding a greater necessity to turn his arms against the Africans and Sarmatians, neglected the Brittains.
2. Now what particular Provinces in Brittany those were which at this time at|tempted to shake off the Roman Yoke, it does not appeare. Coellus was yet alive, who is by our Historiographers call'd King of the Brittains, not as if he were the only King in the Island, but because he was the most considerable in power and wealth, to whom the rest yeilded both honour, and some kind of subjection, as in Caesars time we read the severall Brittish Princes then raigning in their respective Dominions did to Cassibelin: and afterward in the Saxon Heptarchy, he that was called [Rex Anglo|rum] King of the English, had a superemi|nence over the rest.
3. Now as touching King Coellus,A. D. 120. he is described by our Histories to be a Prince of so benign and peaceable a nature, and withall so affectionat to the Romans, having had his breeding at Rome it selfe,Polid. Virg. Hist. Lib. 2. where, as Polidor Virgil says, he spent his younger years in the disciplin of war and civill literature, and during his raign he shewd all respectfull submission to the Majesty of that Imperiall Citty, restraining his Subjects from all de|signs and attempts against it: So that it can|not be conceived that he ioyned in the said Rebellion.
4. Now though Traian by greater con|cernments was hindred from reducing the tumultuous Brittains to obedience,A. D. 120. yet his Successour Adrian in the beginning of his raign neglected them not: For there are yet extant ancient Coyns made by a Decree of the Roman Senat, wherin is imprinted the Brit|tish Army with the figures of three Roman soldiers on one side, and on the other the Emperour Adrians face, denoting likewise his third Consulship, which fell in the first year of his raign. Such Coyns were framed and dispersed among the Soldiours as a gratuity, to conciliate their affections to the Emperour: And the figures of the three soldiers imported the three Legions then guarding this Island: the Titles of which were the Second call'd Augusta, the fourteenth cal|led Victrix, and the Twentieth Legion call'd also Victrix and Britannica.
5. Notwithstanding these Coyns are no proof either of the Emperours coming then into Brittany, or of any battell or Victory gained then upon the Brittains: being only a ceremony of Adrians assumption to the Empire, partly to oblige the Roman sol|diers to him, and likewise to admonish the Brittains, that the New Emperour was mind|full of their disorders, which if they con|tinued, he would, as he effectually did three years after, come himselfe to chastise them.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1. Iulius Severus Governour of Britta|ny.
2. The Emperour Hadrians pro|gresse through the Empire.
3.4. A wall made by him in Brit|tany, to exclude the Caledonian Brit|tains.
5. Hadrian returns out of Brittany.

1. IVlius Severus was the Pretor who at this time administred the Province, and governed the Roman Army in Brittany, who, for ought appears in story, stood only upon his defence, and made no expedition a|gainst

the rebellious Brittains in the Nor|thern parts of the Island,A. D. 82. as appears by the following exploits of the Emperour Hadrian. By which it is manifest that King Coellus, whose Dominions lay southward, had no ingagement in those commotions.
2. In the third year of his raign the Em|perour began a progresse through all the Re|gions of the Empire, to compose seditions, to rectify disorders, and restore discipline through all his armies. He began with Ger|many, and from thence took a view of France, and the year following pass'd over into Brittany: A generall view of whose actions in these Countreys is afforded us by Dio.Dio. lib. 69.
3. We will here only mention one me|morable exploit in Brittany, which was the separating of the peaceable subjects of the Roman Empire from the rest who refused to submit to its yoke. Now whereas Iulius Agricola had formerly driven the ruder Brittains into the Northern parts of Scotland, and had built forts in the narrow Isthmus between Edinborough frith, and that of Dun|britton, to hinder them from making in|roads into the Provinces subject to the Ro|mans, it seems the Brittains had broke through that enclosure, and subdued much of the Countrey beyond it.
A. D. 13.  in Hadrian.4. Hereupon Hadrian not esteeming it worth his care, or endangering his Army to repell them within their former bounds, contented himself to raise a wall or rampire more Southern then the former, which he continued the space of fourscore miles be|tween Solway frith on the West, and Tinmouth on the East side of the Isle. Which wall made of Turfs, and strengthned with Timber, was afterward repaired by the Emperour Severus, and again changed into a stone wall by Theodsius Father of the famous Emperour of that name. This was in succeeding times call'd the The Picts Wall, by reason that those Northern Brittains beyond it became as a di|stinct Nation, taking their name from their continuing the old barbarous custome of painting themselves, which the civill inha|bitants had relinquished.
5. Hadrian the year following was call'd out of Brittany to compose a sedition rais'd at Alexandria in Egypt:A. D. 124. Therefore he pass'd back into Gaule, and from thence into Spain where he wintred. Out of Spain the next year he sayld into Egypt, where having quie|ted the Countrey, he returned to Rome.


VII. CHAP.A. D. 126.
VII. CH.

1.2 Persecution rais'd by Hadrian against Christians: and the occasion of it.
3. He profanes the holy places at Ie|rusalem
4. They remain desolate till S. Hele|na's time.
5. Modern Sectaries imitate the rage of Heathens against the Crosse of Christ.

1. THis laborious circuit made by the Emperour,A. D. 126. though it was very bene|ficiall to the Regions through which he pass'd, that is, almost the whole Empire, yet it was the cause of great suffrings to the Christians every where; but especially in Palestina, where they were most numerous, that Countrey being the source of our Reli|gion: and also by reason of the Devotion which all of them bore to those holy places consecrated by the actions and suffrings of our Saviour: to celebrate the memory of which there was continually a confluence of Beleivers from all the quarters of the world.
2. This moved envy in the minds of the Iews and Gentiles likewise, upon whose com|plaints the Emperour not only renew'd the persecution of them begun by his Predeces|sour, but as Sulpitius Severus affirms, imagi|ning that he could destroy Christian Religion it selfe by iniurious defacing the place where it be|gan,Sulpit. Se|ver. hist. l. 2. he erected in the most sacred place of our our Lords Passion the Idols of Devils. And be|cause Christians were generally esteemed an off|spring of Iews, be ordained a Cohrt of souldiers to keep contnuall watch to forbid all Iews an ac|cesse into Ierusalem.
3. S. Paulinus more particularly says,Paulin. Epist 11. Hieron. E|pist. ad Pau|lin. that on Mount Calvary where our Lord suffred, Ha|drian placed the Idol of Iupiter: (S. Hierom adds, that on the Rock where the Crosse had been placed, he erected a marble-statue consecrated to Venus) and profaned Bethleem, the place of our Saviours Birth, with the Temple of Adonis. This he did, as conceiving that the Root as it were, and foundation of the Church would be destroyed, if Idols were worshipped in those places in which Christ was born that he might suffer; and suf|fred that he might rise again; and rse that he might raign; being iudged by men, that he might be Iudge of mankind.
4. In this desolation did those Holy places lye,Soz Hi|stor. lib. 2. ap. 1. till Helena the Mother of the Empe|rour Constantin out of a pious affection to Chri|stian Religion, thought it worth her pains and industry to search out the Venerable Crosse. But neither that, nor the divine Sepulcher of our Lord were easily to be found. For the ancient Gen|tiles, persecutors of the Church, labouring with

their utmost endeavours to oppresse and destroy Christan Religion then newly strung forth,A. D. 128. over|whelm'd that place by heaping on it a great bank of earth. And morever encompassing the whole place both of the Sepulcher whence Christ rose,  Mount Calvary where he was crucified, with a great wall in all sides, hy afterwards profaned it by ornaments of their own heathenish fashion. For first they paved it with stones, and then rai|sed up a Temple of Venus, and in conclusion pla|ced in it the Idol of that impure Goddesse: This they did, to the end that if any would adore Christ in that place, they might seem to worship Venus; and consequently to processe of time the true cause  mn had that place in Venera|tion, would be utterly forgotten.
5. We see here who they were to whom the Ensigns of our Lords Passion, his Crosse and Sepulcher, as likewise the place of his Nati|vity were venerable, to wit, the ancient Primitive Christians, our Brittish Saint Hele|na, c. and to whom they were odious; to envious Iewes and persecuting Heathens. And yet the abolishing of those sacred Mo|numents, the scornfull reproaches and blas|phemies cast on the Crosse of our Lord are of late made the proofs of Primitive Refor|mation. The Crosse,Lactant. I|it. c. 27. saith Lactantius, was fre|quently to wicked Princes a principall Motive of persecuting Christians. And the reason is gi|ven by S. Athanasius,Athanas. in vita sancti Amo. because by the prea|ching of the ignominy of the Crosse, Idolatry was confounded, and the golden Temple of the Heathens fell to the ground.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1. Persecution against Christians mitigated: why.
2.3 c. Severall rebellions of Iewes and their destruction.

1. THis persecution rais'd by Hadrian was shortly after mitigated, upon oc|casion of a suggestion made to him by Gr|vianus Prcnsul of Asia,A. D. 128. that it was against all law and equity, that persons in all other respects innocent, should only for the name and and Title of a Sect be exposed to the fury of impious multitudes. And more|over there wanted not among the Christians themselves persons of eminence and lear|ning, who employ'd their pens to write A|pologies in justification of the piety and in|nocence of the Christian Profession: such were Quadratus a Disciple of the Apostles, and Aristides Bishop of Athens. By such means the eyes of many were opened, and men began to consider Christianity, not by the erroneous judgments and rumours of the Vulgar, or the malicious suggestions of Iewes, but by the sober account given of it by prudent men, and the untainted lives and constant deaths of the Professours of it. These things moved many to approve and embrace it, and the Emperour Hadrian him|selfe to publish an Edict, prohibiting the punishment of any for their Beleife, if o|therwise they were free from crimes.
2. What effect this mitigation of the per|secution probably wrought in Brittany we shall presently shew. But first we will ob|serve Gods just severity against the most in|veterate hatred of the Iewes, always active and restlesse to incite and inflame persecu|tions against innocent Christians.
3. The Iews had rais'd a rebellion in the beginning of Hadrians raign: and with much adoe were at last subdued: insomuch as they were forbidden to enter into, or so much as from a far to look upon their Cit|ty Ierusalem: The name of which was by the Emperour likewise changed into Aelia Capitolina, and in it a Temple was built to Iupiter. Yea moreover the Iews were by a Law forbidden to practise circumcision, thereby to distinguish themselves from o|thers.
4. Vpon these provocations a second Re|bellion far more violent and largely spread then the former,A. D. 135. Dio in Ha|drian. was raised by them, by which, saith Dio, the whole world was shaken and disordered. To oppose them, after that the Emperours first Generall, Tinius Rufus, had been unsuccesfull, Iulius Severus was com|manded out of Brittany, which he had go|verned severall years: and in his place was sent Lcinis Priscus, favoured by the Empe|rour for service formerly done against the Iewes in their first sedition. Concerning whom nothing remains of any exploits done by him: for all his employment was to guard the Wall or Rampire lately raised to restrain the inroads of the rude Northern Brittains. Only there is still extant an an|cient Inscription signifying this his promo|tion, and the cause of it, which Monument was raised by one of his Officers, Q: Cassius Domitius Palumbus.
5. As for the particulars touching the prosecution of the Iewish war, the savage cruelties exercised by them, and the great hazards sustained by the Romans, which yet ended in almost an utter extirpation of the Iewish Nation, these things not pertaining to our present design, are to be enquired into among the Histories of that Age. We will now return to the Ecclesiasticall affairs of Brittany hapning in this time, which though of small moment, are not therefore to be omitted.



A. D. 124.
IX. CH.IX. CHAP.

1.2. The death of the Brittish King Coellus: to whom succeeds his Son Lucius, a child. The reason of his name.
3. A message sent from the Brittains to Pope Evaristus.
4. An answer given by his Successour Pope Alexander.
5. Many Baptis'd in Brittany at Granta, or Cambridge.

A. D. 124.1. TOward the beginning of the Empe|rour Hadrian's raign dyed the Brittish King Coellus. Leaving for his successour his Son Lucius, a child then of ten years old, who imitating the acts of his Father, possess'd the affections of his subiects, being esteem'd as a se|cond Coellus.Westmona|steris. ad an. . 115. The reverence and love which his Father bore to the Romans seems to have been the cause that he gave him a Roman name, which being derived from Lux (Light) hence the Brittains called him Lever Maur, or a great Brightnes, by reason of the ioy he brought to his Father, being born to him in his old age, in the thirty seaventh yeare of his raign, as likewise to the whole Kingdome which esteemd it a great happines to enjoy a successour to their most beloved King.
2. But Divine Providence seems to have had another design in the appointment of this Kings name, intending it for an Omen of that heavenly Light, which in this Princes time and by his procurement was commu|nicated to the whole Kingdom. But this most signall blessing arrived not suddenly. Though King Lucius, imitating his Fathers benignity, express'd much kindnes to the Christians, yet he quitted not the supersti|tion of his Forefathers till after many Vo|cations sent him from God, and many invitations and preparations which by Di|vine Providence occurring in his time, disposed him by little and little to sub|mit his neck to the easy and most happy Yoke of Christ. What those preparations were, we shall set down in their due place.
3. Our Brittish Historians, Gildas and Nen|nius, mention a message sent to the Brittains by Pope Evaristus in the latter end of Traians raign, exhorting them to the embracing of Christian Faith. An occasion and advantage for such a message may seem to have been taken from Traians mitigating the persecu|tion formerly rais'd by him against the Christians,A. D. 141. for which purpose he sent his Edicts into all Provinces. No wonder ther|fore if that Holy Bishop layd hold of this opportunity to recommend that Religion, whose innocence was approved by its greatest persecuters.
4. Yea moreover Albertus Krantzius a late German Writer,Krantzius. from what Monuments it does not appeare, affirms that King Lucius obtained from Pope Alexander the successour of Evaristus, that the Christian Faith should be preached in this Isle. Which if it be true, we may reasonably impute the occasion of it to the Emperour Hadrians Edict published for the ceasing of persecutions against the Christians. Now that this Holy Bishop did readily comply with so desirable a request, and consequently send Apostolicall men to propagate the sacred Verities of our Christian Faith,Broughton. cent. 2 cap. 3. some Writers doe hence collect, because about these times our Ecclesiasticall Annalls doe take notice of the coming of S. Timotheus and S. Marcellus with others into Brittany, concerning whom we shall treat shortly.
5. Moreover in the most ancient Monu|ments of Burton Abbey we find,A. D. 141. that in the yeare of our Lord a hundred forty and one there were baptised in Granta (after|ward call'd Cambridge) nine Doctours and schollars. Now whether this so memo|rable  publicka Ceremony was performed by any of the Preachers sent by Pope Alexan|der, is not mention'd in these Monuments. However this is confidently aveed by Gildas,Gild. de Excid. That the Christian Faith did from the beginning entirely remain in Brittany till Dio|cletians persecution. Which saying of Gildas, as Bishop Vsher well observes, was seasonably recorded by him,Vsser. Primord. fol. 52. least any one should thinke that before the conversion of King Lucius, Christian Religion brought into Brittany by the Apostles and their Disciples, had been utterly extin|guished.



A. D. 147.
X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1. Antoninus Pius succeeds to Hadrian in the Empire: who sent Lollius Vrbicus to represse the rebellious Caledonians in Brittany.
2.3. The Brigantes in Brittany rebell: and are pacified: For which the Em|perour is stiled Britannicus.

1. TO the Emperour Hadrian succeeded Antoninus Pius adopted by him:A. D. 142 Capitol. in Antonin. c. . In the beginning of whose raign the Northern rude Brittains took the boldnes to break through the wall rais'd by Hadrian for their restraint, and after a hostile manner made in roads into the Roman Provinces. For the repressing of whom Lollius Vrbicus was by the New mperour sent into Brittany to govern the Roman Army: who easily quietted those commotions, and moreover drove back the Brittains within their former bounds, at Edinborough, where he rais'd a new Wall, in the same narrow space between the Eastern and Western seas, where formerly Iulius Agricola had for the same purpose built se|verall forts at convenient distances. From which wall the Emperour Antoninus in his Itinerary reckons the utmost limits of the Empire.
A. D. 147.2. A few years after, the Brigantes (in Yorkshire) upon what provocations it is un|certain, began umults, and both by Sea and land invaded the Ordovices (in North|wales) a Roman Province. Which injury the others likewise repayd in the like man|ner. Hereupon Lollius Vrbicus the Roman Pretor, least this flame of dissention should spread further, timely put both his army and Navy in readines. Himselfe lead his Army by land, and Seius Saturninus com|manded at Sea: Thus in a short time all differences were composed, and the Brigan|tes, who first began the sedition, received condign punishment.
3. Though these two Tumults in Britta|ny are by the Writers of those times only sleightly and summarily described, yet it seems they were full of danger and hazard to the Romans, otherwise the Emperour An|toninus by whose directions and authority the war was managed, would not have as|sumed the Title of Britannicus, as a conque|rour of Brittany, which Title notwithstan|ding we find ascrib'd to him.


XI. CHAP.A. D. 160.
XI. CHAP.

1. Succession of Popes: Pope Pius esta|blishes the observation of Easter: to whom the Brittains conform.
2 3 4. Of S. Marcellus a Brittain: Bishop of Tiers and the first Brittich Martyr: he suffred out of Britta+ny.

1. IN the nineteenth year of the Empe|rour Antoninus,A. D. 158. being the one hun|dred fifty eighth yeare of our Lord, Pope Pius the first of that name succeeded Hi|ginus, the Successour of Pope Alexander. He was the first who by a Decree establish'd the observation of Easter, or the Feast of our Lord's Resurrection on a Sunday, in opposition to the Iudaizing Christians in the East, who pretending a Tradition from S. Iohn the Evangelist, kepd it precisely on the fourteenth day of the first Moon in March. This we mention here because some Modern Protestants pretending that our ancient Brittish Christians conform'd themselves to the Eastern, not Roman cu|stome, doe therfore infer that this Island received the Christian Faith, not from Rome, but the East: Which controversy shall be examined in due place.
2. Our Ancient Ecclesiasticall Monuments make mention about this time of S. Marcellus a Brittain born, and a zealous Apostlicall Preacher of the Faith in Brit|tany.Martyr. Ang. 4. Septemb. Concerning whom our English Martyrologe testifies that he gathered into a flock the remainders of those who had been converted by S. Ioseph of Arimathea and his companions, confirming them in the same Faith.
3. This S. Marcellus was afterward or|dained Bishop of Tongres and Triers.Miraeus in ast. Bolg. 7. Iunij. Catalog. Epis. Treirens. For be|fore Constantins time, saith Miraeus, those two Citties were govern'd by one Bishop. In the Annals of which Church we read, that Saint Lucius King of Brittany was made a Christian, and baptised by this Marcellus a Teacher of the inhabitants of Triers. In|deed it is not unprobable that King Lu|cius might have been instructed in the verities of Christian Religion, and well disposed to the Profession of it by this Saint: but there are far more authen|tik testimonies demonstrating that he was baptised by Fugatius and Damia|nus sent from Rome by Pope Eleutherius, as shall be demonstrated herafter.
A. D. 161.4. This holy Bishop was the first Brittain which suffred Martyrdom, out of the Island, as S. Alban was the first that suffred within it.Mart. Angl. 4. Sept. He is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the fourth of September, and in the Gallican Martyrologe he is celebrated with an illustrious Elogy. This his Martyrdom hap|ned many years after this time, in a great persecution rais'd against Christians during the raign of Antoninus his Successour, Mar|cus Aurelius, when he was absent from Rome, and gone into the Eastern parts then in commotion after he had finished the German warr.


XII. CH.XII. CHAP.

1.2. S. Timothy the son of Pudens preaches in Brittany.
3. Of his Sister S. Pudentiana.
4. Who Priscilla was.

1. TOgether with S. Marcellus there came from Rome another illustrious Saint of Noble Birth and plentifull fortunes, all which notwithstanding he despis'd and re|linquish'd that with more freedom he might preach Christ crucified: This was S. Timotheus, the son of Pudens a Roman Sena|tour, and of his wife, suppos'd by many to have been the famous S. Claudia, the Brittish Lady, concerning whom we have already treated. He was Brother to Novatus and to S. Pudentiana and S. Prxedes, whose memories are anniversarily celebrated by the Catho|lick Church.
2. The coming of S. Timotheus is a con|siderable proof that his Mother was a Brit|tain: and for that reason the whole family may iustly challenge a place in this History. And because he survived the rest, we will breifly set down what we find in the Eccle|siasticall Office touching the two Holy Si|sters.
Bre. Roman. 19. Maj. A. D. 161.3. Pudentiana a Virgin, daughter of Pudens a Roman (Senatour) with admirable piety pra|ctising the duties of Christian Religion, together with her sister Praxedes, sold her patrimony, and distributed to the poore the mony arising from thence: giving her selfe wholly o fasting and prayer. By her endeavours and zeale her whole family, consisting of ninety six persons, was conver|ted to the Faith, and baptised by Pope Pius. And wheras by an Edict of the Emperour Anto|ninus publick Sacrifices of Christians were for|bidden, the Holy Pope celebrated the Di|vine Mysteries together with other Christians in the house of Pudentian: who kindly en|tertained them all, affording them all things necessary for their sustenane. Thus continually employing herselfe in these offices of Piety she departed out of this life,A. D. 162. and on the four|teenth of the Calends of Iune (in the year of our Lord one hundred sixty and one) she was buried in the Sepulcher of her Father in the Coemitory of Priscilla situated in the Sa|larian way.
4. Priscilla here mention'd, by whom a Coemitory or common place of buriall for Christians had been bestow'd, was the Mother of Pudens and Grand-mother of this holy Virgin. From her probably it was that her Mother Claudia, took her name. For as she being a Captive attending King Caractacus when he was taken prisoner by Ostorius, she changed her Brittish name into Claudia, out of regard to Emperour Claudius: so being maried to Pudens she it seems once more changed it for another, peculiar to her husbands family.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. The death of Novatus Brother of S Timothy and S Pudentiana, signified in a ltter from the Holy Preist Pastor S. Timothy in Brittany.
3. S. Timothy's Answer: who leaves to the disposall of his Sister S. Praxedes the state left by their Brother.
4 5. She dedicats the Bathes of No|vatus or Timothy, into a Church where Christians assembled.
6. Why Churches in Rome call'd Tituli.

1. THe next yeare followed the death of Pudentiana's Brother Novatus.A. D. 162. Concerning which the ancient Ecclesia|sticall Monuments have still preserved a letter written by the Holy Preist called Pastor, directed to S. Timotheus then absent from Rome, and employed in the Aposto|lick Office in Brittany: the tenour of the Letter is as follows:2. Pastor a Preist to his follow Preist Ti|motheus,he Letter of Pastor to S. Timotheus. health in our Lord. The Venerable Virgin Praxedes was in great affliction for the death of her Sister Pudentiana. Whereupon many honourable Christians together with our Holy Pope Pius came to her to comfort her. There came likewise to her for the same pur|pose Novatus your Brother, who is also our Brother in our Lord, and gave her much consolation: and moreover by his libera|lity he greatly refreshed many poore Chri|stians, ministring to them plentifully of his wealth. Being with his Sister, he ear|nestly desired that by her prayers he might obtain mercy from our Lord. He likewise, toge|ther with our most blessed Bishop Pius, doth fre|quently

commemorate you at the Altar of our Lord. About a month and twenty eight days days after he was departed from the Virgin Pra|xedes, he fell sick Now our Bishop Pius together with the Virgin Praxedes having a solicitude for all Christians, they enquired where the Man of God Novatus was, since he appeared not in the Congregation: And they were informed that he was detained thence by sicknes: then were all very sorrowfull. Hereupon the Blessed Virgin Pra|xedes sayd to our Bishop Pius, If it be your Ho|lines pleasure let us goe to him: for by your visitation and prayers I doe assure my selfe our Lord will save him. Vpon this her proposall it was resolved accordingly: and at night wee together with our Bishop Pius, and the Virgin of our lord Praxedes, went to the Man of our Lord Novatus. And when this Holy man heard that this assem|bly was come to see him, he gave thanks to our Lord for the comfort he received by the Visitation of the Holy Bishop Pius, together with the Virgin of our Lord, and all the rest of us. Thus wee remained in his house eight days and nights. And during the time we were with him, he expressed his Will and pleasure to be, to bequeath to your selfe and the Blessed-Virgin Praxedes all his estate: and on the thirteenth day following he departed to our Lord. Of these things we together with holy Pius Bishop of the Apostolick See and the Virgin Praxedes, thought meet to give you an account by these our letters, to the end you might acquaint us with your pleasure, how you would have the estate of your Brother Novatus disposed, that your appoint|ment may in all things be observed. Sent by Euse|bius a Subdeacon of the holy Roman Church.
3. To this Letter S. Timotheus his Answer follows, though short, yet full of piety and perfum'd with the simplicity and Christian Charity of that age. Timotheus to his Brother and fellow preist Pastor, and to his most holy Sister Praxedes, health. We being desirous in all things without delay to expresse our service, beseech your holines to recommend us to the Memory, and intercession of the Holy Apostles, the holy Bi|shop Pius, Prelat of the holy Apostolick See, and all the saints. I your humble servant perusing the letter you were pleased to direct to mee, am more abundantly filled with ioy: For my soule always was, and still continues resigned to yours. Wherfore your Holines may take notice, that the same is pleasing to us your servant, which was agreable to our Brother Novatus, namely that what he bequeathed to mee, should be at the disposition of the holy Virgin Praxedes: and there|fore hereby you have full power to employ the said legacy which way soever shall be thought good by you and the said holy Virgin.
4. Now what was the successe of this holy negotiation appears in the ancient Acts of the same Pastor in these words,Act. Pastor. Having ther|fore received this Epistle, we were filled with ioy, and presented it to the Holy Bishop Pius, to be read by him. Then the blessed Bishop Pius gave thanks to God the Father Almighty. At the same time the holy Virgin of our Lord Praxedes, ha|ving received such power (from her Brother Timotheus) humbly besought the Blessed Bi|shop Pius that he would dedicate a Church in the Baths of Novatus, at that time not frequented: because in them there was a large and spacious Edifice. To this request Bishop Pius willingly yeilded, and dedicated a Church in the Baths of Novatus at Rome in the street calld The Brick|layers street, where likewise he constituted a Ro|man Title, and consecrated a Font for Baptism on the fourth of the Ides of May.
5. These Bathes here named from Nova|tus, have elsewhere their title from S. Ti|motheus, being situated on the Mountain at Rome call'd Viminal. To this place it was, before a Church was solemnly consecrated, that Christians usually repaired, but pri|vately, for the celebration of holy Christian Mysteries: as we find in the Acts of S. Iustin the Philosopher and Martyr: For being exa|mined by the Prefect of Rome concerning the place in which the Christians made their Assemblies, his answer was, I have hi|therto had my abode near the house of one Mar|tius, at the Bath named The Timothin-bath. For which Assemblies,Act. Iustin. ap. Bar. A. D. 165. having been forbid by the Emperour, the same Iustin four years after suffred Martyrdom.
6. Now Wheras in this relation made by the holy Preist Pastor, there is mention of a Roman Title constituted by Pope Pius; we may observe that in the first infancy of the Church, those who were ordained Preists to celebrate Divine Mysteries, were not confined to any fixed residence, but exercised their function in severall places, as occasion presented it selfe: But about the year of our Lord one hundred and twelve S. Evaristus Pope assign'd to each Preist a peculiar Cure and Parish in Rome, which were called Tituli, or Titles, so named from the Ensigns or Marks set on the places where they assembled: which in the ancient Churches were Crosses, erected to signify that such buildings were appropriated to Christian Worship.



A. D. 166.
XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1. The death of Antoninus Emperour, to whom succeed Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus.
2. The death of S. Praxedes.
3. Persecution rais'd by M. Aurelius at the instigation of Philosophers.

1. THE same yeare with S. Novatus, did the Emperour Antoninus likewise end his life:A. D. 163. to whom succeeded Marcus Aurelius, call'd the Philosopher, and Lucius Verus: so that the Roman Empire was joyntly governed by two persons, with equall authority.
A. D. 164.2. In the second year of the raign of these Emperours dyed the holy Virgin Praxedes. Concerning whom thus the Holy Priest Pa|stor continues to write: Two years and eighteen days after this Church was dedicated, there was a great persecution rais'd against Christians, to the end to force them to worship Idols: and many were crown'd with Martyrdom. Now the holy Virgin of our Lord Praxedes, being fervent in the Holy Ghost, secretly conceal'd many Christians in the sayd Title, or Church: whose bodies she strengthned with food, and their minds with ex|hortations proceeding from Gods spirit. Then in|formation was given to Antoninus (that is, M. Aurelius) that Christian assemblies were made in the house of Praxedes. Who sent Officers and layd hold on many, among which was Symitrius a Priest, with twenty two more: All which he commanded to be put to death in the same Title, without any examination. Whose bodies the bles|sed Virgin Praxedes took by night, and buried them in the Coemitery of Priscilla on the sea|venth day of the Ides of Iune. After this the Holy Virgin became much afflicted in mind, and with many groans prayd unto our Lord that she might passe out of this life; whose prayers and teares found accesse unto our Lord Iesus Christ. For on the thirty fourth day after the Martyrdom of the foresaid Saints the consecrated Virgin went unto our Lord, on the twelfth of the Calends of August. Whose body I Pastor a Priest buried next to her Father in the Coemitery of Priscilla in the Salarian way: where at this day the Prayers, and devotions of Saints are frequently exercised.
3. This persecution was begun cheifly at the instigation of Heathen Philosophers, espe|cially the inhuman, beastly Sect of the Cy|nicks. For by reason of the Emperours stu|diousnes and profession of Stoicall Philo|sophy, such persons had easy admittance to him. Among whom Tatianus a learned Chri|stian in that time takes notice of one infa|mous Cynick called Crescens, whose vanity, luxury, cruelty and profanenes is well de|scribed by him: and S. Iustin Martyr in his Oration publickly pronounc'd before the Se|nat, mentions the same Cynick with con|tempt and indignation: as it were prophe|cying his Martyrdom following, and procu|red by those Sycophants.


XV. CHAP.XV. CH.

1.2. Of S. Timotheus: his death by Mar|tyrdom at Rome.
3. A Letter of Pope Pius signifying this, c.
4. His universall care over the Church.
5.6. A second Letter of the same Ho|ly Pope.
7. Great care of Christians touching the Sacred bodies of Martyrs.

1. THus we have the summe of what is in Ecclesiasticall Monuments deli|vered touching three holy children of Pu|dens a Roman Senatour, and his wife Claudia Priscilla: in the Acts of whom our Nation has an interest, partly in regard of their Mo|ther a Brittish Lady, as likewise their Brother S. Timotheus, who besides his generall Apo|stolicall Office exercised in this Island, had no doubt a great influence in disposing King Lucius to the embracing of our Christian Faith.
2. Now besides this generall Character of this our Saint, there is little extant touching S. Timotheus, but only that the year after his devout Sister Praxedes death, he return'd to Rome, where also he became a happy prey to those sensuall savage Philo|sophers, and in the following year gloriously ended his life by Martyrdom, together with another worthy companion called Marcus.Rom. Mart. 24. Mar. This appears both in the ancient Roman Martyrologe on the twenty fourth of March, as likewise an Epistle written by the Holy Pope Pius to Iustus Bishop of Vienna in France.
3. The Copy of which Epistle is as fol|loweth:Epistle of P. Pius. Pius Bishop of Rome to his Brother Iu|stus Bishop. Before thou didst depart from Rome, our Sister Euprepia, if thou doest well remember, assign'd the Title of her house for maintaining the poore: where we abiding with our poore bre|thren doe celebrate Masses. Now we are desirous to be informed concerning thy affairs, most happy Brother, since thou tookst thy iourney to that Se|natoriall Citty of Vienna: as likewise with what successe thou hast spread abroad the seed of the Gospell. Those Priests which had their first edu|cation from the Apostles, and have continued to our dayes, with whom also we divided the care of preaching the word of Faith, having been call'd by our Lord, doe now repose in their eternall man|sions. Saint Timotheus and Marcus have ended

their dayes by a happy conflict. Take care, dear Bro|ther, that thou follow them by imitating their zeale, and freeing thy selfe from the chains of this world. Make hast to obtain with the Holy Apostles the everlasting palm of victory: that palm which S. Paul attain'd by a world of suf|fring; and S. Peter also, from whom the Crosse it selfe could not take the love of Christ. Soter and Eleutherius, worthy Priests salute thee. Salute the Brethren who live with thee in our Lord. Cherinthus, Satans prime Minister, seduces ma|ny from the Faith. May the Grace of Christ dwell for ever in thy heart.
4. In this Epistle we see what a generall care this holy Bishop expresses, and how his solicitude for the salvation of soules is not confin'd to Rome or Italy only. As like|wise how he professes that he divided the care of propagating the Gospell to Priests subordinate to him. So that it cannot be doubted but that S. Timotheus his employ|ment in our Lords Vineyard in Brittany pro|ceeded from his care, and was accompanied with his benediction. A further proof whereof is afforded us in another letter of his to the same Iustus Bishop of Vienna, which we here set down.
A second Letter.5. Pius Bishop of Rome, to his Brother Iustus Bishop, health. Attalus is arrived here, bring|ing with him the Epistles of the Martyrs there: whereby he has fill'd our hearts with inestimable ioy for their triumphs. He acquainted u that our holy Collegue Verus has victoriously trium|phed also over the Prince of this world: and that thou art seated in his place in the Senatoriall Citty of Vienna, being cloathed with Episcopall Vestments. Be carefull therefore faithfully to discharge in our Lord the Ministery which thou hast received. Let not thy diligence be wanting decently and reverently to bury the bodies of the Martyrs, as the members of Christ: for the A|postles treated S. Steven. Visit the prisons of the Saints, and take care that none of them loose the fervour of their Faith. Approve holy Martyr|doms by the light of the Holy Spirit in thee. Encourage and encite them to continue constant in the Faith. Let the Priests and Deacons ob|serve thee, not as a Master, but as a Minister of Christ. Let thy piety and holines be a protection to the whole congregation under thee. Our bre|thren, whose names Attalus will acquaint thee with, are freed from the Tyrants cruelty, and now rest in our Lord. Pastor the Preist hath built a Title (or Church,) and is happily dead in our Lord. Know, O most blessed Brother, that it has been revealed to me, that the end of my life ap|proaches shortly. One thing I earnestly begg of thee, that in the holy Communion thou wilt not be unmindfull of me. This poor Senat of Christ at Rome salutes thee. I salute the whole assembly of Brethren with thee in our Lord.
6. That which this holy Pope mentions of his approaching death,A. D. 161. was by the event prov'd to have been a Divine revelation, for the year following he was crown'd with Martyrdom, after he had sate ten years: And Anicetus a Syrian succeeded him.A. D. 170.
7. As touching that advice concerning the Bodies of Martyrs, severall examples of those Primitive times demonstrate, that what he there advises, was no superstitious invention of his own, as our Modern Separa|tists doe call it, but a duty received from the Apostles. Such reverence did the Church of Smyrna expresse to the Relicks of S. Poly|carpus, who was martyrd two years after S. Pius: as appears in their Epistle relating the circumstances of his blessed death. The ma|licious Iews would have perswaded the Ro|man President to have refused the holy Mar|tyrs body to the Christians of Smyrna, least, sayd they,Euseb. Hi|stor. lib. 4. ap. 14. they should forsake their crucifica God, and worship Polycarpus for a God: for these miscreants could not distinguish a sa|cred Veneration due to holy Relicks, from that Supreme adoration, which belongs only to God: But those holy Primitive Christians were better instructed,Ib. for thus they write; We (say they) have reposed the bones of Poly|carpus, more valuable to us then precious stones, and purer then gold, in such a place as is decent and becoming: Where being all of us assembled, God will give us the grace to celebrate with all possible joy and exaltation the day of his Martyr|dom, as being indeed the day of his more happy Nativity.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1. Commotions in Brittany: pacified by Calphurnius Agricola.
2.3. Long and dangerous war in Ger|many. A victory miraculously obtain'd by the Prayers of Christians.
4. Successions of Popes. Touching King Lucius.

1. IN the eighth yeare of the raign of M. Aurelius and L. Verus,A. D. 170. the Northern part of the Empire, especially in Germany and Brittany, was cruelly agitated with tem|pests of seditions and wars.Capitoliu. in Aurelio. In Brittany the Northern Province of the Ottadini (about Berwick) broke out into open rebellion: for reducing of whom Calphurnius Agricola was sent into the Island, upon whose ap|proach the rebels quickly submitted. And all that remains besides to keep alive his Memory, is an Inscription upon a Pillar rais'd by A. Licinius, wherein Calphurnius Agrico|la's name is engraved: Which Pillar is de|dicated to the Syrian Goddesse (Dea Syria,) worship'd, it seems, by the Romans in that place.Seld. de Ds Syr. 2. cap 2. Concerning which Goddesse the rea|der may consult our learned Mr. Selden in his Treatise of that argument.
2. But the German war was more lasting and doubtfull: which not belonging to

our present design,A. D. 180. the relation of it must be sought for in the Roman Historians of this age. Yet one circumstance in it, conducing much to the glory of Christian Religion, must not be omitted. Which was the saving of the Emperour and the whole Roman Army, not only from a certain destruction by the Ger|man Nations,A. D. 176. (the Marcomanni, Catti, c.) by whom they were inclosed, but from a more irresistible enemy, extremity of thirst: All this obtain'd by the Prayers of Christian souldiers, not only interrupted all persecu|tion of them, but obliged the Emperour by his publick Letters sent into all Provinces to professe his gratitude for so eminent a de|liverance.
3. The particular circumstances hereof we shall refer to the following Book, the argument whereof will be the happy and glorious conversion of our Brittish King Lu|cius to the Christian Faith: To effect which, this so wonderfull, publick and unquestio|nable a miracle, no doubt much conduced. Now this conversion having been perfected in the beginning of the raign of the Empe|rour Commodus, who succeeded his Father M. Aurelius, which was four years after this stupendious deliverance of the Romans, our Ecclesiasticall Monuments afford us little for the furnishing that space of time. There|fore we will onely adde, for a distinct clea|ring of Chronology, the succession of the Bi|shops of Rome since the last mention'd Pope Pius the first of that name.
4. To Pope Pius therefore, having sate somewhat more then nine years, and dying in the year of our Lord one hundred sixty six, succeeded S. Anicetus, to whom after nine years succeeded S. Soter, who having for the space of five years filled the Chair of S. Peter, had for his next Successour S. Eleu|therius in the year of our Lord one hundred and eighty: in the third year after whose assumption to the Apostolick dignity King Lucius,A. D. 180. then an old man, for he had raigned fifty eight years, by Gods mercy and grace, had his youth renew'd like an Eagle, being born again by Baptism, and made an heyr of an everlasting Kingdom.





THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAP.

1. The Conversion of the Brittish King Lucius in his old Age.
2.3. Severall Motives thereto.
4. Edicts of former Emperours in fa|vour of Christians.
5. An example of the Emperour An|toninus his Edict.

1 _KING Lucius had now gover|ned the Brittains almost three|score years, having begun his raign in the tenth year of his age, when Almighty God at last subdued his heart to the beleif and obedience of his Go|spell. It may perhaps seem strange he should hold out so long against the Truth: but yet if we consider the tenaciousnes of humane nature to inveterate customs, especially such as are agreable to flesh and blood, and like|wise the horrible scandals and prejudices which then were cast on Christian Religion, which even without such prejudices, is ex|tremely contrary to our naturall inclina|tions, it is to be esteem'd no lesse then mira|culous, that a great King in such times as those were, should have the courage to be the first example, and this in his old age, of submitting a Scepter and Crown to the spiri|tuall Scepter of Christs Kingdom.
2. Besides his so long experience of the innocence, humility, patience and peace|able dispositions of his Christian subjects, we may suppose the principall Motives indu|cing him to yeild at last to the exhortations of many Apostolick Preachers, such as were S. Aristobulus, S. Marcellus, S. Timotheus, c. to have been two; First the Testimonies that the Emperours themselves, though other|wise Enemies to the Christian Faith, gave to the Professours of it: Next the wonderfull testimony that God gave thereto by rescuing the then raigning Emperour from unavoy|dable destruction by the prayers of his Chri|stian souldiers.
3. As touching the former Testimonies of Emperours, they are the more weighty, be|cause given not out of any worldly respects, but purely out of a conviction of the inno|cence of poor persecuted Christians, after all severity, rigour and cruelty had been used toward them to force them to renounce their Profession. Moreover these Emperours were not such as Nero, Vitellius or Domitian, whose favour to Christianity would have been a disgrace and prejudice to it: But Princes venerable to the world for their pru|dence, courage, and zeale likewise to their own superstition; Such were Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius.
A. D. 181.4. We will here insert onely one Edict of the Emperour Antoninus, by which we may gather the tenour of the others. It is extra|cted out of the Writings of S. Iustin the Phi|losopher and Martyr, who then flourished. The form thereof is as followeth.
5. The Emperour Caesar Titus Aelius Hadria|nus Antoninus Pius Augustus, Highest Preist, this fifteenth time possessed of the Tribunitiall Power, and this third time Consul, Father of his Countrey. To the people of Asia, Health. I am assured that the Gods will not permit those men to lye hid in obscurity, who refuse to pay due ho|nour and worship to them: for they themselves will far more severely punish such, then you can. And you doe not consider that by molesting and tormenting those men whom you call impious, and charge as enemies to the Gods, you thereby doe the more confirm and encrease their Religion. For to them it is a thing more desirable to be ac|cused as criminall, and to lay down their lives for their God, then to enjoy the present life with worldly contentment. Hence it comes to passe that by exposing their lives in this manner they obtain over you a more illustrious Victory, then if they should perform whatsoever you require of them. Now as concerning the Earth-quakes which both in late times, and at this present also do happen, I judge very reasonable to give you some admonition. Whensoever such calami|ties befall you, you are presently disheartned and in despaire, and you impute to their Religion, as if it alone was the cause of all misfortunes hap|ning to you. On the other side, whensoever any such accident befalls them, they are thereby in|cited to a more constant and firm trust in God: Whereas all that while you either loose all know|ledge of God, and utterly despise all sacred du|ties, not only refusing to pay the worship and service due unto the Deity, but greivously vexing, and to the death pursuing those who doe observe and reverence him. Now severall Ma+gistrats and Governours of our Provinces have heretofore written letters in the behalf of those innocent men to our most holy and deified Fa|ther Hadrian. To whom his Answer and Re|script was, That no further trouble or molestation should be given to those men, except they should otherwise be found guilty of any crime, or that they had a design prejudiciall to the Roman Em|pire. Many have likewise written to me in their favour, to whom my Answer was, That I assen|ted to the Ordinance and Will of my late Father, And my pleasure is, That if any shall hereaf|ter offer any injury or vexation to any Christian, upon this account that he is a Christian, the per|son so persecuted, though he be found to be indeed a Christian, shall be presently acquitted: and his accuser shall undergoe a just and due punishment.
6. This Edict though in this Copy dire|cted only to the Eastern Provinces, where the malice and petulancy both of Iews and Gen|tiles, Enemies to Christianity, was more vio|lent, yet no doubt had its effect in all other places also: For besides that the cause of Christians was every where the same; Edicts of this nature were sent over the whole Em|pire, as we shall see in another of the same nature published by M. Aurelius, and pre|sently to be produced. And however, all Christians no doubt would be zealous to make use of the advantage that such Edicts gave them to justify their Religion, and clear it from all prejudices cast upon it: For what could the most learned among the Christian Writers in their Apologies invent more ho|nourable and more advantageous to recom|mend the Christian Faith, then this Heathen Emperour here published to all the world? It cannot therefore be doubted, but that such Testimonies from Enemies of such Authority had great influence on the minds of all con+sidering moderate Heathens, though other|wise lesse disposed to embrace the Truth then King Lucius was, who from his Ance|stours inherited a spirit not only of civility and courtesy to all, but likewise of a par|ticular kindnes and liberality to Christians.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Wonderfull deliverance of the Emperour Aurelius and his Army by the prayers of Christians: particu|larly related out of Dio, c.
4.5. Dio wrongfully ascribes this Vi|ctory to a Magician.
6.7. The Emperours own true relation of it.
8.9. This an occasion of the Conversion of many particularly of King Lucius.
10. Mistake of the Centuriators of Magdeburg.
11.12. Eusebius his testimony of the Conversion of many (in Brittany.)

1. BVT another far more powerfull and efficacious Testimony to the Truth did Almighty God himselfe at this time give to all mankind, by delivering not the Emperour alone, but his whole Army, yea in a manner the Empire it selfe, upon the pray|ers of his Christian servants, from destru|ction otherwise inevitable.
2. The state of the then present affairs and danger is thus described by Dio a Roman Historian living in those times,Dio in Mar|c. lib. 71. and a bitter enemy to Christians; The Emperour Marcus (saith he) after many and great battels fought in Germany, and no small dangers undergone, at last subdued the Marcmanni and Iazyges. After which arose a new and sharp war against a Nation called Quadi: From which war ensued a Victory to the Romans, happy beyond their hope, being in|deed obtained by a miraculous favour of God: For the Romans in the midst of the battel being brought into extreme danger, were saved after a wonderfull manner,  meerly by a special Divine

assistance. For being narrowly enclos'd on all sides by the Quadi, though, where the places were com|modious, they fought valiantly yet the Barbarous Enemy delayd the deciding the busines by a ge|nerall battel, hoping, without the hazard of a com|bat, to see them be destroy'd by the extremity of heat and thirst: For by the advantage of their multitudes having seised on all passages, they had so shutt them in, that they could not come to any water. Now the Romans beng brought into these extreme difficulties, and tormented both with diseases, wounds, a burning heat of the Sun and intolerable thirst, so that they could neither fight, nor draw off from the place, but were forc'd to stand still in their arms exposed to the fiery beames of the Sun: On a sudden there was a gathering together of many clouds, from which descended wonderfull great showres of raine refreshing the Romans, which could be imputed to no other cause, but a speciall imme|diate favour of God.
Ibid.3. Thus writeth Dio: and hereto adds, that the Romans being encouraged by so unexpected an assistance of heaven, va|liantly set upon their enemies astonish'd at such a miracle, who immediately fled, and in their flight as many were kill'd by lightning, thunderbolts and stones fal|ling from heaven, as with their enemies swords. So that it was notorious to all the world that this so great deliverance and victory was the work not of men, but God only.
4. Now though evidence hereof extor|ted from Dio a free confession of Divine goodnesse, yet his malice and envy against the Christians incited him to attribute this Miracle rather to Magick more powerfull then his God Mercury, then to the true God of the Christians. For to the forecited ac|count, he adds this conclusion:Dio ibid. The report is (saith he) that a certain Egyptian Magi|cian called Arnuphis, who was then attending on the Emperour Marcus, did by Magicall arts invocate Mercury, especially that Deity which rules in the aire, and other Demons, and by their assistance forcibly procured such showres. But Xphilin the abridger of his History, e|vidently convinces this imposture,Xiphilin. ibid. by shewing first that the Emperour was never ad|dicted to the delusions of Magick, or affected with the society of the Professours of such arts: And afterwards declaring the true circumstances of the matter, to this effect: Marcus, saith he, having in his army one Legion consisting of soul|diers which came from Melitine (in Armenia) and were all of them worshippers of Christ: There came to him, being in great feare what would be|cme of his Army, and at a losse what course to take, the Preect of his Pretorian ands, who told him, That there was nothing so difficult but those which were called Christians could obtain from God: of which Profession there was then present in the Army one entire Legion. Marcus being thus informed, desired the Christians to make supplication to their God in behalf of the Army. Which assoon as they had done, God immediately granted their prayers, and with the same showres destroyed the Enemies, and refresh'd the Romans. Hereupon Marcus wonderfully astonished with these things, by a publick Edict honour'd the Christians, and called that Legion the Thundring Legion. And to this effect an Epistle written by the Emperour himselfe is extant to this day.
5. This was the true Narration of this wonderfull deliverance, which is confirmed by the Testimonies of severall learned Chri|stians in their publick Apologies for their Re|ligion immediately after that time, such were Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis cited by Eu|sebius, and S. Gregory Nissenus,Euseb. hist. Grg. Niss. in oration. in 40. Martyr. Tertull. A|pol. c. 5. ad Scapul c. 4. and likewise Tertullian in his works still extant. Which is a proof undeniable of the Truth of these things: because otherwise their alledging of so famous an accident in the times when if their allegations had been false, they might evidently have been convinced of most impudent forgery, this would instead of pacifying, have more enraged their per|secutors against them.
6. But a Witnes beyond exception is the Emperour Marcu himselfe, though a Hea|then, who testifies, not by report or hear|say, but what his eyes had seen: This he does in a publick Letter or Edict in favour of Christians, which he commanded to be sent through all the Provinces of the Em|pire. This is that Epistle mention'd by Xi|philin: the tenour whereof is this:7. The Emperour Caesar Marcus Aurelius Augustus Antoninus,The Epistle an Edict of the Emperor M. Aurelius in favour of Christians. Germanicus, Parthicus, Sarmaticus, High Preist, in the twenty eighth year of our Tribunitiall Power, and our third Con|sulship, Father of our Countrey, Proconsul, To the Senat and People of Rome, sends health. I have given you information touching the greatnes of our present design and resolution, and all the oc|currents which successively hapned to me in Ger|many, both in our combats and Seiges. Truly when I was at Carnutum, our Scouts inform'd us that there approached within the space of nine miles no fewer then seaventy four Ensigns of our Enemies. And the same thing did Pompeianus our Generall declare to us, which our selves like|wise saw. Now having in our Army onely four Legions, the First, the Tenth, the Twinn-Legion, and that of the Ferentarij, and there being in our Enemies Camp no fewer then nine hundred seaventy seaven thousand, when I compar'd our small forces with the vast multitudes of our Bar|barous Foes, I addressed my prayers and vows to our Roman Gods: But when I saw that I was negle|cted by them, and that the Enemy began to over|charge us, considering the small number of our own forces, I sent to call the Christians, which were not a few in our Army, whom I both by prayers and threats also urged to assist us: But threats were neither needfull, nor indeed seemly, as I perceived afterward, when I found how power|full they were. For they undertaking our de|fence, did not set themselves to provide themselves of weapons, or to make use of arms

or Trumpets: For to put their trust in such things is not acceptable to that God, whose name, cause and honour they always carry in their hearts. Therefore it is just that we should ac|knowledge those to be safely protected by God whom formerly we esteem'd to be impious and enemies to him. For having cast themselves pro|strate on the ground, they offred their prayers not only for me, but for the whole Army, that some remedy might be sent us to asswage the hunger and thirst with which we were tormen|ted: For, for the space of five days we had not drunk any water, there being none best among us, nor any means to procure any, we being clos'd round about with Mountains in the very heart of Germany. Now assoon as these Christians had cast themselves on the ground; and addressed their Prayers to that God of whom I was ignorant, im|mediately there fell from heaven abundance of rain, which to us was coole and refreshing, but to the Enemies of the Romans it was accompanied with haile in the likenes of fire, and with thun|derbolts. Thus that God who cannot be over|come or resisted, was in a wonderfull manner rea|dily propitious to their prayers and supplications. For this reason let us freely permit such as these to be, what they professe, Christians, least we force them by their prayers to obtain such wea|pons from heaven against us. My judgment and sentence therefore is, That none be question'd or call'd into judgment upon this charge that he is a Christian. So that if any one shall be found to lay this as a crime to any one, that he is a Chri|stian, let it be made known to the person accus'd for being a Christian, in case no other crime be objected to him, that he is to be presently dis|miss'd and acquitted: and let him that accused such a Christian, be burnt alive. Whosoever therefore professes himselfe a Christian is hereby freed from any danger in that regard threatned against him. Neither let the Magistrate who governs the Province, endeavour to make him renounce his Profession, or any way abridge his liberty. And my Sentence moreover is, That this Edict be further establish'd by a Decree of the Senat, and publickly expos'd in the common place of Trajan, that any one may read it. Let Vetrasius Pollio likewise Prefect of the Citty take order that this Constitution be sent into all Pro|vinces: Neither let any one who has a mind to take a copy and make any use of it, be prohibited so to doe. Fare ye well.
8. The Emperour not content with cele|brating so advantageously the wonderfull power and goodnes of the true God by Edicts and Writings published to the whole world, proceeded to a yet more illustrious expres|sion of his gratitude: And because Edicts were only in force for the present age, he to eternise the memory of so great a delive|rance, rais'd up in a spacious place at Rome a vast Pillar, on which was graved the whole History, to be read by all future times.
9. Now such a Confession of the impo|tency of the Roman Deities, and the Omni|potency of the true God worshipped only by Christians, a Confession made by the most wise, learned and vertuous Emperour that ever assumed the Title of Caesar, this, no doubt, had a strange influence on the minds of a world of perons in all the Provinces of the Empire, to incline them to conform themselves to the Emperours judgment, though worldly interests made his practise contradict his judgment. Hence it came to passe that the numbers of Christians wonder|fully encreas'd at this time, and those not only of the vulgar rank, but persons of ho|nour and esteem in the world: as we read in Tertullian, a Christian Writer of the next Age:Tertull. A|prlog. cap. 37. We, says he, who are counted Externs by you, doe yet fill all your places, your Citties, Isles, Castles, Free Towns, Camps, Tribes, Corporations, Palaces, Senats and places of Iudicature, c.
10. No wonder then if our Brittish King Lucius, so well prepar'd before, having been inform'd (as our Historian Bale writes) by the Emperours principall Officers Trebellius and Pertinax,Bal. cent. 1. cap. 19. sent by him into Brittany, not only of the late miraculous deliverance, but how a great number of the Roman Nobility and Senatours had thereupon given their names to Christ: No wonder, I say, if he being convinc'd in judgment, and not de|terd by the Roman Civill power, at last sub|mitted his neck to the same easy yoke.Magdebur|gens. cent. 2. c. 2. But whereas the Centuriators of Magdeburg mi|staking this passage of Bale, do affirm that Pertinax and Trebellius were themselves con|verted to the Christian Faith, and thereby an occasion of King Lucius his conversion, this evidently contradicts the current of the Ro|man History. Eor Pertinax who in these times was sent the Emperours Lievtenant into Brit|tany, he after the death of Commodus who succeeded M. Aurelius his father, was cho|sen Emperour, and not the least intimation is given by any Historian, that he was affe|cted to Christian Religion. As for Trebellius a person unknown in the History of these times, for he could neither be that Trebellius Maximus, who governed Brittany in the year of our Lord sixty seaven, nor probably that Cneus Trebellius the Emperours Lievtenant here in the year one hundred and eighteen, con|cerning whom we find in no Monuments any ground of suspicion, that either of them became Christians.
11. For this reason we cannot afford him a place among those illustrious persons, concerning whom Eusebius thus writes,Euseb. hist. lib. 5. c. 20. At the same time when Commodus governed the Ro|man Empire, our Religion was brought to a quiet and peaceable state, through all the Churches in the world. Yea moreover the Word of salvation did then so attract the minds of all sorts of men to the holy Religion which teaches the worship of the onely true omnipotent God, Creatour of all things, that at Rome it selfe (and in the Ro|man Empire) very many persons illustrious for their birth, and flowing with wealth, embraced that Truth which brought salvation to them, and

moreover drew to the same Holy Profession their whole families and kinred.A. D. 182.
12. By which expression the Historian seems in the opinion of Baronius,Bayon. A. D. 183. n. 3. to have princi|pally pointed at this famous Conversion of Brittany: For, having with all diligence searched into Ecclesiasticall monuments he professes he could could not find out any to whom that passage in Eusebius could be ap|plied, except our Brittish King Lucius, whose name is commemorated in the ancient Martyrologes usually read in Churches. Nei|ther is it any wonder that Eusebius should either be ignorant, or silent concerning the particular affairs of Brittany, concerning which, as may be shewd by many Exam|ples, he treats very negligently. But enough hath been sayd touching the motives pro|bably inducing King Lucius at this time publickly to embrace the Christian Faith: We will consequently declare the manner and order of the said Kings conversion, accom|panied with that not only of his family, but generally his whole Kingdom.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1. A History of the Conversion of Brit|tany anciently written by Elvanus A|vallonius, lost.
2. The Relation of Bale and the Magdeburgenses concerning it.
3.4.5. c. King Lucius being un|satisfied in his old Religion, demands instruction of Pope Eleutherius: And why he has recourse to him.

A. D. 182. Rad. Nger in Chronic. A. D. 179. . 17. Bal.1. IF the Ancient History of Elvanus call'd Avallonius (that is, of Glastonbury) mention'd by Radulphus Niger in his Chroni|cle, and ale, who is sayd to have lived in these very times of Antoninus the Philoso|pher, Commodus his son, and Pope Eleuthe|rius, and to have written a Book of the Ori|ginal of the Brittish Church, if this History, I say, were still extant, we might with more assurance proceed in the relation of the particulars touching this most happy conversion of our Countrey: Wheras now we must content our selves with gleaning out of lesse ancient Writers such parcell's as they will afford us to make up the following Narration. Notwithstanding since we can|not charge them with delivering to poste|rity their own inventions, we ought to re|ceive their scattred Records as the Relicks of ancient Tradition, extracted out of Primitive Histories, now swallowd in the gulfe of time.
2. Now in our Narration, that we may approve our sincerity, we will not neglect the iudgment and testimonies of such Mo|dern Writers as have searched into Antiquity,Bale. cent. 1. cap. 19. though otherwise averse from Catholick Re|ligion. Among which thus writs Bale, King Lucius, says he, was it seems, scandalis'd at the meannesse and Poverty of Christ, as the Iews formerly were. For though Christian Religion had for the space of more then a hundred years been propagated through Brittany, yet it seem'd to him deprived of its due splendour, because it had hitherto been administred by simple, poore and contemptible persons: and however, it wanted the Emperiall Authority of Rome to support it. Ther|fore as soon as he was informed by Trebellius and Pertinax, the Emperours Lievtenants, that upon the ceasing of persecution, severall illustrious Romans had embraced it, he then began to en|tertain a more worthy conceit of it. And to the same effect write the Centuriators of Magde|burg,Centur. Mag+debrg. though with some mistake, as hath been observed.
3. This stone of offence, to wit, Po|verty and want of worldly splendour and advantages being thus removed, King Lucius now seriously comparing the Chri|stian Faith with what he had been taught by his Druids, the simplicity and sanctity of the one, with the unclean and inhuman Superstitions of the other, but especially considering the inestimable Promises of eternall Glory and Happines not only proposed, but by evident demonstra|tions establish'd, in the Gospell, to which his own Preists never pretended any claim at all; No wonder if he grew unsatisfied and weary of his former Errours, and willing to admit a further illustration of those verities, with a few beams wherof he had formerly been enlightned.
4. Now, it seems, there not being then in Brittany, or not known to the King, any Ecclesiasticall persons of authority sufficient to establish a new Church, though there wanted not such as had skill enough to per|swade  satisfy him in the Truth of Christian Religion, the principall of which were the foremention'd Elvanus of Avallonia, and Medwinus of the Province inhabited by the Belgae: Hence it came to passe that King Lu|cius, no doubt, by the advice of these holy persons, was oblig'd to seek for a more perfect instruction, and to implore a grea|ter authority for setling the common affairs of Christianity, from abroad.
5. For which purpose though in the neigh|bouring Kingdom of Gaule there were at that time living and famous many holy Bishops, eminent for Piety and learning, the most illustrious among which was S. Irenaeus Bi|shop of Lyons, and shortly after a most glo|rious Martyr: Yet to none of these had King Lucius recourse either for counsell or assi|stance: But ordring his Messengers, to passe through that Nation, he directed them beyond it to Rome, the fountain of all Eccle|siasticall Iurisdiction, and to S. Eleutherius

a worthy Successor of S. Peter in the Aposto|lick Chair.
6. Indeed if he had at that time consul|ted S. Irenaeus,ren. l. 3. c. 3. he would have told him what himselfe had taught the world in his Book against Heresies, That to this Roman Church by reason of its more powerfull principality it is ne|cessary that every other Church should have re|course, that is, all faithfull Christians where|soever dispers'd: Because in that Church the Tra|dition derived from the Apostles was safely con|serv'd. Tertullian likewise an Eminent Preist then alive would have given him the same advice,Tertull. in Praescript. cap. 36. Whosoever thou art, saith he, that would'st better employ thy curiosity in the busi|nes of thy salvation, take a view of the princi|pall Churches founded by the Apostles, c. If Italy be nearest thee, thou maist repaire to Rome, from whence our authority (in Africk) is like|wise derived: A Church it is happy in its consti|tution, to which the (cheif) Apostles together with their blood shed forth the whole doctrine of Christianity. Lastly the security of making that Church the Rule both of doctrin and disciplin would have been excellently de|clared by the foresaid glorious Saint Ire|naeus,Iren. bi sup. saying, By making known the Faith of that cheifest, most ancient and through all the world most renouned Church of Rome, founded and constituted by the most glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and by an uninterrupted succession of Bishops derived to our times, we confound all those who any way, either by an unlawfull self-love, vain-glory, blindnes, or or perversenes of opinion doe make separated con|gregation professing other Doctrines. And in consequence,d. ibid. the same holy Father adioyns a Catalogue of the Names of all the Bishops of Rome from S. Peters dayes, the twelfth and last wherof living in his time was this S. Eleutherius, to whom King Lucius ad|dress'd himselfe for a more perfect infor|mation in Christian verities, and to obtain Ordinances and lawes necessary for the con|stitution of a well ordred Church in his Kingdome.


IV. CHA.IV. CHAP.

1.2. Bishop Vshers iudgment of King Lucius his Message to the Pope.
3. Instructions given by the King to Messengers.
4.5 Pope Eleutherius his Answer.
6. Other particulars of the said An|swer.

Vsser in Pri+mord. Eccles. Brit. fol. 4.1. COncerning the message sent by King Lucius to Pope Eleutherius, thus writes Bishop Vsher, I doe not find among our more an|cient Writers what was the principall Motive in|ducing King Lucius to procure and send for from Rome Doctours and Teachers of the Christian Faith.A. D. 183. Onely in a Book belonging to the Monastery of Abingdon I read, That the sayd King having heard the fame of the Sanctity of Preachers at that time living in that Citty, sent his Messen|gers with publick Letters in great expedition, most devoutly and earnestly beseeching the Vene|rable Pope Eleutherius that by his order and will he might be made a Christian. Now no man can be ignorant of the strict alliance and frequent commerce which in those times interven'd be|tween the Brittains living within the Province subject to the Romans, and that Imperiall Citty: So that here there is no necessity that we should recurr to the Primacy of the Roman Bishop.
2. Notwithstanding although this last clause was added on purpose to make the readers beleive that this Kingdom had no de|pendance at all on Rome in Ecclesiasticall affaires, contrary to the foremention'd as|sertion of Pope Innocent the First, and the Traditionary practise of so many ages: we see the testimonies of S. Irenaeus and Tertullian doe evince the contrary: which likewise is more evidently demonstrated in the pursuit of this History.
3. Now as touching the particular In|struction given by King Lucius to his Messen|gers,Antiq. Brit. fol. 4. the Protestant Authour of the Brittish An|tiquities thus declares, King Lucius, saith he, resolued to be inaugurated and solemnly initiated in the Christian Faith by Eleutherius the then Ro|man Bishop. For which purpose be dispatched with Letters and commands unto him two illustrious and eloquent men, Elvanus of (Glastonbury or) Auallonia, and Medwinus of the Province of the Belgae: By whom he requested the Roman Bishop that he would please to direct his Messen|gers and Legats with order to baptise him, being already imbued with Christian Doctrine. He more|over desired that they might bring with them the Roman Laws, according to which he might order and establish both the Ecclesiasticall and Civill state in his Kingdom. But the pious Bishop Eleutherius being much more zealous to propa|gate the Divine doctrin, then to illustrate his own fame, signified to him his inexpressibile ioy for gaining of so great a King to the obedience of Christ, but for the civill ordering of his Kingdome, that his interessing himselfe therin was to no pur|pose. Those Lawes were not necessary for the consti|tution of a Christian Commonwealth, and that in them many things were establish'd which ought not to be observed by thse who professe the Christian Faith, c.
4. S. Beda having mention'd these requests of King Lucius to Pope Eleutherius,Bed. hist. l 1. cap. 4. add's pre|sently, that he obtained the effect of his pious Petition: that is, for as much as concern'd his further instruction and initiation in Christian Religion, c. This will appear by the Answer said to be sent by the said Pope in Writing, to this day preserved by our Hi|storian Mathew of Westminster, the Tenour wherof is as follweth;
5. Your request to us is, that we would trans|mit to you a Copy of the Roman and Imperiall Laws,The Epistle of P. Eleu|therius to King Lucius: out of Mat|thevv of West|minst. which, it seems, you desire to make use of in your kingdom of Brittany. But you must be informed, that the Roman Lawes and such as are enacted by the Emperour, are not of such obli|gation, but they may any time be rejected, which the Law of God in no case must be. Now by the Divine mercy you have of late submitted your selfe in your Kingdom of Brittany to the Law and Faith of Christ: so that you have already with you both the Old and New Testament: Out of them therfore by Gods inspiration and with the common counsell of your Kingdom collect and frame a Law, and by it through the Divine assistance govern your Kingdom of Brittany. You are Gods Deputy in your Kingdom, according as the Kingly Pro|phet says, the Earth is our Lords, and the fullnes of it, the round world, and all that dwell in it. And again the same Kingly Prophet saith, Thou hast loved righteousnes and hated inquity: therfore thy God hath annointed thee with the oyle of gladnes above thy fellows. And again, O God, giue thy iudgment to the King, and thy iustice c. He saith, Thy judgment; not the judg|ment and justice of Caesar. For the Christian Na|tions and people of your kingdom who live under your peaceable protection, are the children of God, under his care, who according to the Gospell, pro|tects them as a Hen gathering her chickens under her wings, c. The Nations therfore of your Kingdom of Brittany are your people, which being hitherto divided, you ought to gather into one unanimous congregation to the obedience of the Faith and Law of Christ, constituting of them one Church, which you must cherish, maintain, protect and govern, that so you may raign with Christ for ever, whose Deputy you are in the foresaid Kingdom.
6. Thus far doth the said Historian re|late the tenour of this Epistle,1. Foxe l. 2 fol. 107. l. Speed. hist. in Aurelio. cap. 19. . 3. adding wi|thall by way of Preface, that this was the en|tire form of it: Notwithstanding some Mo|dern Writers further adioyn therto these following passages: Woe to the Kingdom whose King is a child, and whose Princes eat early in the morning. A King is here call'd a child, not for his want of growth and age, but for his folly, injustice and madnes: since according to the King|ly Prophet, Bloody and deceitfull men shall not live out half their dayes, c. Now by eating in the morning we are to understand gluttony and Luxury: for by Luxury come all perverse and fil|thy things according to King Salomons speech, Into a malevolent soule wisedom will not enter, nordwell in a body subject to sin. A King has his title from governing, not having, a Kingdom. You will be a King as long as you rule well: which if you cease to doe the name of a King will remain in you no longer, but you will leave to be a King, which God forbid. Almighty God give you his grace so to govern your kingdome of Brit|tany, that you may for ever raign with him, whose Deputy you are in the foresaid King|dom. This Epistle, saith Cambden, was dated in the yeare when L. Aurelius Commodus a second time,Spelman. ad A. D. 185. D. Duck de Vsu. Iris Civil. l. 2. p. 344. and Vespronius were Consuls: agreeing with the one hundred eighty third year of our Lord.
7. I was unwilling to forbear transcri|bing this Epistle though I cannot but ac|knowledge that the reasons proving it sup|positious seem to mee very concluding, as containing words tasting of the Norman La|tin and English Lawe: besids there are in it alledged Texts of Scripture according to S. Hieroms Translation, who liv'd two hundred years after Eleutherius: Again Eleutherius speaks to King Lucius in the plurall Number, according to a modern stile, not then in use, when he says, Vos estis Vicarius Dei: And lastly not any of our more Ancient Hi|storians, as Geffrey of Monmouth, Hoveden, c. doe mention it. But what ever becoms of this Epistle, certain it is that the story of King Lucius his conversion, c. does not depend on it, but is confirm'd by most Au|thentick Records, and unquestion'd Tra|dition.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2. Fugatius and Damianus sent back with King Lucius his Messengers.
3. Concerning Elvanus, one of the Kings Messengers.

1. THis Epistle, if indeed genuine, was brought back by the same Messen|gers whom King Lucius had sent to Rome, El|vanus and Medwinus: and together with them there came two other Holy Men commis|sion'd by Pope Eleutherius not only to in|struct and baptise the King, and those who imitating the Kings good Example, em|braced the Christian Faith; but also to or|der and establish all Ecclesiasticall affairs in the Kingdome. The names of those two strangers were Fugatius and Damianus.
2. The Employment about which these men were sent, argues them to have been sufficiently qualified thereto: And hence it is that our more Modern Historians, both Catholicks and Protestants,Pont. Vi|runn. l. 4. Godvvin de Epist. Win doe not doubt to stile them Prelats (Antistites) and Bishops. For indeed without such a Character and Authority how could they erect Bishop|ricks, consecrate Churches, dispense Orders, c?
3. It is not likewise without probability what other Writers say concerning our Brittish Messenger Elvanus, that he was consecrated a Bishop at Rome by Pope Eleu|therius. And whereas others contradict this upon a supposition that when he with his companion went to Rome, they were only Cathecumens, not baptis'd before that time: the contrary seems to appear, in that they

were formerly Preachers of the Christian Faith both to King Lucius and others: And besids, their Education sufficiently shews their capacity:Pits. at. 2. For, as a late Writer out of ancient Monuments asserts, they were of the number, of S. Ioseph of Arimathea's Dis|ciples, full of zeale to Gods glory according to knowledge, bred up in a contemplative life of Prayer, and Mortification at Glastonbury, where according to the Testimony of Adam Domerham, and Iohn a Monk, Authours of the Antiquities of Glastonbury, The twelve holy men companions of S. Ioseph,Antiq. Glas|ton. and their Suc|cessors in the same number did for a long time lead an Eremiticall life there, and converted great multituds of Pagans to the Faith of Christ. It is therfore very credible that so well a qualified person as Elvanus, was, as Tra|dition delivers, consecrated a Bishop at Rome, since no prejudice therby was done to the Apostolick Canons forbidding Neo|phyts to be assumed to so sublime a degree. As for his Companion Medwinus, the same Tradition informs us, that being endued with eloquence and fluency of speech, he was qualified there also with the Office of a Preacher and Doctour of the Christian Faith.


VI. CHA.VI. CHAP.

1.2. King Lucius, with his Queen, c. baptised.
3.4.5. c. Rites of ancient Baptism, signing with the Crosse, Vnction, Be|nediction of the water, Exorcismes, c.
11.12.13. These come by Tradition: confirm'd by S. Basile.
14. The Centuriators blaspemies against them.

1. FVgatius and Damianus being admitted to King Lucius his presence, acquain|ted him with the great ioy caus'd at Rome by his happy conversion, and how in com|plyance with his desire, they were sent by the Holy Pope Eleutherius to administer the Rites of Christianity. And hereupon both the King and his whole family with many others received Baptism according to the course and ceremony of the Roman Church. Thus we read in the Ancient Roman Mar|tyrologe,Martyr. Rom. 26. Maij. Pope Eleutherius brought to the pro|fession of Christian Faith many of the Ro|man Nobility: And moreover sent into Brit|tany S. Fugatius and S. Damianus, who bap|tis'd King Lucius together with his Wife, and almost all his people.
2. The Name of King Lucius his Queen baptised with him, is lost: but in ancient Records the memory of his Sister, call'd Emerita, is still preserv'd, who for her Ho|lines and constant suffring Martyrdom for Christ, ha's worthily obtain'd a place among the Saints. More shall be sayd of her here|after.
3. Now since all Ancient Histories agree that King Lucius was baptis'd solemny ac|cording to the Roman rite: it will be ex|pedient to declare the order and form therof, as may be collected out of the Monuments and Writings of this Primitive age, which was no doubt conformable to the Ordinances of the Apostles, as S. Iu|stin Martyr, S. Irenaeus and Tertullian, living in these times, doe confidently affirm against all Hereticks and innovatours, challenging them all to shew wherin any of the Apostolick Churches, and principally that of Rome, have deserted the ancient Faith and Disciplin established by the Apostles.
4. Now though to the essence and sub|stance of the Sacrament of Baptis'm there be necessarily required no more besides the due Matter, which is Water, the due Form of Words to be pronounced, and a right Intention of him who conferrs it: Yet that besids these there were even in those Primitive times adioyned severall other Sacred and ceremonious rites, very effectuall to apply and imprint the sence and vertue of that Sacrament in the minds of all those who received it, is most evident from ancient Tradition and the Writings of those times: Which additionary Ceremonies were commanded to be used in Solemne baptisms through the whole Church by S. Clement, S. Hyginus, S. Pius and other Pri|mitive Popes, by a prescription, no doubt, from the Apostles, though probably not used every where with due reverence.
5. But though those Ceremonies had not been expressly enioynd by the Apostles, who can iustly deny but that the Church and her Governours, (concerning whom our Lord saith, He that heareth (or obeyeth) you, heareth me) had sufficient authority to render the administration of the Sacraments more solemne and august, by ordaining externall Rites in the celebration of them, as long as they doe not command our beleif of the absolut necessity of them in themselves?
6. Of the sayd Additionary Rites the principall are these, 1. The arming of the person to be Baptised with the sign of the Crosse. 2. The annointing him on the head with holy Oyle: 3. and likewise with Chrism. 4. The solemn blessing of the Water design'd for Baptism. 5. The using of Exorcisms and holy Prayers for the driving away the Enemy of mankind. Of all these Ceremo|nies, at this day banish'd from all Con|gregations, but only the Roman and Greek Churches, and in regard of the first and

last, the English Protestant Church, there are evident proofs that they were in use at this time when our King Lucius was baptiz'd.
7. First touching signing with the Crosse, Tertullian is so expresse, even by confession of Protestants, and that not only in Baptism, but a world of other occasions, that it is to no purpose to quote him. This was the Character which distinguishd true Beleivers in that age from Infidells. And particularly with regard to King Lucius, there is to this day extant an ancient Coyn stampd with the Image of this King, his Name LVC. and the sign of the Cross, therby shewing him then to have been a Christian,Vsser. in Primrd. Ec. Brit. fol. 40. as Bishop Vsher acknowledges. The Medall remains still reserv'd in that Treasure of Antiqui|ties, the Library of Sir Iohn Cotton.
8. Next concerning the ceremony of holy Vnction of the person baptis'd, Tertullian gives an expresse Testimony in his Book co~cerning Baptism, where he also shews it to have been an ancient Tradition, Saying, Being baptis'd and come out of the Water,Tertll. de . cap. 7. we are an|nointed with consecrated Vnction, in imitation of the ancient Disciplin of the Iews, according to which men were annointed with oyle out of a hor in order to be therby consecrated Preists. By this Ceremony therfore was shewd that all Christians are by baptism made in a sort Kings and Preists, that is, in a spe|ciall manner consecrated to the service of God,Apocalyp. 1..  5.20. as S. Iohn saith.
9. Thirdly touching the Benediction of the Water deputed for Baptism, the Lu|theran Centuriators of Magdeburg doe re|late how S. Pius the first Pope of that name did consecrate a Baptisterium (or Font) in the Bath of Nvaus and S. Timothy mention'd before.
10. Lastly for as much as concerns Exor|cisms, or appointed forms of Prayer effe|ctuall to expell the Devill, not only Ba|ptism (before the receiving of which all the children of men are detain'd under his power, and from which they are freed by this Sacrament onely) but also on other occa|sions, when by Gods most wise and most holy permission sinners, yea and some|times even holy men are given up to be afflicted and possess'd by him. Of such Form of Exorcisms we have a world of witnesses in Antiquity,Tertull. de . Cy|pryan. Ep. 76. Oat. lib. 4. as besides Ter|tullian, in S. Cyprian, Optatus, the fourth Council of Carthage can. 7. c.
11. These Rites were practisd with much reverence in the Primitive Church, nei|ther was it any preiudice or hindrance to the said practise, that they were not commanded in Scripture being commended by the same authority of Tradition that Scripture was. Hence S. Basile who liu'd in the second age after this, most co|piously and elegantly discourses tou|ching these Rites of Baptism against the He|retiks of his time, true patterns of their Modern successours, who would reiect all things not expresly contain'd in Scripture. One passage of his pertinent to the pre|sent purpose wee will here transcribe.Basil. de Spiritu Sancto cap. 27.28.
12. Among the Doctrins (saith he) which are taught in the Church, some we have delivered in Writing, and again some others wee have received in a Mystery, that is; secretly derived unto us by Tradition from the Apostles. And both these have an equall force and ver|tue to produce Piety in our minds. Neither doth any one that has any small experience in Eccle|siasticall Laws, contradict these Traditions. For if wee shall once presume to reiect the Customs of the Church not delivered in Scri|pture, as if they were matters of small con|cernment, we shall on the same ground, though unawares, condemn likewise those things which are written in the Gospell, and esteemd necessary to our salvation. Or rather we shall endanger to make the whole Do|ctrin of Faith passe for a meer Name and shew, as if it had no Truth and reality in it.
13. Among those things which come to us by Tradition, without expresse Scripture, wee will in the first place take notice of a practise most commonly known to all, and that is the signing with the Crosse those who have professed to place their hope in our Lord. Now which of the Apostles hath taught this in writing? Again what passage in Scripture instructs us in our Prayers to turn our selves toward the East? Likewise as touching the words and Form of Invocation or consecration, when we shew the Bread of the Eucharist and Chalice of bene|diction to the people, which of the Saints hath left them to us in Writing? For wee doe not content our selves with the words rehearsed by the Apostle, o in the Gospell, but besides them we at that time pronounce many others both before and after consecration, which with|out scripture we have received by Tradition, and which we esteem of great moment for con|summation of that Mistery. Moreover we conse|crate the Water of Baptism, as also the holy Oyle of Vnction, yea and the person himselfe who receives Baptism: Now from what Writings doe we all this? Is it not only from a secret and Tacite Tradition? Again severall other Rites practisd in Baptism, as the Renunciation of Satan and his Angells, from what Scripture doe Wee derive them? Doe not wee observe all these things by instruction silently communi|cated to us by our Forefathers, on purpose that idle and curious persons should not know them? And this way of delivering such Myste|rious things was with great wisedome ordained by our Predecessours, who knew very well that by such silence and reservednes there was main|tain'd in the people's minds a reverence and Veneration of these Sacred Mysteries. Besides all this, since those who are not yet initiated by Ba|ptism into the Profession of Christianity, are for|bidden the sight of these Mysteries, what could be more unfitting then that such things should be publishd in writing?
A. D. 184.14. This Testimony of S. Basile touching the Mysterious Rites of Baptism, not invented in his Age, but derived from ancient Tradi|tion, being so expresse; instead of submis|sion of judgment to so venerable an Au|thority, the Lutheran Centuriators of Magde|burg vomit forth their blasphemies against the then certanliy immaculate Spouse of Christ, for thus they write, If all these things (touching the benediction of the Water and use of Oyle and Chrism in Baptism,Magdeburg. cent. 2. f. 111. c.) be true, say they, what can be more certain then that in those times the Mystery of iniquity did work in the Roman Church, polluting the simple Form of Baptism? They might haue as well added, in the Greek, in the African, in the Asiatick Churches, for in all these the same Rites were used.


VII. CHVII. CHAP.

1.2. Fugatius and Damianus destroy Idola|try: Erect Bishopricks, c.
3. How this is to be understood.
4.5. In place of Arch-flamens and Flamens are appointed Arch-Bishops and Bishops.
6. Among the Duids there was a sub|ordination.

1. AFter the administration of Baptism to the King, those holy Men Fugatius and Damianus, together with Elvanus and Medwinus, wholly employ'd themselves in Preaching the Gospell of Christ through all the Provinces of the Kingdom, in dispu|ting against the Superstition of the Druids, and demonstrating the vanity of their Idols, and the abominablenes of their horri|ble Sacrifices. And being attended with the Kings authority and zeale, they broke in peices those Idols, and easily perswaded the Brittains to renounce their ancient Supersti|tions: So that in a short space the Christian Faith and Worship of the only true God came generally to be had in honour and admiration.
2. Hereto Mathew of Westminster adds, that those blessed Teachers,Westmnster. A. D. having defaced Idolatry in a manner through all Brittany, they dedicated to the honour of one God and his Saints those Temples which had been founded to the worship of many false Gods, filling them with as|semblies of lawfull Pastours. Adding withall, That they constituted in diverse Citties of the Kingdome twenty eight Bishops, which were in subjection to three Arch-Bishops and Metropo|litan Sees. The Prime See was London, to which Loegria and Cornwall was subject, to wit, all the Provinces on the South of Severn, and Wales. The second was Yorck, to which was submitted Deira and Albania, divided from Loegria by the River Humber. The Third was the Citty of Legions, which had Dominion over Cambria or Wales, separated from Loegria by the River Severn. This Citty was anciently seated on the River Osca in Glamorganshire, as the old walls and buildings there doe shew.
3. Thus that Historian: herein following a more ancient Writer, Geffrey of Monmouth: with whom accord severall others men|tion'd by Bishop Vsher. And though he, as likewise Bishop Godwin, call this a vain inven|tion and Dream: as truly they may justly, if by that passage of our Historian were to be understood, that immediatly upon the first Conversion of the Brittains so many Bishops and Arch-Bishops were established in the Kingdom. Notwithstanding we may rea|sonably interpret the meaning to be, That in ordring the Ecclesiasticall Policy of the New Christian Church they, according to the pattern given, not only by the Roman, but all Eastern Churches, design'd a distin|ction of Dioceses and Provinces according to the number and splendour of the respective Citties: So that there being then in Brit|tany twenty eight Citties,Bed. hist. l. 1. cap. 1. as S. Bede says, compass'd with walls, and fortified with Towres and Gates, they ordain'd, that in future times, when the number of Pastours was multiplied, each Citty and Territory be|longing to it should be governed by a particular Bishop: Wheras in the beginning those who were consecrated Bishops, did not confine themselves to one place, but according to occasions and emergent ne|cessities transfer'd their solicituds and exercise of their Pastorall duties from one Citty and Province to another, till in fu|ture times the Harvest encreasing and la|bourers proportionably multiplying, every Bishop and Pastour in his Iuridiction was li|mited to his peculiar flock, with a prohi|bition to exceed his limits.
4. This sence of the forecited Histo|rians seems to be given by the Authour of the ancient Book belonging to the Mo|nastery of Abingdon,Liber Abing|don. ap. Vs|ser. in Pri+mord. Eccl. Brit. fol. 88. quoted by Bishop V|sher, where we read this passage, The Ve|nerable man Pope Eleutherius sent to the il|lustrious King Lucius his Messengers Faganus and Divianus, religious persons, and sufficient|ly instructed in the Christian Faith. These holy men did with great devotion baptize both the King himselfe and his people, who unani|mously embraced the Christian Faith: and with|all destroyed Idols, and built Churches to the worship of God. In a word, these two men in all things seeking the glory of God, and the propa|gation of Christian Religion, decreed that there should be appointed in all places parti|cular Ministers of the Omnipotent God, and that in those Cities where formerly resided Arch-flamens according to the Superstition of the Pagans, in their place should be es|tablish'd Arch-Bishops, and likewise to the

ordinary simple Flamens should succeed Bishops. Now at that time there were in the three most famous places, to wit, London, York and the Citty of Legions, ordained three Arch-Prelats, that is, Arch-flamens of the Pagan Super|stition.
5. This distinction and subordination of Arch-flamens and Flamens though we doe not find mention'd by Roman Writers to have been setled among the Idolatrous Brittish Preists under those Titles: Yet that the Druids had an Order and Degree among them,Caesar. Com|ment. lib. 3. and that there was one Principall per|son who enioyd a Domination over their whole Body, Caesar an eye-witnes of their customs doth acquaint us: From whence necessarily follows, that since one single person could not alone have an inspection over so many subjects so widely dispersed, it necessarily follows that he must have sub|ordinate Ministers to govern in severall places, and to give him an account of the state of their affairs. And indeed without such a subordination it was impossible they should subsist in one Body: insomuch as these blind Heathens have shew'd greater effects of reason and naturall prudence in composing their Congregation, then our Modern Sects, withall their pretended light of Scriptures, have done.
6. These Druid-Preists have the Title of Arch-flamens and Flamens given them, not by themselves, but by our Historians writing of them, in imitation of the Ro|mans, among whom those Titles were in use, so call'd from the Flamen, or flame-colourd Hat wherewith their heads were always coverd These Flamines among the Romans were of severall orders according to the Deities whom they served, as Iupiter, Mars, c. And each order had a distinct Cheif, and all these cheifs were subject to the Pontifex Maximus, a Title assum'd by the Emperours themselves.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of twenty eight Cities anciently in Brittany: The names of them out of ancient Authours.
7. In what sence Arch-Bishops are sad to have been in those times.

1 NOw wheras mention has been made of twenty eight Citties in Brittany, suitably to what our ancient Gildas has written,Gildas. that this Island was strengthned with twice ten and twice four Citties; it will not be a vain Curiosity to enquire what those Citties were which were design'd for the Sees of so many Bishops.
2. To give a full satisfaction to such an enquiry will be no easy matter, considering so great and frequent Vicissitudes of inha|bitants; tongues, governments and warrs, which since these times have succeded in this our Countrey from all which must needs follow great confusion of names and de|struction of places.
3. Our Ancient Historians have scattringly mention'd severall of them: and particu|larly, Nennius a Monk of Bangor, and the Arch-deacon of Huntingdon, have made a collection of them. But the most exact Catalogue of them is afforded us by the late learned Bishop Vsher described out of two very an|cient Manuscripts extant in Sir Iohn Cottons Library, which he sayth he co~par'd with nine Written Copies more in which the old Brit|tish names were se down together with an interpretation of them,Vsserin Pri|mord Eccl Brit. f. 9. as followeth.
4. These are the Names of all Citties in Brit|tany, in number twenty eight. I. Car Guint|guic, which perhaps is Norwich, call'd by the Brittains Cair Guntins: Or rather it is Winwick in Lancashire. The old Glossary of Nennius in|terprets it Winchester. II. Car Mincip, or Muni|cip, erroneously written in Henry of Hunting|don, Mercipit. This is Verolam a Town neer S. Albans, which, as we read in Tacitus, was anciently a Free-town, enioying the Priviledge of the Citty of Rome. III. Car Liqualid, or Legevit, or Lualid: This is Luguballia, call'd by Huntingdon Car Leil, now Carlile. IV. Car Meguaid, or Meigod, at this day Mei|vod in the Province of Montgomery. It was anciently call'd by Ptolomy and Antoninus, Mediolanum. V. Car Colun or Colon, which Geffrey of Monmouth and Huntingdon call Colchester, situated on the River Coln, and it is in Antoninus his Itinerary call'd Colo|nia. VI. Car Ebranc, by others Car branc, it is York. VII. Car Custeint. This Citty was formerly called Seiont, near Caernarvont, being the same which Antoninus calls Se|guntium. But it chang'd its name into Car Custein, because Constantius the Father of Constantin was buried there Whose body, saith Mathew of Westminster, was found at Caernar|von near Snowdon in the time of King Ed|ward the first after the Conquest, and by his command honourably buried in the Church. VIII. Car Caratauc,Math. West|monast. ad A. D. 1283. or Car Caradoc, in the borders of Shropshire between the Rivers Temdus and Colunus, Where King Caractacus rais'd against the Roman Generall Ostorius a great Rampire, but was there defeated by him. There a Citty being afterwards rais'd, was from his Name called Car Caradoc. So that Geffrey of Monmouth and Huntingdon are much mistaken, who interpret this Citty to be Salisbury. IX. Car Grant, or Granteceaster, or Grantbridge, now Cambridge: taking its name from the River Grant or Gront. X. Cair Maunguid or Manchguid, suppos'd to be the same Which by Antoninus is called Mancunium, or Manchester in Lancashire: others conceive it to be Manduessedum, or Manchester in Warwickshire.

XI. Car Lundein, by others Car Lud, now Lon|don. XII. Car Guorthigirn, a Citty situated in Radnorshire, and called from King Vortigern, who conceild himself there, being afraid of pu|nishment for his horrible crimes, but was found out by Divine Iustice, and by Lightning burnt to|gether with his Citty What the prime name of this Citty was in King Lucius his dayes, does not appeare. XIII. Car Ceint, or Kent: now called Canterbury: formerly Dorobernia. XIV. Car Guiragon or Guorangon, that is Wigornia: The Welsh call it Car Wrangon, the English Worcester. Antoninus calls it Branonium, and Ptolomy Bra|nogenium. XV. Car Pers, otherwise Portcester, from the commodiousnes of the Haven: It is now called Portsmouth. XVI. Car Daun, named by Antoninus Danus: now Doncaster in Yorkshire. XVII. Car-Legio, taking its name from the the twentieth Legion by Iulius Agricola's ap|pointment quartering there. It is at this day called Chester, or Westchester. XVIII. Car Gu|ricon or Guoricon, or as Cambden writes it Car Guaruinc, now warwick, so called because it was a Garrison of the Romans, which in the Brittish Language is called Guarth. XIX. Car Segeint, or the Citty of the Segontiaci, which were the people who first surrendred themselves to Caesar: It is now called Silcester in Hampshire. XX. Car Leon or Vsk, so call'd because the second Brittish Legion brought over by Vespasian was quartered here. It was seated in Monmouthshire: but is now quite demolished. XXI. Car Guent, called by the Romans Venta Belgarum (to distinguish it from severall other places called Ventae:) be|ing in the Province of the Belgae, a people which came out of lower Germany, and seated them|selves in Hampshire; it is now called Winche|ster. XXII. Car Brito, a Citty placed between the Rivers Avon and Fome: it is now called Bri|stol. XXIII. Car Lerion: by the Saxons after|ward called Legecestria: now Leicester. XXIV. Car Draiton: the situation whereof is now un|certain, there being many places of that name. Bishop Vsher thinks it is the same now call'd Dragton in Shropshire. XXV. Car Pentavel|coit, seated on the River Ivel in Somershire, now called Ivelcester, or Ilchester. The same learned Bishop writes it Car Pensavelcoit, supposing it to be Pentsey in Sussex, where William the Con|querour first landed. XXVI. Car Vrvac, cal|led by Antoninus Vriconium, and by the Saxons Wrekenceaster, at this day Wroxcester in Shropshire. XXVII. Car Calemion, or as Mr. Cambden reads it, Car Calion, which he thinks to be Camelet in Somersetshire, where remains the footsteps of an ancient Roman Camp; and where many Roman Coyns are frequently found. XXVIII. Car Luitcoit, or rather Lindcoit; by Antoninus and Ptolomy call'd Lindum: by the Saxons Lindecollinum, at this day Lin|coln.
5. These are the twenty eight Citties of Brittany: all which cannot yet be asser|ted to have been extant, at least under those names, in the dayes of King Lucius: since among them there are severall which took their Title from persons living in af|ter-ages, as Car Vortigern, Car Casteint, c. And Car Draiton seems to have been a Sa|xon building.
6. Henry of Huntington in the account of them varies somewhat from this, and in the place of some of these omitted by him, substitutes others, as Car Glou, that is, Glocester: Car Cei, or Chichester: Car Ceri, that is Cirencester: Car Dorm, call'd by Antoninus Durobrivae, at this day Dorn|ford in Huntingdonshire: Car Dauri, or Car Dorin, now Dorcester: And Car Mer|din, still remaining with the same name, from whence a Province in Wales takes its title. These are the Citties design'd to be the Residences of Arch-bishops and Bi|shops, when the number of Pastors should be so encreased as to supply them.
7. Now whereas here is mention'd the Title of Arch-bishops, we are to take no|tice that that Title was not in use as yet in the Church, in the dayes of King Lu|cis: but yet the same latitude of Ecclesiasti|call Iurisdiction was from the beginning un|der the name of Metropolitan Bishops. For the Policy of the Church being squared ac|cording to the Civill: as the Governours of Citties which were Metropoles, exerci|sed an Authority over other Citties also depending on them, so did the Bishops like|wise of those Citties over the whole Pro|vinces.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1.2.3. Of Saint Theanus first Bishop of London.
4.5. Elvanus his Successour.

1. HOw many of those twenty eight Citties were in those dayes sup|plied with Bishops, is uncertain.A. D. 185. Besides Elvanus consecrated Bishop at Rome, our Ecclesiasticall Records mention only one Brittish Bishop more, called Theanus, the first Metropolitan Bishop of London, where our devout King Lucius built a Church con|secrated to S. Peter, and seated in the place called Cornhill.
2. The truth of this is testified by an ancient Table belonging to the same Church, wherein was this Inscription, In the year of our Lord one hundred seaventy nine, Lucius the first Christian King of this Land founded the first Church at Lon|don, namely the Church of Saint Peter in Cornhill. He established likewise there an Archiepiscopall See, and the prime Church of the Kingdom: and so it continued for the space of four hundred years, till the coming of S. Au|gustin

the Apostle of England, c.A. D. 186. Thus the Inscription.
3. But Iocelinus a Monk of Furnes testifying this holy Prelat Theanus to have been the first Archbishop of this new erected See of London, makes him to be the Founder of this Church, for thus he writes, Thean or Thea|nus is sayd in the time of King Lucius to have built the Church of S. Peter on Cornhill in Lon|don,Iocelin. Furn. being assisted therein by Ciranus the Kings Cheif Cupp-bearer.
4. After Theanus his decease, the time of whose government in that See is uncertain, there succeeded him therein S. Elvanus, who generally is acknowledged the second Metropolitan of London. But whether in those times there was in Brittany any Iurisdiction properly Metropoliticall, which must presup|pose an erection of severall subordinate Dio|ceses, cannot by any of our ancient Ecclesia|sticall Monuments be asserted. Vpon which grounds Malmsburiensis saith,Malmsbu|riens. There is no cer|tainty in what place was seated the Archiepis|copall Iurisdiction in the time of the Brittains, before the entry of the Saxons.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. S. Fugatius and Damianus return to Rome to obtain a Confirmation of their Acts.
3.4. Recourse to the See Apostolick, ancient.
5 6. At their return they bring a bles|sed Crown, and a Letter to King Lu|cius.
7. The extent of King Lucius his Dominions
8. Of Archflamens and Flamens.

1. AFter three years succesfull labours in this new Vineyard of our Lord,A. D. 186. these two Holy Apostolick Preachers Fuga|tius and Damanus returned to Rome to give an account to S. Eleutherius of the affairs of Brittany. This is testified by our ancient Historians, Geffrey of Monmouth, Roger Wendo|ver, the compiler of the History of Rochester, as likewise a Brittish ancient Poet, taking the name of Gildas, and quoted by Bishop Vsher.
2. But most expresly by Matthew of West|minster, whose words are these:Westman. In the year of Grace one hundred eighty six, the Blessed Pre|lats Fugatius and Damianus returned to Rome, and obtained from the holy Pope Eleutherius a Confirmation of all they had done in Brittany. And having perform'd this, the foresayd Do|ctours came back into Brittany, accompanied with many others; By whose inctructions the Na|tion of the Brittains being confirm'd in tho Faith of Christ became illustrious. The names and Acts of these men are found in the Book which our Historian Gildas wrote of the Victory of Au|relius Ambrosius.
3. That it was the practise of Christian Churches, especially in the West, upon seve|rall occasions to have recourse to the Chair of S. Peter, many examples occurre in the Ec|clesiasticall History, and this even from the beginning of Christianity. We mention'd formerly a Message sent from the Christians of Brittany by S. Beatus to Rome for a more per|fect instruction in the Christian Faith.Sup. lib. 1. c. 5. And about this time of King Lucius,Hieron. de Script. Ec|cles. in Ire|naeo. the Church of Lyons in France sent S. Irenaeus to this Holy Pope Eleutherius for resolving certain Que|stions about Ecclesiasticall affairs, saith S. Ie|rome.
4. This they did partly to shew their de|pendance and subordination to the supreme Tribunal of the Church, as likewise for the preservation of Vnity, of which the Chair of S. Peter was always acknowledged the Center. But the present Church of Brittany having been constituted a Church by the zeale and authority of this blessed Pope Eleu|therius, there was a greater necessity and ob|ligation of recourse to him for the confir|mation of those Ordinances which had been made by his Delegats.
5. Among other memorable passages touching the Answer sent by Pope Eleutherius to this Message of King Lucius, this is one, That Fugatius and Damianus presented the King from him with a Crown blessed by him. This is asserted by a late learned Protestant Lawyer, William Lambard,Lambard. in|ter ges R. Edvvard. who professes that in his search among the Ancient Lawes of England, for many ages hid in darknes, he produced this: adding withall that besides a Crown bless'd by this Holy Pope, he like|wise ordain'd the limits of the Brittish King|dom, and withall prescrib'd the Duty and Right of a Christian King, saying thus, A King being the Minister and Delegat of the Su|preme King, is appointed by God for this end that he might govern this earthly Kingdom and people of our Lord, and above all that he should vene|rate and govern his Church, defending it from all who would injure it: that he should root out of it and utterly destroy all evill doers.
6. Roger Hoveden four hundred years be|fore M. Lambard, transcribing the same pas|sage out of the Ancient Laws of King Edward, onely differs from him in this, That where mention is made of a Kings Office toward the Church, he leaves out the word, Re|gat.
7. As touching the limits of King Lucius his Kingdom, which this Authour saith was prescribed by Pope Eleutherius, whether from thence it came that all the Northern Provin|ces of the Island (afterwards called Scotland,  governed by a King of their own Nation) were subiect to the Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction of the Metropolitan Church of York, cannot

now be determin'd.A. D. 188. Polydor Virgil out of an|cient Scottish Records affirms that this subje|ction was (a principio) from the very beginning of Christianity,Polyd. Vergil lib 9.  l. 13. and that the Bishop of Glasco was to receive his consecration from the Arch-Bishop of York (More Maiorum) by an immemoriall custom of their Ancestors. But of this hereafter.
8. One passage more relating to this Answer of Pope Eleutherius, is recorded by Martinus Polonus,Martin. Po|lon. a A. D. 88. who writes thus, The fore|said Holy men Fugatius and Damianus by an Apostolicall Mandat of the Pope ordained that Bishops should be placed in those Citties where formerly there were Flamens, and Arch-bi|shops, where Arch-flamens, Wherby he signifies that the Pope confirmed the Ordonan|ces formerly made by these his Legats.


XI. CH.XI. CHAP.

1. Severall Churches built by King Lucius.
2.3. As Westminster, deputed for the buriall of Princes.
4. A second at York: then the Cheif Citty.
5. A third at Cae~r-leon in Wales.
6.7. It is question'd whether that was a Metropolitan See.
8. A Church built at Dover.
9. An Episcopall See said to be erected at Kungresbury in Somersetshire: bu that is doubtfull.

1. IT hath already been declared that King Lucius, presently after his Baptism, or Theanus consecrated first Bishop of London, built a Cathedrall Church to the honour of S. Peter on Cornhill in London. Now after the return of Fugatius and Damianus there were severall other Churches erected: The names of many of which are still extant upon ancient Records.
2. The first of these was the Church of West|minster: concerning the first foundation wherof Sulcardus a Monk wrote a Book which he dedicated to Vitalis constituted Abbot there by King William the Conquerour:Sulcard. ap. Camdenum in Tinbant. From whence some have collected, that in the same place had been formerly erected an Idol-temple consecrated to Apollo, which by an Earthquake in the raign of Antoninus Pius was cast to the ground.
3. Another Authour called Iohn Fleet, who wrote in the year of our Lord one thou|sand four hundred forty three, adds in consequence to Sulcardus, out of an Ancient Chronicle written in the Saxon tongue, that this place was from the days of King Lucius destin'd for the burying place of our Kings, as wee see to this day. His words quoted by Bishop Vsher are these,o. Fletusapud Vsserium de Primord. fol. 129. From the Primitive age of Christian Faith among the Brittains, that is from the days of Lucius their King, who in the year of Grace one hundred eighty four is sayd to have received the Divine Law of Christ, and together with it the Baptism of holy Regenera|tion, this place of Westminster was founded and consecrated to the honour of God, and specially deputed for the buriall of Kings, and a Treasury or Repository of their Royall Ornaments. To the same effect writes Radolphus Niger,Rad. Nig. A. mund 538. affir|ming that it was built in the last year of (Mar|cus Aurelius) Antoninus: but that afterward the sayd Abbey was destroyed: which was again repaired by S. Edward the Confessour, and richly endowed. In which testimony is implied that from the beginning there were placed in it a Convent of Monks: Concerning whose Rule and Institute, we shall treat hereafter.
4. A Second Metropolitan Church at this time was erected at the City of York, which a learned Writer, Philip Berterius, quo|ted by Bishop Vsher, esteems in that age the prime Citty and Church of Brittany:Phil. Bert. apud Vsser. de Primord. f. 9. Whose opinion the Bishop seems to approve, saying, Though as this day London be the most noble Citty of the whole British Kingdome: and though it has been in former ages celebrated by Ammianus Marcellinus, as an ancient Town, and by Cornelius Tacitus as famous for Marchan|dise and abord of strangers: Nowithstanding the most learned Berterius positively affirms, that York was much rather the ancient Metropolis of the Diocese of Brittany, not only as being a Co|lony of the Romans, but because there was placed the Emperours Palace and Courts of Iudgment. And hence it is that Spartianus in the life of the Emperour Severus calls it by way of preeminence, The Citty. The same thing is likewise further proved by this, That in the Synod of Arles assembled under Constantin the Great, among the subscriptions the name of Eborius Bishop of York precedes Restitutus Bishop of London: Though I am not ignorant that in the ordring of such subscriptions regard was had rather to the anti|quity of the persons, then dignity of their Sees.
5. As for the third Metropolitan Citty of Cair-leon upon Vsk,Huntingdon. Henry of Huntingdon thus writes of it, In Cair-legion there was an Arch bishoprick in the times of the Brit|tains: but at this day one can scarce discern any remainders of its walls, except a little where the River Vsk falls into Severn.Girald. And Giraldus Cam|brensis adds, that in the same Citty there were in ancient times three Noble Churches: One bearing the Title of the holy Martyr Iulius, which was beautified with a Monastery of Virgins con|secrated to God: A second founded by the Name of his companion S. Aaron, ennobled with an illustrious Quire of Canons: And the Third fa|mous for being the Metropolitan See of all Cam|bria.
6. Notwithstanding however this Citty of Cair-leon, being in the times of King Lucius the Civill Metropolis of those parts, might

then to be design'd from an Archiepiscopall See:A. D. 187. yet we doe not find in History any an|cient Bishops with that Title. Yea the Church of Landaff seems to have enjoy'd that Title before Cair-Leon. Concerning which Church thus writes Bishop Godwin, The Cathedrall Church of Landaff,Godvvin in Landav. as some report, was first built by King Lucius, about the year of Grace one hun|dred and eighty. Notwithstanding I doe not find any Bishop there before Dubritius: (who was consecrated Bishop there by S. German Bishop of Auxerre) and was by the King and whole Province elected Arch-bishop over all the Welsh Brittains, saith the Authour of his life extant in Capgrave.
7. Vpon these grounds it was that in suc|ceeding times the Bishops of Landaff refused Canonicall obedience to the Metropoli|tans of Menevia, or S. Davids, as appears by a Protestation made by Bishop Vrbanus in the Councill of Rhemes before Calixtus second Pope of that name: part whereof is cited by Bishop Vsher out of the Register of that Church,Vid. Vsser. Prid. fol. 65. as followeth: From the time of our ancient Fathers, as appears by the handwriting of our Holy Patron Teiliavus, this Church of Lan|daff was first founded in honour of S. Peter, and in dignity and all other Priviledges was the Mi|stresse of all other Churches. Thus it remained till by reason of intestin seditions and forraign war, in the days of my Predecessour Herwold, it became weakned, and almost deprived of a Pa|stour, by the cruelty of the inhabitants, and in|vasion of the Normans. Yet there always re|main'd in it Religious men attending to Divine service. After this, partly by reason of the neighbourhood of the English, from whom we differed nothing in matters touching Ecclesiasti|call Ministery, as having been bred and instru|cted together; and likewise because from most ancient times, that is, from the time of Pope E|leutherius, there hath always been a Bishop of this place (subject to none:) After the coming of S. Augustin into Brittany, the Bishop of Lan|daff has always been subject and obedient both to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and also the King of England. Thus argued the sayd Bi|shop Vrbanus, but what proofs he had does not appear. Certain it is that in all Records at this day extant, there is no mention of any Bishop actually sitting at Landaff before Dubritius: Whence it is that the erecting of that See is attributed to S. Germanus by Mr. Camden,Cmden. in . saying, Germanus and Lupus French Bishops, having repress'd the Pelagian Heresy largely spread in Brittany, erected Landaff into a Cathedrall Church, preferring thereto the most holy man Dubritius to be the first Bishop, to wit, in the year of our Lord four hundred thirty and six.
8. Besides these the same King built a Church at Dover: concerning which Bishop Vsher writes in this manner,Vsser. de Primord. fol. 130. That in the time of King Lucius there was a Chappell erected in the Castle of Dover, and dedicated to the honour of our Saviour, is related by Leland, out of the Annals of the same Citty, venerable for their great antiquity. The same thing we likewise read in a Commentary touching the first beginning of the sayd Castle, where it is sayd, That in the one hundred sixty  one year of our Lord King Lucius built a Temple to Christ on the height of Dover-Castle, for the maintaining of which he assign'd the Tribute of that Haven. And whereas in a later Chronicle of Dover we read, That a|mong other liberalities besto'wd by King Lucius on God and his Church,Ibid. one was the building of a Church in the Castle of Dover to the honour of S. Mary the glorious Mother of God, where both the King and his people, as likewise their Catho|lick Successours, received the Sacraments and Holy Rites of Christian Religion: This does not prejudice the foregoing Record: for all Churches are primarily erected to the ho|nour of Christ, and in consequence thereof to the honour of his Saints.
9. There are severall other sacred places and Churches, which in old Records pretend to King Lucius, as their Founder, but whose pretentions cannot in reason and prudence be admitted. Thus the Authour of the Chro+nicle of Glastonbury,Chron. Gla|ton. ap. Vs+ser. in Pri|mord. fol 6 written about four hun|dred years since, relates, That in the one hun+dred eighty seaventh year of our Lords Incarna|tion, the Bishoprick of Somerset took its begin|ning, being erected by the Holy men Fugatius and Damianus: and for a long time the Epis|copall See was placed at Kungresbury: in which very many Bishops sate successively till the dayes of Ina King of the West Saxons: the number, gests and times of which Bishops can no where be found. But in the time of the foresayd King Ina Daniel, who as we have received by Tradition, was the last who sate in the Chair of Kungres|bury, transfer'd that See, which had continued six hundred years or more at Kungresbury, to a Town, then call'd Tethescine, but now Welles, which was given by King Ina, who also consented to the Translation. The said Daniel was the last of the Brittains who sate in that Bishoprick.
10. This Story, at least for as much as con|cerns the antiquity of the Episcopall See of Kungresbury, seems to want a solide founda|tion. For that Town took its name about the year of our Lord seaven hundred and eleaven, from a holy man called Cungar, a son of a Constantinopolitan Prince, who coming into Brittany, and desirous to live a retired life, was kindly received by King Ina, who bestow'd on him that portion of Land, call'd afterward by his name, and withall built for him a Mansion and Oratory there. As for the Church of Wells, it was then built by King Ina, and endow'd with Lands by Kenul|phus the Successour of King Ina in the year seaven hundred and sixty six: But saith Bi|shop Godwin, it was then not a Cathedrall, but Collegiat or Monasticall Church: and was e|rected into an Episcopall See in the year nine hundred and five: in which the first Bishop was Adelmus.



A. D. 189.
XII. CH.XII. CHAP.

1.2. King Lucius richly endows Churches with possessions.
3.4. Priviledge of Sanctuary: long continued in Brittany.

1. KIng Lucius as he was very zealous and munificent in building Churches to the Glory of God, he was no lesse in liberall endowments and Priviledges bestow'd on them.Math. West|monast. d A. D. 187. To this purpose Matthew of Westmin|ster, call'd Florilegus, writes thus, In the year of Grace one hundred eighty seaven, Lucius the glorious King of the Brittains having seen the true Worship of God largely spread in his King|dom, liberally bestow'd possessions and territo|ries on Churches and Ecclesiasticall persons, and also firmly established them with Charters and immunities. Such liberties he gave to Churches and their Precincts, that if any Malefactour made his refuge to them, he became safe from all injuries of any man whosoever. Thus living happily in the love of God and his Neighbour, he governed his Kingdom in great peace. A Mo|dern Historian Richard White adds, That this King having destroyed all the Idols and worship of false Gods,Richard. Vi|tus in Hist. l. . transfer'd all their possessions on Christian Churches, which he further enrich'd with more Lands, and greater immunities: as knowing very well that greater honour is due o the houses of the true God.
2. We may from hence in some degree compute this King Munificence to Gods Church: for since he judged that the Wor|ship of the true God ought to be more splen|did and sumptuous then that of their pro|fane Idols had been, by searching into an|cient Monuments we shall find, that the former Brittish Idolatry had been very costly, and consequently the true worship much more. To this purpose Geffrey of Monmouth, and after him Ponticus Virunnius thus writes, At London the Pagan Flamens sacrificed (yearly) forty thousand cowes,Galfrid. Mon. hist. l. 4. c. 1. a hundred thousand sheep, and fowle of all kinds so many as could scarce be numbred: And besides all these they offred thir|ty thousand savage cattle, stags and other beasts bred in the woods.
3. As for the Priviledge of Sanctuary gran|ted by King Lucius to Churches, he seems therein to have been a pattern to the Em|perour-Constantin and other Christian Princes in future Ages, who by their Laws gave un|to the Church the like prerogative. Hence the Fathers of the Councill of Orleans above eleaven hundred years since, made this Ca|non to renew the use of former Canons and Lawes, Concerning Manslayers, adulte|rers,1. Conc. Au|relian. can. 3. c. and theeves who shall seek refuge in a Church, we now ordain that that shall be obser|ved which the Ecclesiasticall Canons have de|creed, and the Roman Law appointed: to wit, that it shall not be lawfull for any man by force to draw them from the Courts of Churches or hou|ses of Bishops.
4. This respect and reverence which King Lucius shew'd to the Church and Church|men was for many ages continued in Brit|tany, more then in any Christian Nation be|sides:Girald. amb. in dscript. Cambriae cap. 18. These Priviledges of Sanctuaries were ex|tended not only to Churches and Church-yards, but much further, according to limits and bounds determined by Bishops: Insomuch, saith Gi|raldus Cambrensis, that by the indemnity of such immunity, far exceeding the indulgence al|low'd by the Canons of the Church (which grant security only to the body and members of offen|ders) many were induced to commit great out|rages, and from such places of Refuge did grei|vously molest both their Countrey, and even their Princes themselves. Whence appears with what religion the Ordinances of King Lucius were received and practised by po|sterity.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. c. A famous Church and Mona|stery erected by King Lucius at Winche|ster: with Possessions and Priviledges: which continued till the raign of Dio|cletia.
6.7. Of what Institute the Monk in those days were.
9. Severall decays and restitutions of that Monastery.

1.A. D. 189. THE Piety of King Lucius in the sixth year after his conversion did more gloriously shew it selfe in the foundation and plentifull endowment of a Church and Monastery at Winchester, then call'd Ventae Belgarum: Which Church, saith Bishop God|win, was consecrated by Fugatius and Da|mianus on the twenty ninth of October, in the year one hundred eighty nine.
2. Moratius a very ancient Authour, quo|ted by Thomas Radburn,Ap. Vsser. de Primord. fol. 1055. Harpsfeld, Bishop Vsher, c. gives us a perfect description of this Church and Monastery: And first as touching the dimensions and bounds of it, he writes thus, as he is quoted by Thomas Radburn Bishop of S. Davids, The measure of the Church founded by King Lucius (according to Moratius in his first Book and second Chap|ter) was in length two hundred and nine paces: in breadth fourscore paces, and in heighth nine|ty two paces. From one corner crosse the Church to the opposite corner were one hundred and thirty paces. The situation of the Monastery on the East side of the Church towards the Temple of Con|cord, was one hundred paces in length, and in

breadth towards the New Temple of Apollo, orty. On the Northpart it was one hun|dred and sixty paces in length, and ninety eight in breadth. On the West side of the Church there were in length one hundred and ninety, in breadth one hundred. On the south coast there were in length four hundred and fifty paces, and in breadth five hundred and eighty. On this side was seated the Episco|pall Palace, as likewise the habitation of the Monks.
3. In the next place the same Authour Mo|ratius describes the large possessions where|with this Church and Monastery were endowed by King Lucius,Ap. Harps|feild. hist. c. . f. 6. saying, The li|mits of their possessions were extended twelve miles round about the Citty of Winchester, reaching so far on every side: In which space there were on each quarter seated eight wealthy Villages. Now if one Church possessed so large 2 Territory, we may collect how richly all the Churches of Brittany were endowed even in those Primitive times.
4. The forementiond Thomas Rudborn in the greater Chronicle of the Church of Win|chester further shews the speciall affection that King Lucius bore to that Church,Ap. Vsser. in Prid. f. 126. and the Immunities which he bestowd on it, The glorious and most Christian King Lucius (saith he) perceiving how by the two holy men, Fu|gatius and Duvianus, his Kingdom did wonder|fully increase in the Worship of God taught by true Faith, and being therfore replenishd with great ioy, he converted to a better use the posses|sions and territories formerly possess'd by the Temples of the Flamens, transferring them to the Churches of the Faithfull: and he not only added more and larger Mannors and lands, but advanced them likewise with all sorts of Privi|ledges. And particularly touching the Church of Winchester, which in his affection he in a spe|ciall manner preferd before others, he raisd it from the very foundations. And before he had perfected the whole work, he built a little habi|tation, an Oratory, Dormitory and Refectory for the Monks design'd by him to dwell there. Ha|ving finishd the entire building in the fifth year after his Conversion, the foresayd Prelats and Monks, Fugatius and Duvianus, dedicated it to the honour of our holy Saviour on the fourth of the Calends of November,lgt it. in the year of Grace one hundred Sixty nine, and filld it with Monks, who devoutly served our Lord there: constituting the Abbot of the place a certain Monk called Dentus. The same excellent Prince likewise re|solved to conferr on the Bishop and Monks of that Church of Winchester all the possessions and farms which anciently belonged to the Flamens of the same Citty, together with all their Priviledges and Immunities.
5. What those Priviledges were, the same Authour a little after thus declares,ibid. f. saying, The foresaid most Christian King Lucius bestow'd on the said Church newly founded by him the Suburbs of the Citty of Winchester, together with the Priviledge of Dunwallo Molmutius. Which Dunwallo (as Moratius, Gildas and Geffrey of Monmouth also testify) was the sixteenth King of the Brittains: And being extremely zealous in his Heathenish Super|stition, he enacted Lawes, famous till the dayes of King William the Conquerour under the Title of Molmutian Lawes; by which he or|dained; That the Citties and Temples of their Idoll-Gods, as likewise the high wayes leading to them, together with the Farms of their Tenants and husbandmen should enioy the immunity of Sanctuary: Insomuch as if any Malefactour should seek refuge there, he might safely depart, though his adversary were present. Now by means of such endowments and Priviledges the Church of Winchester enioyd its possessions in all tranquillity, dayly singing the praises of God the space of one hun|dred and two years, to wit, from the first year of the most Christian King Lucius (his Conversion) to the second year of the Tyrant Diocletian. Thus writeth this Au|thour: though he faile somewhat in his Chronology: Which defect is rectified by the ancient Authour of the Book of An|tiquities of the Church of Winchester,Ap. Vsser. in Primord f. 128. who numbers exactly one hundred years from King Lucius his Conversion to the first year of Diocletian, during which time the said Monks quietly served God in their Mona|stery.
6. If any one have the curiosity to en|quire what the Rule and Institut of these ancient Monks were, the foresaid Tho|mas Rudburn will satisfy him, presently adding, That S. Faganus and Duvianus filld that Church with Monks devoutly serving and praising God, and profess'd according to the Rule delivered by S. Mark the Evange|list.
7. Now the order and manner of the Rule prescribed by S. Mark is thus decla|red by Cassianus an ancient Writer of the Church:Cassian de Cocnob. In|stit. lib. 2. c. 5. In the beginning of the Christian Faith (saith he) a very few, and those of approved sanctity, were dignified with the Title of Monks. Which men as they receiv'd their Rule of living from S. Mark the Euan|gelist, first Bishop of Alexandria of blessed Memory, they did not content themselves with retaining the order of living practis'd by the Primitive Christians, concerning which wee read in the Acts of the Apostles,Act. 4.That all the multitude of beleivers were of one soule: Neither did any one esteem that which he possessed to be his own: but they had all things common. For those who were posses|sors of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the price, laying it at the Apostles feet: Which was divided to every one accor|ding to their need. But besids this, the ancient Monks aspired to other practises more sublime.
For retiring themselves into the most secret places of the suburbs, there they lead a life so austere and with such rigorous abstinence, that even those who were

strangers to Christian Religion were astonish'd at it: For with so wonderfull fervour they atten|ded day and night to the reading of holy Scri|pture, prayer and labouring with their hands, that neither the appetite, nor so much as thought of meat, did interrupt their abstinence, except every second or third day: and then they recei|ved food, not to satisfie their desire, but meer ne|cessity: And neither did they this till after Sun-set: so dividing their time, as to make the Light accompany the exercise of their spirituall Meditations, and darknes the care of their Bo|dies. These, and besides these, many other more perfect and sublime were the practises of the An|cient Monks. Thus Cassianus.
8. Such were the Monks who first pos|sess'd the Church of Winchester: and in such holy exercises they continued till the Tem|pest of the persecution raised by the Tyrant Diocletian dissipated them. After which in a short time they were restored, and the Church consecrated by Constantius Bishop of Winche|ster, in the year of Grace three hundred and nine, taking its new name from S. Amphi|balus, who together with Saint Alban was crow'nd with Martyrdom: at which time the Abbot was named Deodatus. Hence it is that Gildas, the most ancient of all our Hi|storians, mentions it under that Title, where he relates how the sons of Mordred to avoyd the cruelty of Constantin fled thither: But in vain: For the Tyrant not regarding the Sanctity and Priviledge of the place, took the sons of Mordred,Math. Westm. A. D. 543. and murdred one of them be|fore the Altar of the Church of S. Amphibalus at Winchester, whither he had fled for Sanctuary.
9. The same Church afterward suffred an|other Ecclipse, when the barbarous Infidell-Saxons profan'd and layd wast all the sacred places of this Island. But not long after, the same Saxons, having by Gods mercy embraced that Faith which they formerly persecuted, repaired with advantage all the ruins they had made: And particularly this Church and Monastery of Winchester (called after|wards de Hida) was restored with far grea|ter splendour and magnificence, then ever before. And thus it, with the rest, continued for many Ages, fortified with the Charters of Kings, encreased by the Devotion of the people, secured by the Bulls of Popes, and the Curses of Prelats against all tyrannous usur|pations, till by the schism, avarice, lust and fury of King Henry the eighth, more fatall to the Church then the savage cruelty of hea|thenish Danes or Saxons, they were all swal|low'd up at once in a common destruction. Thus the Prophecy of our blessed King Edward the Confessour was fulfilled,Vid. Mona|sticon. pag. 61.2. who in a Charter by him bestow'd on the Monastery of Westmin|ster, concludes it with this clause, (Haec Char|ta in sua libertate permanebit, quam diu Chri|stiani nominis timor  amor in hac nostra gen|te perseveraverit) that is, This our Charter shall remain in its full force and liberty, as long as the fear or love of the very name of Christianity shall continue in this our Na|tion.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. CH.

1.2. c. Seminaries and Schooles of Learning instituted by King Lucius: the principall of which was Bangor: both a Schoole and Monastery.
5. Of the pretention of Cambridge hereto.

1. OVR devout King Lucius, being also wise in his devotion, was not con|tent with a wonderfull bounty to build and endow Churches and Monasteries, in which Almighty God might be zealously worship'd,  the people plentifully instru|cted in Christian saving Verities: but more|over extending his providence to posteri|ty: he provided Seminaries of Learning and Piety, for the institution and education of those who were afterwards to succeed in the Office of administring Divine Mysteries, and teaching the people.
2. Among these the most famous was the Monastery and Schoole of Bangor in North|wales, in which, as S. Beda saith, at the co|ming of S. Augustin into England there were more then two thousand Monks. Concer|ning which our Countreyman Bale thus writes,Bale. cent. ii. cap. 53. Bangor was first a Colledge of Christian Philosophers: which having as such continued from the time of King Lucius, for about the space of three hundred and fifty years, Congellus changed it into a Convent of Monks, under the Title of the Order Apostolick, and having been the Prefect of the said Colledge, became the first Abbot of the New Monastery there, in the year of Christ five hundred and thirty.
3. That Bangor was in King Lucius his time design'd for a place of literature, may be proved by other ancient Records: But whereas this Authour says that Congellus changed it into a Monastery, is certainly a mistake, wherein Iohn Pits follows him: The ground of which mistake is, the con|founding of this Monastery of Bangor in Wales, with another of the like name in Vlster a Province of Ireland, in which lived this Congellus, or as the Irish Writers call him, Comgallus, and from which issued the famous Bishop S. Malachias, whose life is elegantly written by Saint Bernard, who there likewise mentions this Comgallus. Now true it is that about the year five hundred and thirty, the said Irish Monaste|ry of Benchor became an Episcopall See, into which one called Daniel was first consecra|ted: which seem'd to be a second ground of Bales mistake touching the change made in our Brittish Bangor.
A. D. 190.4. Most probable it is therefore that our Bangor was in King Lucius his time, and afterward, both a Monastery and School of Learning: and that as anciently the Druids were, according to Pliny, great lovers of literature, flourishing in all kinds of know|ledge, so likewise the Christian solitary Re|ligious men who succeeded them, spent some part of their time in learning and charitably teaching others. So that to them especially may be attributed the propaga|tion of the Christian Faith in Brittany,Antiquit. Brit. fol. 8. which, as the Protestant Authour of our Brittish Antiquities says, being preached here in the first times of the Apostles, was not only firmly retain'd, but became in every age more encrea|sed and dilated. He might as well have ad|ded, That as the true Faith was principally conserved by Monasteries, so with the decay and ruine of Monasteries, our holy Faith like|wise was extinguished.
5. Our famous Vniversity of Cambridge therefore will not take it ill, if an alum|nus of her Sister suspend his assent to her pretention of being founded an Vniversi|ty by King Lucius.K. Arthur Dipla. And as for the Charter of our famous Brittish King Arthur, in which there is a Grant of Exemption from Taxes and other civill burdens, to the end that the Do|ctours and Schollers there might peaceably and without distraction apply themselves to their Studies, as the glorious King of Brittany Lucius decreed, who embraced the Christian Faith by the preaching of the Doctours of Cambridge: This Charter is obnoxious to so many ex|ceptions, that without injustice it may be attributed to the Authour of the other He|roicall Gests of the same King Arthur.


XV. CH.XV. CHAP.

1.2. Silence of Historians touching the Gests of King Lucius during his last ten years.
3.4.5. German Records affirm King Lucius to have been the Apostle of Ba|varia, Rhetium, c.
6.7 Three persons call'd by the same name of Lucius.
8.9. Of a supposed son of Constantius call'd Lucius or Lucion: which is ma|nifestly disproved.
10.11. It was only our King Lucius who converted severall Regions in Ger|many.

1. HAving collected a Narration of the glorious Actions of our illustrious King Lucius (as they lye scattred in severall Authours and Monuments) for the space of seaven years after his Conversion,A. D. 190. that is, to the year of Grace one hundred and nine|ty, coincident with the ninth year of the raign of the Emperour Commodus: though our Records of good credit doe testify that he prolonged his life ten years further, yet there is no mention at all in them of any of his actions either publick or private; and excepting one Authour,Galfrid. Monum. l. 5. c. 1. Claudico|striae. Geffrey of Mon|mouth, not any of them declare where he was buried. And as for the sayd Geffrey, who tells us that he ended his life at Gloce|ster, and was honourably buried in the Church of the prime See: his pen does so abundant|ly flow in matters that regard the glory of his Nation, (as in the Acts of King Arthur, c.) that his Authority in domesticall af|fairs is of no great moment.
2. This silence therefore of our own Writers may be an argument inducing us to attend to the Testimonies of forraigners, who will acquaint us with the succeeding actions of King Lucius, not inferiour, yea far more glorious then any hitherto related, though perform'd by him, not in the quality of a King, but a private person employing him|selfe in communicating to other Nations those celestiall blessings which himself, and by his assistance, his own people formerly enjoyed. Now what such forraign Authours testify concerning him, will no doubt seem at least incredible, if not ridiculous to those worldly minds, which setting too great a value on the present temporall vanity of human glory and wealth, judge of Primitive Christians, whether Princes or private per|sons, by the dispositions of after Ages, and because in these times, wherein sensuality, avarice and a contempt of spirituall things doe raign, no such examples can be found, they therefore conclude all relations in an|cient Monuments touching Princes who have prefer'd the poverty of Christ, and the gai|ning of soules to him before temporall a|bundance, and the satisfaction of nature, to have been the fabulous inventions of men.
3. Notwithstanding, mens incredulity shall not deterre me from relating what is extant in the ancient Monuments of severall Churches touching this matter. Generally all Authours which have written of the Ec|clesiasticall affairs of Bavaria, Rhetia, Vindeli|cia and the Cantons of the Swizzars do agree in this, that a certain holy person called Lucius preached the Gospell of Christ in Ba|varia, and some other parts in Germany, from whence he proceeded to Rhaetia, in which Countrey he dyed and was buried in the Citty of Curia, or Chur, situated in the Coun|trey of the Helvetians or Grisons.Gasp. Busch. apud Rader. in Bavaria Sancta. This, saith Gaspar Buschius quoted by Raderus, is certain: But who this Lucius was, of what family or na|tion, cannot certainly be determined. He adds, that this Lucius, who ever he was, having prea|ched among the Bohemians and other Regions bordering on the River Danubius, was banish'd from thence, and came into Rhaetia, where he

built for himselfe a poor narrow cottage, c.
4. Aegidius Tscudus writing of the An|cient Rhaetia, denotes the precise time when this Holy Apostolicall man came into those Countreyes, saying, that about the year of Christ one hundred seaventy six, Eleutherius being Bishop of Rome, Lucius, out of a zeale to plant the Christian Faith is sayd to have come into Bavaria, which he converted to the Faith, and afterwards retired into Rhaetia,Rader. in Bavonia Sancta. c. But Andreas Presbyter, as Raderus testifies, de|termins this to have hapned more lately: For says he, about the year of our Lord one hun|dred eighty two, Eleutherius the twelfth after S. Peter, being Pope, and in the raign of the Em|perour Commodus, Lucius being poor, naked, and therefore lesse encombred, undertook a voyage in|to forraign Nations; and by his preaching and Mi|racles is beleiv'd to have converted to the Faith of Christ the parts about Bavaria, and the whole Countrey of Rhetia situated among the Alpes. Aubertus Miraeus agrees in the same Chrono|logy:Miraeus in Fastis Belg. 21. Decemb. Alfled. in Chronol. c 27. and lastly Alfledius most accuratly re|ferrs this to the year of our Lord one hun|dred and ninety.
5. Such a concurrence of Testimonies, to which may be added the ancient Records of those Nations and Churches, together with the Ecclesiasticall Office of the Cathedrall Church of Curia (or Chur:) all these leave the mat|ter unquestionable, at least thus far, that those Nations were about that time con|verted by one called Lucius. Which Nations being seated not far from the place where, about that time, was performed the fore|mention'd Miracle of the saving the Empe|rour Marcus with the whole Roman Army from almost inevitable destruction, by the prayers of his Christian souldiers, no doubt they were thereby powerfully enclined to the embracing of the Christian Faith.
6. But now who this Lucius was, and out of what Countrey he came, is a dispute a|mong learned Authours, who produce three onely of that Name: 1. Lucius of Cyrene, mention'd in the Acts of the Apostles, and probably in the Epistle to the Romans too.Act. 13.1. Rom. 16.21. 2. Our Brittish King Lucius. 3. Lucius, or Lu|cion a pretended son of Constantius Chlorus and Helena. And to each of these the Con|version of those Nations is by some Writers ascribed.
7. As touching the first of these, namely Lucius of Cyrene a Prophet and teacher at Antioch in the time of the Apostles, that he could not be the Apostolick Converter of those German Nations seems unquestionable, both from the ancient Martyrologes, Eastern and Western, affirming him to have lived and dyed in the East: and likewise from the ancient Records of those Churches in Bava|ria and Rhaetia, which doe not pretend to such an Antiquity of the Profession of Christianity.M. Velser|rerum. Au|gust. lib. 6. So that the learned and No|ble Authour, Marcus Velserus thus confi|dently writes concerning him, The trifling assertions of those who confound Lucius of Cy|rene with the Brittish Lucius, deserve not to be answer'd: since they doe not consider how vast a space there is between their times.
8. And whereas our Hollingshead,Hollings|head in De|script. of Britt. out of I know not what Apocryphall Writings, would entitle to the Conversion of those Nations another Brittish Prince, Lucius or Lucion, pretended to be the second son of Constantius by our Brittish Lady Helena, who is sayd to have been banished by his Father for killing his elder Brother, and after his banishment to have repented, and embra|ced the Christian Faith, which he afterward preached in Germany, c. the fabulousnes of this report discovers it selfe, not only by the silence of all Ancient Historians li|ving in, and after the times of Constantius, not any one of which make the least mention of such a Prince, but on the con|trary expresly affirm that Constantin was the only son born to Constantius by Helena. Thus writes Eusebius,Euseb. vit. Const. lib. 1. cap. 15. familiarly acquainted with Constantin, in the first Book of his Life: To the same effect writes the Panegyrist Eumenius in his Oration pronounced to Con|stantin: as likewise Liveneius descanting on another Panegyrick of an uncertain Au|thour, spoken to the Emperours Maximian and Constantin. And lastly Baronius, who confidently affirms,Baron. A. D. 306. n. 21. That Constantius begot of Helena any other son or daughter besides Constantin, cannot be found recorded any where.
9. To this unanswerable Proof against the assertion of Hollingshead, follow'd here|in by Broughton,Brought. cen. 3. cap. 2.  12. may be added the gene|rall consent of the ancient Monuments and Writers of Germany and Rhaetia, agreeing in this, that the Conversion of those Nations was effected above one whole century of years before the age of Constantin.
10. The first Lucius being therefore excluded for his too great antiquity, and the third, as living, if at all, much too late for such a work: it remains that the Conversion of those Nations must be ascribed only to the second Lucius, our first Pious Chri|stian King.
11. And indeed him only doe the most Ancient Monuments and Writers of those Churches and Regions acknowledge for their Prime Apostle: Insomuch as Raderus a lear|ned Authour, and very diligent in the search of old Records,Rader in Ba|varia Sancta. confidently pronoun|ces, That the Beleif is most certain grounded upon the Testimonies of Authours most an|cient and of prime Note, that it was our Brit|tish King Lucius who converted those Nations. The same is with the like confidence as|serted by Aegidius Tscudus in his Treatise concerning Antient Rhetia, by Andreas Pres|byter, by Petrus Mersaeus, by Hertmannus Sche|del, Stumfius, Aubertus Miraeus, Nauclerus, Not|kerus Balbulus in his Martyrologe and Baronius.

To these may be added a Testimony of yet greater authority taken from the Church of Curia (or Chur) in whose Ecclesiasticall Office King Lucius is commemorated as the first Doctour and Apostle of that Countrey, the place of whose buriall is there venerated, though his Relicks have been dispersed through se|verall places in Germany. And in the last place, the same is confirmed by that Trea|sury of the Records of all Churches, the Roman Martyrologe, out of which every year on the third of December is chanted,Mart. Rom. 3. Decemb. The Commemo|ration of S. Lucius King of the Brittains, at Curia a Citty of Germany, who was the first among Kings which received the Faith of Christ, in the time of Pope Eleutherius.


XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

1.2.3. Of the iourney and Gests of S. Lu|cius in his Apostolick Office.
4.5. His death and buriall in the Citty of Curia, or Chur.
6. Of S. Emerita, a sister of King Lu|cius, who accompanied him: her Mar|tyrdom.
7. Dempsers ridiculous pretention that King Lucius as buried in Scotland.

1. HAving from authorities of great weight asserted the Apostleship of this our Pious King, in pursuance therof we will collect out of ancient Writers some of his particular Gests and suffrings in the dis|charge of the said Office.
2. He having resolved to consecrate the remainder of his old age to the service of Christ, pass'd first into France, landing at Bo|lign a Citty of the Mrini, where, saith Malbranque,Malbranc. de Maii. he first began his office of prea|ching the Faith of Christ: and from thence made his progresse through the Region of the Nervians (the Countrey of Liege) to Triers in Germa|ny. After which the next place bless'd by his presence and Charity was Ausburg (Augu|sta Vindelicorum) where he converted to the Faith a Noble Cittizen call'd Campestrius, with his whole family. But there the Devill rais'd against him a great persecution: for, saith Nauelerus, the people out of a hatred to a Religion formerly unknown by them,Naucler.  2. gen. 7. pursued the preacher of it with stones, and afterward cast him into a pit: Out of which he was secretly drawn by some Christians there, and conducted to the Citty of Curia, where he ended his life by Martyrdom.
3. From Ausburg S. Lucius went to Regino|burgum (or Ratisbon) where he efficaciously spread the seed of the Gospell. And having spent almost all his strength in such works of Charity to others, he desired to end his life in solitude, quietnes and prayer.A. D. 196. For which purpose he retired himself into the moun|tainous countrey of Rhetia: and, saith Tscudus, having pass'd over the hill,Tscudus de pris hae|. under which is si|tuated the Castle called Gutenberg, which to this day retains the name of S. Lucius his Cliff, he came into the Region where now the Citty Curia (or Chur) is placed, together with his devout si|ster S. Emerita, who presently after for prea|ching the Christian Faith suffred Martyrdom at Trimas or Trimontium, distant from Curia the space of two or three miles. But S. Lucius repos'd himselfe in a certain Grot in the Mountain above the Citty Curia, where he taught the Faith of Christ. The place where he built a little Oratory doth still testify his Sanctity and abode there: for in memory thereof there was afterward founded a Monastery of Norbertins (Praemonstratenses) which took its name from S. Lucius, as Aubertus Miraeus and Raderus doe affirm.
4. As touching the manner of S. Lucius his death, the same Aegidius Tscudus writes thus,Idem. ibid. At last Lucius was slain neer to Curia in the Castle call'd Martiola, by the infidell inhabi|tants and the Prefect of that Region. Notwith|standing other Authours affirm that he died in peace: though the honour and Ti|tle of a Martyr cannot be denyed him, since anciently, as Baronius saith, it was communica|ted not only to such as by a violent death for Christs honour were snatchd out of this world,Baron. A. D. 194. but likewise to those who for the confession of the Faith suffred any torments, though they did not consummate Martyrdom by death.
5. The precise year of the death of this glorious King is by Florilegus determin'd to be the year of Christ two hundred and one:Florilegus A. D. 201 which was the seaventy eighth year of his Raign, and the eighty eighth of his life. Wherto the learned Chronologist, Bishop Vs|her likewise accords. His words are these, In so great a debate among Writers,Vsser in Pri|mord. my iudgment doth incline to beleive that King Lucius ended his life in the first year of the third Century after Christ. And the grounds of this perswasion are, because I observe that not only the Annals of the Church of Salisbury, and the Chronicle of the Brittains abbreviated, as likewise the London Tables, but also Roger Wendover, Mathew Paris, and Mathew of Westminster, together with the History of Rochester, doe agree that he dyed in the year of our Lord two hundred and one.
6. His sacred Relicks have been dispersed in severall places of Germany:Rader in Ba|varia Sanct. and to this day saith Raderus, are venerated in a Church of the Franciscans and another of the Iesuits at Ausburg. Which argues that he dyed not in Brittany, but Germany. Therfore although our Citties of Glocester and Win|chester have boasted themselves to have been the Repositories of some parts of the body of this Pious King, it is more like|ly that, considering their near relation to him, they should procure them from the

Church of Curia,A. D. 191. then that the German Chur|ches should obtain them out of Brittany.
7. Now wheras in the Passage cited out of Aegidius Tscudus mention was made of Saint Emerita, the devout Sister of King Lucius, and companion of all his travails and dangers, and how in the Countrey of the Helvetians she added the Crown of Martyrdom to the garland of Virginity: our Brittish Martyrologe thus commemorats her, At Trimas in the territory of Curia this day,Martyr. Aug. 4. Decemb. being the fourth of December, is celebrated the Feast of S. Emerita Virgin and Martyr, the Sister of Lucius King of the Brittains, who together with her Brother went into Germany,A. D. 193. and for confession of the Christian Faith being persecuted by the infidells of that countrey, consummated her glorious Mar|tyrdom by fire, about the year of our Lord one hundred ninety three. The entire history of her life may be read in the Breviary of the Church of Curia. Mention is made of this holy Virgin and Martyr by Isengrenius, and Hermannus Schedelius in his Chronicle.
8. But Philippus Ferrarius in his Catalo|gue of Saints omitted in the Roman Marty|rologe,Phil. Ferrar. in Catal. Sanct. Vsser in Pri|mord. fol. 137. being mislead by Dempster, a Writer most ridiculously partiall for his Scottish Na|tion, as Bishop Vscher observes, assigns a place in the Western parts of Scotland call'd Tri|montium, and now Attetish, for the place of this Virgins Martyrdom, and in the Scottish Calander her commemoration is appointed on the twenty sixth of May. Which assertion is so evidently contradicted by many au|thentick Records of severall Churches, and by Authours of such unquestion'd integrity, that it deserves not a serious confutation.


XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. S. Fugatius and Damianus preach the the Gospell in Brittany.
3.4.5. They retire to Glastonbury: and rebuild it: establishing a succession of Monks. They find there the Holy Crosse, c.
6. The place of their buriall, uncertain.

1. HAving thas largely set down the Gests of our Holy King Lucius, the first among all Christian Kings, we will adioyn hereto such particulars as our ancient Mo|numents furnish us with all touching the two Holy Legats Fugatius (or Phaganus,) and Damianus (or Diruvianus) sent by the Vene|rable Pope Eleutherius to baptise the sayd King, and to settle the affaires of the New Brittish Church.
Malmsbur. in Antiq. Glast.2. Now concerning these two glorious Saints thus writes Malmsburiensis out of the Ancient Records of Glastonbury, Phaganus and Dervianus came into Brittany to preach the Gospell, who travell'd over the whole Island, tea|ching and baptising the inhabitants.
3. Moreover in the same Records we find how these two Saints having been in|form'd that about a hundred yeares before, S. Ioseph of Arimathea and eleaven of his companions had in some measure spread the seed of Christian Faith in Brittany, and at last retired themselves to Glastonbury, where they died: hereupon they visited that sacred place, call'd the Isle of Aval|lonia, which, saith Cap-grave, was then become a covert for wild beasts,Cap-grav. in Ioseph. that formerly had been a habitation of Saints: till it pleas'd the Bles|sed Virgin to reduce to the memory of Chri|stians her Oratory erected there.
4. These two holy men therfore penetrating into this solitary Isle,Antiq. Glast. as Moses the Lawgiver of the Iews did into the inmost parts of the de|sart, by the divine conduct they found there an ancient Church built by the hands of the Disciples of our Lord, which the Supreme Crea|tour of heaven declar'd by many Miraculo signs that himself had consecrated it to his own glory, and to the honour of his most Bles|sed Mother. The foresaid holy men having found this Oratory, were fill'd with unspeakeable ioy: and there they continued the space of nine years, employing all that time in the praises of God. And searching diligently that sacred place, they found (the Holy Crosse) the fi|gure of our Redemption, together with severall other signs declaring that that place had been formerly the habitation of Christians. After|wards being admonished by a Divine Oracle, they considered that our Lord had made choice of that place above all others in Brittany, wherin the intercession of the most Blessed Vir|gin should be implored in all necessities. A perfect relation of all which things they found in ancient Writings there: to wit, How when the Apostles were dispersed through the world, S. Philip with many Disciples came into France, and sent twelve of them to preach the Faith in Brittany: the which being admonish'd by a Revelation of an Angell, built the fore|said Oratory, which afterward the Son of God dedicated to the honour of his Mother: And like|wise how three Kings though Pagans, had given them twelve portions of land for their suste|nance. Thus we read in the Antiquities of Glastonbury.
5. The same Records doe further testify, how these two Holy men added another Oratory built of stone,Ibid. and dedicated to the honour of our Lord and his Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul: and on the top of the Mountain raised a Chapell to the ho|nour of S. Michael the Archangell. Moreover to continue the service of God there which had been interrupted, they established a succession of twelve devout persons in memory of the first twelve com|panions of S. Ioseph: Which number continued till the coming of S. Patrick, the Apostle of Ire|land, into that place, c.
6. Now whether these two Apostolicall men dyed at Glastonbury,Ibid. or no, is not certain, saith the Authour of those Records: though that they

continued there the space of nine years, is delivered by certain Tradition. Most proba|ble it is that they dyed and were buried there, considering that the space of nine years contains almost the whole time of their abode in this Island: so that it seems to have been a place of retirement chosen by them from their first coming, to which they usually had recourse for a refreshment from their labours, and where by the exer|cise of Prayer and Contemplation they ob|tain'd a greater measure of the Divine Spirit to enable them more perfectly to discharge their Apostolicall Office.Martyr. Ang. 24. Maij. A. D. 191. In due gratitude to whose Charity the Brittish Church hath made an anniversary commemoration of them on the twenty fourth of May: consigning their death to the year of our Lord one hundred ninety and one.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2.3. After King Lucius his death, the Romans permit not any of his family to succeed: and why.
4.5.6.7. Commotions in Brittany: com|pos'd by Vlpius Marcellus: to whom Pertinax succeeded, who was Emperour next after Commodus

1. AFter King Lucius his death, which hapned in the seaventh year of the Emperour Severus, we doe not find any of his family, or indeed of the Brittish blood to have succeeded him. Hence it is that Iohn Fordon a Scottish Chronologist thus writes,I. Ford Ch. Sc. l. 2. c. 31. Lu|cius King of the Brittains being dead (or as he says elswhere, Not appearing) the Royall offspring ceased to raign in that Kingdom, Tri|buns being there placed by the Romans to go|vern the Island: by Tribuns understanding the Emperours Legats commanding the Ro|man army.
2. Hector Boethius likewise a French Histo|rian having recounted how King Lucius, as being a favourer of the Romans, had been permitted by the Emperours benevolence to rule:H. tth. hist. ib. 5. he adds, That after his death the Romans considering that the Brittish Kings had been Au|thours of many seditions among themselves, and rebellions against the Romans: therfore by a pu|blick Decree they prohibited any of the Brittish blood for the future to enioy the Title and digni|ty of a King.
3. Now though not any of the Roman Hi|storians mention such a Decree,A D. 201. yet that King Lucius had no Successours of his blood is certain. Probably he had not children: Or if he had, their exclusion from the crown might be caused by his Profession of Chri|stianity. However in our following Narration we shall be obliged to referre occurrents to the raign of the respective Roman Emperours then living.
4. And as for the Roman or Brittish civill affaires during the Raign of Commodus, la|sting thirteen yeares, in the beginning wherof King Lucius became a Christian, the Roman Historians afford us little to furnish this our History. Some few particulars shall here breifly be mention'd.
5. In the fifth year of Commodus his raign (saith Dio,Dio. hist. l. 71. In Commodo. who liv'd in those times) the Caledonian Brittains, having made an erup|tion through the wall which divided them from the more southern Provinces, wasted all the countrey before them, and slew the Roman Ge|nerall together with all his soldiers. Wherewith Commodus being terrified, sent against them Vl|pius Marcellus, a man of admirable vertue and courage: who returned upon those barbarous people their injuries with advantage, and heaped on them most greivous calamities and losses. For which good service through the Emperours envy he scarce escaped being kill'd. Notwithstan|ding for that victory Commodus assumed the sirname of Britannicus among his other Titles, as appears by ancient Medalls, men|tion'd by Camden and Speed.
6. Two years after,Ibid. Helvius Pertinax who succeeded Commodus in the Empire (though he raigned but a few months) was sent into Brittany, whither he brought back five hun|dred soldiers sent by the Army there to Rome to complain of the injuries offred them by Perennius the Emperours favourite, whom they boldly killd in his presence.
7. Pertinax having with much adoe quiet|ted the Brittish Legions,Capitol. in Pertinace. Id. in Albino. made it his suit to the Emperour, to be eas'd of the government, alledging for his principall reason that the Army hated him for his care to preserve mili|tary discipline. Wherupon Commodus in the eleaventh year of his raign sent him a Suc|cessour Clodius Albinus, upon whom like|wise he confer'd the Title of Caesar. Whose a|bode in Brittany was but short: for presently after, Iunius Severus was sent Generall thither: and Commodus us'd all his endeavours to kill Albinus. But dying shortly after, Per|tinax who succeeded him, sent back once more Albinus into Brittany.





THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAP.

1. The Conversion of Brittany celebrated by Origen.
2. The Picts and Caledonian Brittains follow their Example.
3. Their King Donaldus, c. brought to the Faith by Fulgenius a Brittain
4.5. c. Dempsters fabulous narra|tion.

1. _THE Conversion of Brittany was so famous in the Church of God,Orige. in Ezech. that Origen who flou|rished in Egypt not long after these times, in his commentary on Ezechiel, thus celebrates it: When did the Countrey of Brittany before the coming of Christ consent in the Worship of the only true God? But now the whole Earth doth with ioy glorify our Lord for the Churches there erected in the utmost bounds of the world, so that in all its limits it doth aspire to celestiall happines: And in another place, The power of the Divine Grace of our Lord and Saviour is present likewise,Id. hom. 6. in Luc. both to those Na|tions in Brittany which are divided from our world, and likewise those in Mauritania, yea with all People under the Sun, which have be|leived in his name.
2. And as the fame therof was largely spread among Churches far remote from Brittany, so the Example also had a happy influence on the neighbouring Nations. For in the Northern regions of Brittany di|vided from the civilis'd part by the Empe|rour Hadrians wall,A. D. 20. and which always liv'd in hostility with the Romans, the Faith of Christ, within two years after the death o King Lucius, was not only preach'd, but ef|fectually subdued the minds both of the Princes, and generally of their subjects: which gave occasion to Tertullian,Terll.  Iudaeos. c. 7. who liv'd in these times, to say that those Provinces of Brit|tains to which the Roman Armies could not gain accesse, were yet conquered by our Saviour, sub|mitting themselves to his Faith.
3 Concerning this Conversion thus writes Hector Boethius,Boeth. histor. lib. 5. The like mind did Christ our Lord, the Prince and Authour of peace, give to King Donaldus, insomuch as rejecting the wor|ship of Devills, he addicted himselfe to solide Piety. For when Severus was Emperour of the Ro|mans, the sayd King obtained of Pope Victor, the fifteenth after S. Peter, to whom he sent his Em|bassadours, that severall men illustrious for lear|ning and Religion should be sent into Scotland to baptise himselfe, together with his wife and chil|dren, who profess'd the name of Christ. The Scot|tish Nobility following their Kings example, re|nounced their former impiety, and embracing the Religion of Christ were likewise purified by Bap|tism. The year wherin the Scots by the mercy of Almighty God were call'd and receiv'd the light of true Piety, was the two hundred and third after

the incarnation of our Lord.A. D. 203. To same purpose write Duraeus,Duraeus cont. Whittac. fol. 412. Gord. A. D. 20. Dempst. in Apparat. l. 1. cap. 6. Gordonus and generally all the Scottish Authours.
4. As touching the manner of this Con|version, Dempster citing an Ancient Scottish Historian, Fordonus, saith, That is was effected by Paschasius a Sicilian sent into Scotland by Pope Victor, who instructed the Nation in the rudi|ments of Christianity. And the same, saith he, he proves out of an ancient Book of the Church of Lismore, which is the most ancient among the Scottish Records. The same Authour adds, that never any people was with lesse trouble converted to Christ: for so great a concourse there was unto those Holy Teachers, that there were not Preists enow to baptise them. Moreover the sayd Fordo|nus delivers, that this Paschasius leaving behind him his Companions to instruct that rude people more diligently in the Mysteries of Christianity, return'd back to Rome, to give thanks to that most holy Pope in King Donaldus his name, for so singular a blessing confer'd on his Nation. But before he arriv'd there, Victor was departed this life, whose Successour was Zephirinus. Whence it manifestly appears, hat Scotland was converted to the Faith in the last year of Pope Victor. Not|withstanding in the Scottish Menology pub|lish'd by the same Dempster, this Paschasius is sayd not to have been sent into Scotland by Pope Victor, but to have been Donaldus his Messenger to the Pope, as Elvanus and Medwi|nus were sent by King Lucius to Pope Eleuthe|rius, for there it is thus written,Dempst. in Menol. Scot. 12. Dec. At Dorn in Southerland, on the twelfth of December is ce|lebrated the memory of Paschasius who was sent a Messenger to the Holy Pope Victor by King Do|nald, and obtain'd of him Christian Teachers to instruct the Nation.
5. This is the account given by Dempster, as he pretends out of Fordonus. But so little to the satisfaction of the learned Bishop V|sher, that he professes,Vsser. Pri|mor f. 13. In those Copies of Iohn Fordon which I have perused, not any of these things related by Dempster are extant: so that I begin to suspect the truth of them, aswell as of the rest which he quotes out of a namelesse Book of Lismore, and I know not what other Manuscripts.
6. The person, to whom Dempster as|crib's the glory of having first inclin'd the mind of King Donaldus to embrace Christia|nity, was one called Fulgentius or Fulgenius,Dempst. hist. l. 6. n. 547. whom he will have to be the Authour of a Book entitled, of the Faith of Christ: which Book, says he, if it were now extant, Scotland would be furnish'd with a Monument to declare the Antiquity and fervour of its Primitive Faith, wherin it would yeild the preeminence to few Kingdoms in Europe, and would be superiour to many. This Fulgentius, saith he, was sirnamed the Bold, and in the raign of Septimius Seerus dyed at York in England. He it was whose faith|full assistance King Donaldus made use of, being the first King who stamp'd his Coyn in brasse, gold and silver with the sign of the Crosse.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2.3. Confutation of Dempster.
4. Who Fulgenius was.
5. A Message sent by King Donal|dus to Pope Victor.
6. More concerning Fulgenius.

1. THIS relation made by Dempster, though for the substance of it it be agreable to ancient Records, yet to embel|lish it he employs so much of his own inve~|tion, moved therto by a partiall affection to his own countrey, that to a Reader not alto|gether ignorant he rather disgraces the whole story, and renders Truth it selfe sus|pected, then gains beleif to his own impu|dent additions.
2. And first, wheras he makes Donaldus to be a King of the Scotts, and Fulgentius to be of the same Nation, he cannot alledge for this the least ground in any ancient Authours who wrote of these times. The Name of Scots was not yet heard of any where: much lesse in Brittany. The Roman Historians acknow|ledge no other inhabitants in this Island, but only Brittains: That is the Common name, though in the severall Provinces they be distinguished by severall Titles. And particularly touching those Northern Brit|tains by Hadrians wall separated from those which were under the Romans dominion, Dio an Historian of these times, though he cu|riously prosecutes the progresse of the Em|perour Severus through these countreys, finds only two Nations in these parts against whom he fought, the Maeares and the Cale|donians, to which, saith he all other names are refer'd (as the Vecturiones, and Deucalidonians, c.) the former neighbouring to that wall, and the other possessing the remainder of the Island to the Northern Sea. As for the name of Scots, there is as yet no mention of them, either in him, or any other ancient Writer. Where as if there had been any such distinct Nation here, Severus who was most ambitious to multiply his Titles, would not have faild to have inserted Scoticus among them. We shall ere long determine when that Nation entred those parts, and when they changed the Name of those Provinces.
3. It is without question true that such a Prince there was in those times as Donaldus,Rosier tm. 6. in Stem, o tha. who by Rosierius is sayd to be the Brother of Ethodius: but whether he was a King of that whole Countrey of Brittany not yet con|quered by the Romans, or only a Prince of some one Province there, cannot certainly be determin'd. A Tradition likewise suffi|ciently grounded approves the Conversion of that Prince, with his Family and subjects, about two years after the Death of King Lu|cius. Which is evidently confirmed by the forecited testimony of Tertullian in a Book

written not above seaven years after it hap|pned.
4. As for Fulgentius, or as the Brittains call'd him, Fulgenius, he was a Southern Brit|tain, not only a Subject of King Lucius,Boeth. lib. 5. but of the same Royall family: descended, saith Boethius, from the ancient blood of the Brittish Kings, and who together with his King and kinsman embraced the Christian Faith. He was not a Writer of Books, as Dempster fains: but a Prince of high Spirits and courage. And being such an one, no marvell if after so great an injury done to his family, which was excluded from the Succession by the Romans, he refused to continue their subject, and fled to their profess'd Enemies the Cale|donian Brittains beyond the wall.
5. Fulgenius therfore was doubtles the first who instill'd into the mind of Donaldus a love of Christian verities, and suggested to him the same way and meanes to obtain a more perfect instruction, which his Kinsman King Lucius had lately made use of, which was, to direct Messengers to the Bishop of Rome, Pope Victor, with a request that he would send authoris'd Teachers to instruct that Nation, and establish a Church there. This the King perform'd, and accordingly Paschasius with other his companions were sent into those Northern Provinces, who by the Divine assistance converted to the Faith such infinite numbers of the Inhabitants, that there were not Preists enow to baptise them.
6. It seems the reputation of Fulgenius his courage and conduit was so great, that King Donaldus made him Generall of the for|ces with which he broke into the Roman Provinces, causing a terrible desolation there: And being opposed by the Roman Generall, he defeated his Army, and kill'd both him and in a manner all that follow'd him. So great a calamity hence follow'd through all the Southern pats of the Island, that the Empe|rour Severus himselfe thought his own pre|sence and authority necessary to secure the Province. Hereupon he brought with him an Army so formidable, that the Maeates and Caledonians made an offer to surrender themselves. But the Emperour ambitious of fame by a conquest of them, entred their countrey, where his cheif difficulty was to find his enemies; for by reason of the vast mountains, woods and marishes, (all the passages wherof were known to the Brittains) the Romans became oft entangled in their march, and sometimes received considerable defeats: Notwithstanding by their constancy and advantage in numbers the Roman Army did not interrupt their progresse, till they had peirced to the utmost bounds of the Island confining on the Nor|thern Sea. There was no decisive battell at all fought between them: Notwithstanding the Emperour esteem'd his exploit of mar|ching through the whole countrey, which never any Enemy before had done, to be so illustrious, that he therfore assum'd among his other Titles that of Britannicus: Which likewise was communicated to his two Sons Bassianus and Geta, his Successours in the Empire: though only Bassianus accompa|nied him in the invasion, Geta being left in the Southern parts to compose Civil affaires.
7. As for the Noble and pious Brittain Fulgenius, he is sayd shortly after to have ended his life at York, then the Imperiall Citty. It is doubtfull whether he returned thither as a Prisoner, or upon composition. For some of the Princes and Provinces yeil|ded themselves to the Emperour: though the greatest part avoyding any encounter with the Romans, remain'd still in their former hostility.itsius in Fulgenio. A. D. 202. Broughon Cent. 3. c. 5.  3. That therfore which is related by a Modern Writer touching Fulgenius is very uncertain, namely that in a battell against Sep|timius Severus he was mortally wounded, and died at York in the year of Grace two hundred and twelve, being the eighteenth and last year of Severus his Raign. And other stories of him though confidently reported by some, as that he was the Brother of Martia the first wife of Severus, and that by him Severus him selfe was slain, are meer inventions con|triv'd to adorn a Fable rather then a History.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1.2. How far Severus the Emperour subdued the Caledonian Brittains: And of the wall built by him.
3.4. Severus his ominous retreat to York: and his death there: And Conse|cration by the Romans.
5. His Sons left Successours in the Em+pire: but Bassianus the Elder murders his Brother Geta.
6. A sharp reply of a Brittish Lady to the Empresse Iulia.
7. A Description of the Caledonian Picts by Herodian.

1. SEverus though he took the Title of Bri|tannicus, and coyned Medalls inscrib'd with Britannica Victoria, was far from sub|duing those Northern Brittains. He wrote indeed to Rome, that the Caledonians by co|venant had yeilded up a part of the coun|trey formerly possess'd by them: Notwith|standing if we consider the situation of the Wall or Rampire renewd by him to exclude those Nations from commerce with the ci|viliz'd Provinces, we shall find that the Ro|mans rather yeilded to the Brittains a consi|derable space of ground which had former|ly been subdued and gaind by Iulius Agri|cola and Lollius Vrbicus.
2. Our famous Historian S. Beda indeed is of opinion that this Wall,Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 12. or rather Rampire of earth, was rais'd by Severus in the same place where Agricola in the former Age

had made his enclosure, to wit, between the two bayes of Edinborough and Dunbritton. But certain it is that this Rampire was placed much more to the Southward, where the Emperour Hadrian afterward had rais'd his Wall, now utterly demolish'd, between the Mouth of the River Tine and the bay of Eden (Ituna) in Cumberland.Oros. hist. l. 7. cap. 17. Hieron. in Chron. Cassiod. in Fst. Consul. Spartianus in Severo. c. 18. The length of which Rampire was not as Orosius relates, as like|wise S. Hierom and Cassiodorus, one hundred thirty two miles, but onely fourscore, as Spartianus truly measures it, calling this work the greatest ornament of his Empire, from whence he took the Title of Britannicus.
3. Having finish'd this vast work, with frequent towrs and a most deep and spa|cious Trench,Spart. ibid. Severus retir'd with his Army to York, and being superstitious, he busied his thoughts in the way with an expectation of some good omen that might portend an establish|ment of his future happines. But was much daunted seeing an Aethiopan souldier coale black, and crown'd with Cypresse, who came to meet him. And when he commanded him to be taken away, he being a noted Ieaster sayd thus to him, Thou hast been all, thou hast overcome all: Now be a God. The apprehension which so porten|tous a sign wrought in his mind was much encreas'd when entring into York he was by a rusticall Sthsayer conducted to the Temple of Bellona: and afterwards when the beasts brought for sacrifice were all black, and through the ne|gligence of his servants, followd him all the way to the entrance into his Palace.Idem. ib. These saith Spartianus were the presages of his death, which followd presently after in the same Citty.Idem. ibid. His last words were these, When I re|ceiv'd the Government I found the common|wealth every where in troubles: I leave it peace|able even to the Brittains. Though I be an old man, unable to walk, I leave to my children An|tonin, if they be good, an Empire firm and secure, but if they be ill, they will find it weak and tottring.
4. Being dead, he was with all most ex|quisite solemnity consecrated and made a God:Herdian. h. l. 4. the Ceremonies wherof are exactly de|scribed by Herodian. His ashes were gathered into a precious boxe with costly odours, and by his two sons with great veneration caried to Rome, to be layd up in the sacred Monu|ments of their Princes.
5. Now though these two sons, Bassianus or Antoninus, and Geta, were left by their Father with equall power Governours of the Empire, yet presently after their coming to Rome the Elder son, Bassianus, most barba|rously murdred the Younger together with all that had adhered to him, and after his death raigned alone fower yeares.
6. Before we quit this subject in hand, it will not be impertinent to relate from Dio a story touching a quarrell between Severus his Empresse Iulia, and a Brittish Lady, by which we may observe the sprightfullnes of the Brittains. When the Emperour had entred into a league with the Caledonian Brittains,A. D. 216. whilst he was sitting on his Tri|bunal, his wife Iulia intending an affront to the Brittish woemen, sayd publickly that they con|versed impudently with men. Whereto the Wife of Argentocoxs a Caledonian Prince, thus plea|santly answer'd, We doe much more honourably satisfy out naturall passions, then you Roman Ladies: For we converse indeed freely with men, but they are such as are of the best and Noblest rank: Wheras you Roman woemen prestitute your selves secretly to the basest of men. This Reply proved the more sharp; because Iulia was infamous for her adulteries: which it seems, the Brittish Lady was not ignorant of, and had courage enough to let her know it. Shortly after the Empresse became the object of the utmost infamy, by marying publickly her own son Bassianus, to whose lusts she most impudently offred her selfe.
7. We will conclude the present argu|ment with an observation out of Herodian an Historian living in these times,Herod. hist. lib. 4. who des|cribing the fashions of those Northern Brit|tains, says, That they used no garments at all: that about their Necks and breasts they wre swords, esteeming that to be a principall orna|ment, and argument of their wealth. Moreover that they in severall colours mark'd their bodies with the pictures and figures of all sorts of beasts: and this being their cheif bravery, they therfore refused to weare any garments, because they would have those pictures exposed to mens eyes. Hence it is that in Roman Authours of this and the succeeding ages we find, not the Brittains in generall, but only these Northern, Caledonian Brittains stiled, Sky-colourd Brittains, and sky-colourd Brigantes: Ausnius the Poet particularly ascribes such painting to the Caledonian Brittains. So that no doubt it was from hence that those utmost northern Brittains came to be called Picts, or a Painted people.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1. Of the Actions and death of Donaldus the first Christian King of the Caledo|nians.
2. The Ancient Scottish Christianity how different from the Modern.
3. Of a Monument erected to the Dui, or God of the Brigantes.

1. IN the fourth year of Antoninus Bassia|nus his Raign, dyed Donaldus the first Christian Prince among the Caledonians.H. Boeth. hist. lib. 5. Con|cerning whom thus writes Hector Boethius, Donaldus was the first of all the Scottish Kings (as our ancient Annals inform us) which coyned silver and gold, marking it on one side with the figure of the Saving Crosse, and on the other with his own face: Which coyns may propagate to po|sterity

the Memory of the Christian Faith being first embraced by him among all the Kings of that Nation.A. D. 213. He at last dyed in the one and twentieth year of his raign, famous both for his religious and Civill actions. Being dead, he, by the per|swasion of such Preists as among the Scots admi|nistred the sacred Mysteries of Christianity, was with Christian ceremonies and solemnity bu|ried in a feild, which with many pious accu|stomed Prayers had been consecrated for the buriall of Christians.
2. In this relation made by Boethius, extracted out of ancient Records, the pre|sent inhabitants of Scotland may observe how great the difference is between the Christianity of the first King who profess'd it in their countrey, and that which they have lately chosen in stead of it. This King refus'd to be buried among his heathen Ancestours, chusing rather to mingle his bones with those of common beleivers, then to have them proudly entomb'd with Heathen Princes. He would not rest after death but in a place consecrated by the De|votions of holy Preists, who likewise ce|lebrated his Obsequies according to the Pri|mitive Christian manner,Cyprian. Ep. 6. by making oblations for him, and offring the most Holy Sacrifice for the refreshment of his soule, as S. Cyprian, who liv'd not long after, describes the manner of ancient Christian buriall. The same holy Father likewise, as if he intended not only to justify, but commend this last act of King Donaldus his devotion, among other crimes with which he charges one of his Bishops call'd Marialis,d. Epist. 5. adds this, that he buried his children in the profane Sepulchers of the Heathen. Among other ceremonies pecu|liar to Christian burialls in those ancient times, this was one, that a Crosse was raised upon their Monuments, as shall be shew'd hereafter.
3. Having thus related the actions and death of this second Christian Prince Do|naldus, as fully as ancient Records inform us, it will not be amisse to add here a Monu|ment yet remaining, which in those very days was erected nere the River Calder in Yorkshire by Titus Aurelius a Roman officer: on the one side wherof were inscribed these words,A. D. 212. Antoninus and Geta the third time Consuls: and on another was a votive dedi|cation to the Dui, or God of the Brigantes. Who this God was is uncertain: onely it appears that every Province, and perhaps every city and Town in Brittany had their peculiar Dey, such an one was Belatuca|drus, Andates, c. Now the Roman Supersti|tion was such, as that they worshipped all the Idols of the Nations conquered by them, and such an one probably was this (Dui, or) God of the Brigantes. Yet considering the late conversion both of the Southern and Northern Brittains, why may not this God of the Brigantes be the only true God wor|shipped by these New Converts, and honour'd with an Inscription by this unbe|leiving Roman,A. D. 221. as one among the croud of profane Deities superstitiously adored by them?


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2. S. Amphibalus a Young Christian Brit|tain, and afterward the Converter of S. Albanus, accompanies the two young Emperours to Rome.

1. AMong other Brittains which now attended the two young Emperours in their return to Rome,A. D. 213. being moved therto either out of respect to them, or a curiosity of travelling into foraign countreys, one young man is particularly taken notice of in our ancient Annalls, which after some years doe celebrate his Memory, as a glorious ornament of our Nation, in being the In|structour of our first Martyr S. Alban in the Christian Faith, and a companion of his Mar|tyrdom. This was young Amphibalus, born at Cair-leon upon Vsk (Isca) in the County of Monmouth: Concerning whom our Writers give this Character,Pits in Am|phibalo. That he was from his ender years bred up in good literature, and withall in|structed in Christian Religion whilst he liv'd in Brittany: that he learnt both the Greek and La|tin tongues, and was likewise instituted in Elo|quence. Afterward he travelled to Rome with a resolution there to betake himself to higher stu|dies, where he spent his time principally in reading and understanding Holy Scripture and the Doctrine of Christian Religion, till the be|ginning of the cruell persecution rais'd by Dio|cletian.
2. Two voyages of his to Rome are com|memorated: and it was in the Second that he made his continuance there, in which he gave himselfe to these serious and sacred studies, and was ordain'd a Preist, and sent back by the Pope into Brittany, where saith Boethius and Bale, he became Bishop of the Isle of Man.Mart. Angl. 25. Iunij. In this his first voyage thither he was an Auditour of the Holy Pope Zephirin who interpreted the Christian Law, as our Mar|tyrologe testifies. But concerning Amphiba|lus more shall be spoken hereafter.



VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2.3. A long silence touching British affairs: And fictions of Geffrey of Mon|mouth touching Caransius.
4. Succession of Popes.

1. FOR the space of almost threescore yeares after the death of Severus, the Writers of Roman affairs make no mention at all of Brittany: which silence of theirs has given occasion to some of our ancient Hi|storians to insert fictions of their own, or to relate true occurrents without any regard to time and order.
Galfr Monu|et. A. D 218. Hollingsh. h. fol. 81.2. Thus Geffrey of Monmouth, and some Modern Writers, mislead by him, affirm that a certain Brittish Prince called Carausius ha|ving kill'd the Emperour Antoninus Bassia|nus, sirnamed Caracalla, in a battell, in the year of our Lord two hundred and eighteen, therupon invaded the Kingdom of Brittany. Wheras it is certain that at this time An|toninus was in the Eastern parts, where with giving hopes of a Mariage with the daugh|ter of King Artabanus, he treachorously killd great numbers of the Parthians: and presently after was himselfe murdred by Macrinus Prefect of the Pretorian bands: who succeeding in the Empire was in lesse then a years space likewise kill'd by Heliogabals To whom afterward succeeded Alexander Severus.
3. As for Carausius, certain it is that he took the Title of Emperour in Brittany, but that hapned sixty eight years after this time assign'd by Geffrey of Monmouth and his fol|lowers: so that being not yet born, he could neither raign nor kill Antoninus.A. D. 221. We shall speak of him in his due place and season.
4. In the year of Grace two hundred twenty and one Pope Zephirin died, having sate eighteen years: and Calistus succeeded him. In whose time our ancient Records mention one Cadorus Bishop of London, after whose death Obinus followd, the fourth Bi|shop of that See: Of whom nothing remains recorded but only their Names.


VII. CHAP.A. D. 237.
VII. CHA.

1. The Emperour Alexander Severus murdred by Maximinus: who succeeds in the Empire.

1. THE Emperour Alexander Severus a vertuous Prince,A. D. 27. no enemy to Christianity, which some conceive to have been profess'd by his Mother Mammaea, was in the fourteenth year of his raign slain by the treason of Iulius Maximinus who succeeded in his place. We mention this here, that we may take notice of the mistake of some Writers who affirm that he was slain in Brittany,R. Vit in l 5. no. 8. Victor in Cae|saribus. Lamprid. in Alexand. Herod. hi. l. 6. Capitali. in Maximi. Euseb. in Chron. Onphr. P. l. 1. Roman. Princip. Platin. in Pontian. in a town called Si|cila. This is evident, saith Richard White, and that town took its name from Sicilius a Son of King Guintelin. True it is that Victor resolutly says that it was at Sicila a Village of Brittany, that Alexander was slain: and Lampridius affirms that it was in Brittany, or as other Writers will have it, in Gaule: But Herodian, Capitolinus and generally other Historians confidently pronounce, that it was in a Village neer Mogontiacum (or Mentz) called Sicila: wherin they are fol|lowed by Eusobius, Onuphrius Panvinius, Platina, Baronius, c. And this no doubt is the truth, since there are no ancient Monuments testifying that Alexander, or his Successour and Murderer Maximinus, ever were in Brittany.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

i. c. Of Chrathlintus a Christian King of the Caledonian Brittains taught by S. Amphibalus. Sacred Rites of those days. And who this S. Amphibalus was?

1. IN these times when Maximinus began his raign,A. D. 237. Christian Religion flourish'd in Brittany, both in the Southern parts under the Romans dominion, and among the Ca|ledonians also, where raigned Chrathlintus a Christian Prince successour of Donaldus. This Chrathints is sayd to have been directed in matters of Religion by Amphibalus, who is suppos'd to have return'd from Rome about this time, and become a Teacher of the Caledonians.
2. Now what Sacred Rites he taught them is thus declared by Hector Boethius, King Chrathlintus, saith he,H. Boeth. . l. 6. adorned the Sacred Temple built by the Holy Bishop Amphibalus

(in the Isle of Man) with very Noble gifts, as Chalices, Patens, Candlesticks and such like sa|cred Vessells, all made of silver and gold: like|wise with an Altar enclos'd with Copper and brasse. He assigned moreover for the mainte|nance of the said Church revenews out of the lands adioyning therto. That was the first Church among the Scots consecrated according to Chri|stian Rites,Idem. ibid. and wherin the Prime Bishop and Ecclesiasticall Prelate had his See. The same Authour hereto adds, That this Church was called Sadorensis (or rather as at this day, So|dorensis:) the reason of which name, as hath be|faln to many other things and places, is by the great antiquity conceal'd from posterity. Some Writers imagine that it was called Sodorensis, because it was by Amphibalus dedicated to our Saviour, called in Greek () Soter.
3. This Narration, for as much as con|cerns Amphibalus, if this be the Brittish Martyr Amphibalus, seems to be of doubt|full credit: since he could scarce be so time|ly a Bishop: For almost fifty years must yet passe before we introduce him ascending the Episcopall throne,  offring himselfe a Cham|pion and Sacrifice for the Christian Faith.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1. The Sixth Persecution rais'd by the Em|perour Maximinus. Martyrdom of Pope Pontianus.
2. Of Cyriacus a Brittain, falsly sup|pos'd to be the Successour of Pope Pon|tianus.
3.4.5. The Martyrdom of S. Vrsu|la and the eleaven thousand Virgins falsly refer'd to this age. Fictions con|cerning them.

1. AT this time S. Pontianus Bishop of Rome governed the Church of God, whose Predecessour was S. Vrban, who succeeded S. Calistus. Now the Tyrant Maximinus rai|sing the sixth Persecution, sharpned it espe|cially against Bishops and Teachers of the Christian Flock. By his command therfore S. Pontianus, who by the Emperour Alexander had been banish'd into Sardinia, was crown'd with Martyrdom, being beaten to death with clubbs. To him succeeded S. Anterus, by Natio~ a Grecian, who the year following was likewise put to death by the same Tyrant.
2. Hence it appears that those Writers are manifestly disprooved who after S. Pontianus place in the Chair of S. Peter a person un|known to Antiquity, called Cyriacus. The Pa|trons of this Errour are the Authour of the asciculus temporum, Bergomensis, Nauclerus, c. Hereto some Modern Writers add, that Cyriacus was by birth a Brittain, and appoin|ted by S. Pontianus, going into banishment, his Vicar at Rome, to exercise there in his ab|sence the Papall offices:A. D. 238. for which cause he was by some called Pope.
3. A yet greater Errour is that by which certain Authours refer the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and many thousand Virgins her com|panions to these times. Concerning whose particular Gests things are reported beyond all bounds of probability or even possibi|lity. Hermanus Crombachius,Herm. Crom|bach. in Vr|sul Vindi|cut. who has writ|ten a book of the Martyrdom of those Vir|gins, pretends that S. Vrsula was the daughter of a certain Prince in Ireland, a Christian cal|led Dionethus, or Dionothus: and that all her companions came out of the same Countrey. These holy Virgins, saith he, the Emperour Maximinus beseeging and winning by assault Colonia, most barbarously murdred. Wheras it is most certain both by Tradition and all ancient Monuments, that before S. Patricks time (the first Apostle of Ireland) there was in that Island no Prince that was Christian, and much lesse could it afford eleaven thou|sand Christian Virgins. Which by what mira|cle they should in those times be brought to Colen, no man can rationally imagin.
4. A yet more absurd fancy is entertain'd by some others concerning these Virgins,Cap-grav. c. who affirm that they in devotion under|took a pilgrimage to Rome accompanied by severall Princes, and in their retinue the foremention'd Cyriacus: and returning by Colen were there martyred. Indeed a proper time is found by these Writers for a Pilgri|mage to be perform'd by such an Army of Virgins, c. when the persecuting Tyrant Maximinus so cruelly raged against Chri|stians. Notwithstanding besid's pretended Revelations, there is produced an eye-witnes of all this, a certain companion of S. Vrsula, call'd Vetena, who it seems escaped the slaughter, that she might acquaint poste|rity with the story of her Fellows.Vid. Ver. in Prim. f. 623. The tale reported by her is as followeth: When we were at Rome there were at that time two wicked Princes, whose names were Maximi|nus and Africanus. (Yet Maximinus though then Consul with Africanus, never was at Rome:) who seeing our great multituds, and how many Romans associated themselves to us, conceived great indignation against us, fearing least by our means Christian Religion might en|crease and gather strength. Hereupon having by heir Spyes learnt out what way we intended to ourney, they sent with great hast messengers to a certain kinsman of theirs, called Iulius, who was Prince of the Nation of the Hunns, exhorting him to bring forth his Army to persecute and destroy us. Who readily complying with their de|sire, rush'd violently upon us when we were at Colen, and there shed our blood.
5. Such dreams as these, (the inventions of vain and idle witts, which gain no beleif to themselves, and disgrace Truth reported by others) deserve not to be confuted, but with indignation to be rejected and conte'd,See ix. Book. 26. Chap. And as for the true Story of S. Vrsula's Martyr|dom

with her companions we shall herafter in due time and place,A. D. 249. about the middle of the fifth Century, give a sober and rationall account of it, shewing that she was indeed the daughter of one Dionothus, a petty Chri|stian Prince, not in Ireland, but Cornwall: and that those holy Virgins being destin'd for spouses to great multituds of Brittains not long before placed in Gallia Armorica, from them named lesser Brittany, they were on the Sea surpris'd by a Navy of Hunns, and by them led captives up the Rhine to Clen, where they received a glorious Martyrdom.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1. Maximinus the Emperour slain by his Army: His Successours.
2. Of Pope Fabianus: and his preten|ded Bull to confirm the Priviledges of Cambridge.
3. Peace of Gods Church: and many Churches built.
4. An Ancient Monument touching the Emperour Gordianus and his Wife.

1. MAximinus having raign'd not full four years, was slain by his own soldiers at Aquileia, to whom succeeded Maximus and Balbinus chosen by the Roman Senat to oppose Maximinus: who after a few months were likewise slain by the Soldiers: and in their place they advanced to the Em|pire Gordianus the grandchild of a former Gordianus who in a sedition against Maximi|nus had been proclamed Emperour in Africk, and approved by the Senat and people of Rome: but presently after was deprived both of his Empire and life.
2. During the Raign of Maximinus, as like|wise of the Younger Gordianus,A. D. 238. the Holy Pope Fabianus sate in the Chair of S. Peter, being the Successour of Pontianus. There is produced by Caius the Advocat of the Vni|versity of Cambridge a Bull of Pope Honorius dated the six hundred twenty fourth year of our Lord, in which this Pope Fabianus is sayd to have approv'd and confirm'd the sayd Vniversity. In case the said Bull be au|thentick, it shall not here be inquired what Proofs those who obtain'd it from Pope Hono|rius could alledge for their pretending to such a Confirmation by S. Fabianus. This is however certain, that this Holy Pope was not only watchfull over the affairs of the whole Church, but a favourer of learning and learned men.Euseb. hist. l. 6. cap. 29. To him did the famous Origen give account in an Epistle of the orthodoxe soundnes of his doctrin, as Eusebius testifies.
3. At this time the Christian Church enioyed great tranquillity,Baron. A. D. 245. saith Baronius: Of which occasion many Bishops making good use, not only propa|gated the Faith,A. D. 246. but likewise illustrated it by building many Churches. This is affirm'd by S. Gregory Nyssen, who says that in those days many Churches, and Altars were erected every where. And particularly the holy Pope Fabianus commanded Churches to be built over the vaults where the bodies of the holy Martyrs had been buried: which Churches were much frequented by the devotion of Christians. No wonder then if in Brittany, as yet free from all persecu|tion, there be so many testimonies of Chur|ches, Altars and Sacrifices. Neither can it be doubted but that among others Obinus Bi|shop of London, as likewise Conanus his next Successour about these times, were carefull to imitate the zeale of other Bishops.
4. We will not here omitt the taking notice of a Monument or Inscription found among the Brigantes,Tabula Vo|tiva. being a Votive Table, For the safety of M. Antonius Gordianus the Son of Publius, the invincible Emperour, and of Sabina Furia Tranquilla his Wife, and their whole sacred Family: Which Table was erected by the Emperours Wing of horse, for their courage call'd Gordia: the Prefect wherof was Aemilius Crispinus a Gentleman of Rome, born at Tuidrus (or Thisdrus) in the Province of Africa: under the command of Nonnius Philippus the Empe|rours Lieutenant, Propretor (of Brittany,) At|ticus and Pratextatus being Consuls.A. D. 244.
5. In which Table we learn two particu|lars, no where else to be found, The first is, That Nonnius Philippus, was at this time Go|vernour of Brittany: And the other, That the Daughter of Misitheus whom the Em|perour married, was called Sabin Furia Tran|quilla, though Paulus Diaconus calls her Tranquillina.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1. The Emperour Gordianus slain by Philip|pus, who succeeded.
2.3. The Emperour Philippus and his Son become Christians: The occasion of their Conversion.
4. After seaven years raign they are slain by their soldiers: and Decius suc|ceeded in the Empire.

1. IN the sixth year of his raign was the Emperour Gordianus slain by the treason of M. Iulius Philippus,A. D. 246. who succeeded him, and within a few years gave a proof how instable Kingdoms are which are unlaw|fully purchased, for by the like, though lesse uniust treason, he was depriv'd both of his Empire and life by his own Guards. Yet thi advantage did Philip enioy above any of his Predecessors,Oros. hist. Vincent. Li|rin. Cassio|dorus. that Almighty God gave him the Grace to wash away his sins by Baptisme and Pennance.
2. The occasion of whose conversion to Christianity is thus declared in the Acts of S. Pontius the Martyr:Ap. Surium. tom. 7.14. Pontius a person advan|ced to a high dignity, was known and a particular freind of the two Philips, the Father and the son, who were Emperours. Now in the year one thou|sand after the foundation of Rome, they sayd to Pontius, Let us goe, and begg the favour of the Gods, which have brought us to this thousandth year of the Roman City. But Pontius used many excuses to avoyd this: however they in a freeid|ly manner endeavoured to compell him to the Sacrifice. Whereupon he conceiving this to be a good opportunity given him by God to advance his truth, sayd to them, O most pious Emperours, since it is the only true God which has bestowed on you the Supreme dominion over men, why doe you not rather adore Him by whom such power and majesty has been conser'd on you? The Em|perour Philip answered him, For that cause it is that I desire to sacrifice to the great God Iupiter. But Pontius smiling, Be not deceiv'd, O Empe|rour (said he:) It is that Omnipotent God, whose throne is in heaven, who created all things by his Word, and by his Spirit gave life to them, which made you Emperour. In a word, by these and other like speeches and perswasions the Empe|rours received the Faith of Christ, and were bap|tis'd by the holy Pope Fabianus.
3. The two Emperour being thus perswa|ded of the Truth of Christianity, gave a wor|thy example of Christian modesty and humi|lity when they came to be baptis'd, as Euse|bius relates it,Euseb. hist. lib. 6. c. 27. The report is, saith he, that Philip, who was then converted to the Christian Faith, on the last Vigils before Easter coming to the Church with a desire to be partaker of the Prayer toge|ther with the Congregation, was not permitted by the Bishop then presiding over the Church, to enter till he had confess'd his sins, and placed himselfe among those who were yet unabsolved, and therefore were separated from the rest in a rank appointed for Penitents: For the Bishop told him plainly, that considering the many crimes publickly known to have been committed by him, he could not upon any other condition re|ceive him into the Church. Whereupon the Em|perour with a willing and chearfull mind sub|mitted himselfe to the Bishops injunction, thereby declaring an ingenuous modesty, together with a Religious and pious affection proceeding from a reverent fear of God.
4. These two Emperours raigned full seaven years: and at the end were slain by their own soldiers. The time and manner of their death is signified by an ancient Inscrip|tion and Monument at Verona, where the Elder Philip was kill'd. The Words of the Inscription are these, In the two hundred fifty and third year of Christ the Emperour Philip the Elder was slain at Verona: and the Younger at Rome by their own Guards, incited thereto by Decius, who succeeded in the Empire.


XII. CHAP.A. D. 247.
XII. CHA.

1. The birth of Helena, Mother of Con|stantin.
2.3. A Controversy about the Place of her birth, c.

1. THE Raign of the two Philips is ren|dred to us more illustrious by the Mother of Constantin the Great. She was the daughter of a Brittish Prince called Collus or Coelus, who exercised a Dominion among the Trinobantes, the Regni and the Iceni, that is, Essex, Middlesex, Surrey, Sussex, Norfolk c. For though after the death of King Lu|cius not any Brittain was allow'd the name of King, yet certain it is there were severall Princes of the Brittish blood which under an inferiour Title exercised a kingly Iurisdi|ction in their respective Provinces.
2. There is a controversy among Writers in which of these Provinces S. Helena was born. The more common opinion is that it was among the Trinobantes, in Essex: and particularly in Colchester,Cambden. in Essex. which saith M. Camden, was in those days the prime Citty of that Province, as a world of ancient Coyns there dayly digg'd up doe testify. And that she was indeed born there, the same Authour prooves by an argument of some weight, for says he, The inhabitants of Colchester doe confi|dently affirm that Flavia Iulia Helena, the Mother of Constantin the Great,Idem. ibid. and daughter of King Collus, was born in their Citty. And there|fore in memory of the Holy Crosse found by her, they bear for their Arms in a Scutcheon a knotty Crosse placed between four Crowns.
3. Notwithstanding severall Historians of the Greek Church doe challenge S. Helena to themselves, affirming that she was born in Bithynia, in a town rais'd by her son Constan|tin to the dignity of a Citty, and from her called Helenopolis. Moreover that she was a person of no good fame, and that from a Pagan she became a Iew, c. But all these fictions we shall in due place disprove, and demonstrate that she was from her infancy a perfectly vertuous Christian, bred up in that Religion by her Father, who was a Chri|stian too: that she was maried to Constan|tius at his first coming into Brittany, whom though perhaps she did not perswade to be a Christian, yet she induced him to be a fa|vourer of them, c. But of these things here|after.



A. D. 253.
XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1. A persecution rais'd against the Church by the Emperour Decius.
2. Libellatici, who.
3. The Novatian Heresy: and occa|sion of it.

1. DEcius after the death of the two Philips, extended his rage to the Re|ligion profess'd by them: and, as S. Gregory Nyssen saith, thinking with his cruelty to resist the divine omnipotence by repressing the preaching of Gods word, sent his Edicts to the Presi|dents of Provinces threatning them with terrible punishments unlesse they heaped all manner of disgraces, injuries and torments upon all those who adored the Name of Christ. By which ter|rours threatned by the Emperour, and execu|ted by inferiour Magistrats,, those who were firm in the Faith approved themselves to be pure wheat of Gods floore: such were S. Fabianus Bishop of Rome, S. Alexander Bi|shop of Hierusalem, and S. Babylas of An|tioch, which made a glorious Confession of Christ before many Witnesses, and sealed it with their blood.
2. But on the other side the same Tempest scattered the chaffe out of Gods barn: for then began the name of the Libellatici in the Church:Libellatici. A title given to those tepide worldly-minded Christians, which by money redeem'd themselves from the obligation to be assi|stant at the Pagan Sacrifices, and privatly obtain'd from the Roman Magistrats Libells, or Testimonies in writing, falsely declaring that they had sacrifised. Which Hypocrisy was severely condemn'd by all Christian Churches, but principally that of Rome, where S. Cornelius succeeded S. Fabianus, and of Carthage,Cyprian. l. de psis. in which the glorious Martyr S. Cyprian sate. For no better title did these Saints afford such dissembling Christians, then that of Lapsi, or Apostats.
3. Whilst S. Cornelius possess'd S. Peters chaire, there arose in Gods Church a great scandall, which was the Novatian Heresy. For Novatus having for his turbulency been driven out of Africk, came to Rome, where finding Novatianus swelling with envy and rage at the Election of S. Cornelius, he easily drew him to be a favourer of his Schism and Heresy, by which he excluded from all hope of pardon and reconciliation those which were called Libellatici, or which had been guilty of any great crime, although they had submitted themselves to due Pennance.ild. in Exci|o. This Novatus is by our Gildas call'd a black wine, who trodd under foot our Lords pearle, and cast violent hands on the Church, more worthy to be consumed by the fearfull flames of hell, then to be made a Sacrifice on Gods altar.A. D. 257. And concerning his followers thus writes Saint Augustin, Let us take heed of hearkning to those who deny that the Church of God has authority to forgive all sins whatsoever.August. de Agone Christ. cap. 31. Those wretches whilst they will not understand how in S. Peter God has established a Rock: and will not beleive that the Keyes of the kingdome of heaven have been given to the Church, they let the same keyes fall out of their own hands. These are they which boast themselves to be (Cathari) more pure then the Apostles doctrine requires, c.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. CH.

1. Decius betrayd by Gallus and slain: He succeding is slain by his solders, together with his Son Volusianus: and the Empire comes to Valerianus and Gallienus.
2. Of S. Stephanus Pope: who baptises many.
3.4. c. Among others, S. Mello, a Brittish Saint.

1. THE Persecution rais'd by Decius though extremely violent, was yet short, for himself having raign'd little more then two years, he was by the treachery of Trebonianus Gallus deserted in a battell fought against the Scythians, where he lost his life being swallowed in a fenn: In whose place the same Gallus together with his Son Volu|sianus succeeded, by whose cruelty S. Lucius who follow'd S. Cornelius in the Roman See, was crown'd with Martyrdom. Immediatly after which they themselves were slain by their soldiers: who cast the Imperiall Purple on Aemilianus: which having worn but one months space, he also was killd by them, and Valerianus formerly chosen by another Army succeeded in the Empire, who assum'd as his Collegue therin his son Gallienus.
2. In the beginning of whose raign Ste|phanus the Successour of S. Lucius in the A|postolick See instructed, baptis'd, and ordain'd among others a glorious ornament of our Brittish Nation,Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. 145. S. Mello, otherwhere call'd S. Mallo, S. Melanius and S. Meloninus, sending him to govern the Church of Roen in France.
This Mello being yet a Pagan was sent out of Brittany to Rome to pay the Tribut to the Emperour Valerian:Cap grav in vit S. Mel|lonis. Petr. de Na|talibus. Vincent. in Speculo. where according to the custome he with his companions was lead to the Temple of Mars to sacrifice.
4. But presently after, by divine Providence being admitted to the acquaintance of the Holy Pope Stephanus, he became one among his hearers whilst he expounded to a few Christians the doctrines of the Gospell of Christ: and being very attentive to his words, he beleived: and at his own earnest request received Baptism
5. In the ancient Acts of this holy Bishop S. Stephanus, approved by Baronius to be Au|thentick, we read of great numbers baptised by him,Baron. A. D. 259.  22. to gether with the order and Form of the administration of that Mystery, when Nemesius and his daughter together with many other Gentiles were baptised by him, among whom probably this our S. Mello might have been one. The words of the Acts are as followeth.
Id. ibid.6. S. Stephanus gave order that Nemesius should be conducted to the (Church, or) Title of S. Pastor. Where after he had catechiz'd him and his daughter according to the Christian custom, and appointed a Fast to be observed till the evening: when even was come, he bles|sed the Font in the same Title, and causing Nemesius to descend into the water, he sayd, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Which having done, turning himselfe to the daughter of Ne|mesius, he sayd, Doest thou beleive in God the Father Almighty? She answered, I be|leive. He added, And doest thou beleive in Iesus Christ our Lord? She answered, I beleive. Doest thou beleive the Remission of all sins? I beleive. Doest thou beleive the Resurrection of the Flesh? She answered, I beleive c. Then began many others to cast themselves at S. Ste|phanus his feet, with tears beseeching him to baptise them. So that in that day he baptised of both sexes to the number of sixty two. And after this many other Gentiles of good rank in the world came to S. Stephanus desiring to be bap|tized by him. Moreover tis blessed Bishop being replenish'd With the Grace of the holy Ghost, cele|brated frequently Masses and Synods in vaults where the Bodies of holy Martyrs rested.
Vsser. in Pri+mord. f. 146 ap. grav. in Mello.7. After S. Mello's Baptism, S. Stephanus ere long promoted him by all the severall Ecclesiasticall degrees to the sublime Order of a Bishop: for S. Mello continually ad|hered to him Now by how stupendious a Miracle he was designed to be the Bishop of (Rhotomagum, or) Roen, we find in his life collected out of ancient Ecclesiasticall Records, in this manner.
8 S. Stephanus together with S. Mello perse|ver'd in Fastings and watching. Now on a certain day whilst the Holy Bishop S. Stephanus was celebrating Masse, both himselfe and S. Mello saw an Angell standing at the right side of the Altar. Masse therfore being finish'd, he gave to him a Pastorall Croster or staff, which the Angell held in his hand, saying, Receive this staff, with which thou shalt govern the inha|bitants of the Citty of Rosen in the Province of Neustria. And though the labours of away and course of life hitherto unexperienced by thee, may prove burdensom, notwithstanding doe not feare to undertake it, for our Lord Iesus Christ will protect thee under the shadow of his wings, Thus having received a benediction from the holy Pope he betook himself to his iourney. And when he was come to (Altissiodorum, or) Au|xerre in Gaule, having in his hand the staff which he had received from the Angell, he by his prayer restored to health a man who had his foot cut in two peices by an axe.
9. The learned Molanus calls S. Mello the first Bishop of Roen, and seems to proove it by an Ancient Distick of that Church impor|ting as much. But a former more authentick Tradition describ'd out of the ancient Cata|logue of Bishops of that Church by Democharus declares that S. Nicasius preceded S. Mello in that Bishoprick. However, saith Ordericus Vita|lis, The Ancient Pagan Superstition after the Martyrdom of S. Nicasius possess'd the said Citty, filling it with innumerable pollutions of Idolatry till the time that S. Mello was Bishop there.


XV. CHAP.

1.2. c A prosecution of the Gests of S. Mello, Bishop of Roen.
5. Dempster impudently challenges him to be a Scott.

1. BEcause we would not interrupt this story of S. Mello, it will be convenient here to prosecute his life and Gests unto his death, which hapned almost two and twenty years after his Ordination. Thus ther|fore the Gallican Martyrologe relates concer|ning him:2. S. Mello unwilling to delay the execution of the Mission impos'd on him by the Holy Ghost,Martyrolog. Gallican 21. Octob. departed from Auxerre, and went streight to Roen: Where courageously setting upon his divine employment, he began to preach to the inha|bitants the name of Christ, with such efficacy of speech and power of miracles, to which the ad|mirable Sanctity of his life added a greater ver|tue, that in short time he brought almost the whole Citty to the obedience of Faith. This great change began especially when on a certain day the people were busy in attending to an abominable sacrifice offred to a certain false Deity of theirs. For S. Mello coming there suddenly upon them, and inflam'd with a heavenly zeale, sharply reproved that frantick people for their blindnes, which worship'd a senceles stock, as if it were a God: And presently calling on the Name of Christ, and making the triumphant Sign of the Crosse, he immediatly tumbled down the Idoll, and with the word of his mouth alone, in the sight of them all, broke it into small peices-Hereupon the people being astonish'd with this sight, willingly attended to his admonitions: who taught them the knowledge of the true God, and the hope of im|mortall life to be attaind by his pure Worship. By this means a great multitude of the Cittizens became imbued with the Doctrines of our holy Faith, and purified by the water of Sacred Bap|tisme: And S. Mello in the same place from which he had expelled the Devill, erected the first Trophey to our Lord, building there a Church under the Title of the Supreme most Holy Trinity. In which Church the people being assembled every Sunday were instructed

more perfectly by him in the Worship of God: there he offred the unbloody Sacrifice, and communicated to his flock the means and helps by which they might attain salvation.
3. Thus the flock of Christ encreasing plen|tifully every day,Idem. ibid. certain Merchants of other countreys negotiating there became attentive and obedient to the Divine Word: for whose commodity the Holy Bishop built another Church in an Island, where they might more conve|niently assemble themselves: to which he gave the Title of S. Clement. He added moreover a third Church to the end he might comply with the fervour of the multitudes flowing to|gether to see the Wonders wrought by him: This he consecrated to the veneration of the most holy Virgin the Mother of God: and placed there a Colledge of Preists, therby designing it for an Episcopall See.
Id. ib.4. Having thus persisted the space of many years in the discharge of his Apostolicall Of|fice, and by the seed of the Divine Word ha|ving begotten many thousand soules to Christ, this Blessed man, a veteran Soldier in our Lords warfare, at last (in the year of Grace two hundred and eighty) departed to his eternall rest, there receiving from his heavenly Gene|rall, whom he had served with great courage, perseverance and glory, an inestimable Do|tive and reward. He was buried in a vault in the suburbs, over which afterward was ere|cted a Church dedicated to S. Gervasius a glorious Monument worthy of him. From whence notwithstanding afterward when the Danish armies raged in France, his sacred Body was removed into parts more remote from the Sea, and reverently layd at a Castle called Pontoise, where to this day it reposes in a Church which from him takes its Title, where the memory of so illustrious a Champion of Christ lives with great glory and splendour.
5. This account gives the Gallican Mar|tyrologe of our Blessed Brittish Saint Mello, or Melanius Probus, as Possevin calls him. Whom yet in opposition to the universall consent of all Writers and Records,Dempst. in Menolog. cot. 22. Octo. agreeing that he was a Brittain, Dempster most im|pudently in his Scottish Menology will needs call a Scott, falsly affirming that Possevin acknowledges him for such. Wheras to this time there is not mention in any an|cient Writers of such a Nation as Scotts, in this Island. Or if there had been, certain it is that their countrey never having been subdued by the Romans, there was no Tribut sent from thence to Rome, which yet we see was the occasion of S. Mello's first going thither. But it is Dempsters constant practise, ridiculously to adopt into a Scottish family all persons whatsoe|ver which in these Primitive times are called Brittains. If this were granted, Ireland would have a better title to this Saint, then Scotland; for in this age that Island was the only countrey of the Nation called Scots, which afterward transplanted themselves into the Northern parts of the Caledonian Brittains.A. D. 262. But this controversy is well de|termin'd by the learned Bishop Vsher, though an Irishman,Vsser in Pri|mord. f. 146. who says, Dempster is the first and onely Writer that ever dreamt that Melanius was a Scott.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1. The Emperour Valerianus first favours, afterward persecutes Christians.
2. He is taken Captive by the King of Persia.
3. Many Tyrants and Vsurpers in the Empire.
4. Gallienus Son to Valerianus slain.
5.6. Claudius a Worthy Emperour succeeds: His raign short: but his po|sterity in the following age possesses the Empire.

VAlerian in the beginning of his raign showd not any disfavour to Christians,A. D. 260. but in his fifth year he raised a furious persecution (which was the eighth) against them:A. D. 260. in which the holy Pope Stephanus was crowned with Martyr|dom: to whom succeeded S. Sixtus, the second of that Name: who the same year tasted of same the Cup. And in his place sate S. Dionysius. To the same Emperours cruelty the glorious Martyr S. Cyprian became a Sacrifice: and at Rome S. Laurence though inferiour in degree, yet excelling all other Martyrs in his magnanimously suffring with contempt most exquisite torments.
2. But almight God speedily and heavily visited all this precious blood upon the Emperour Valerian,A. D. 262. who being taken pri|soner in a battell against Sapore King of the Persians, lived many years in a most mi|serable slavery, being made that Kings foot|stoole when he mounted his horse: and at last his body was excoriated and salted with salt to be an eternall monument of the in|stability of human glory, Neither was it a small aggravation to his unhappines, that his Son Gallienus left sole Emperour, never attempted either by treaty or war to redeem him.
3. Notwithstanding though Gallienus was by iust title Sole Emperour, yet never was there in so few years so many Vsur|pers of the Empire as during his raign: for in severall Provinces of the Roman world no fewer then thirty Tyrants assumed the Title of Emperours Among which, those who had the Government of Gaule, as Posthumius, Tetricus, c. were always fa|voured

and assisted by the Armies in Brit|tany,A. D. 271. which was a portion of that Prefe|cture. This is testified by a world of an|cient Medalls inscrib'd by their names and faces, which have been diggd up in seve|rall places in this Island.
4. At last after more then five years luxuriously and sluggishly spent,A. D. 269. Gallie|nus was by the treachery of Claudius, his next Successour, slain, together with his Brother and children.
5. Within lesse then three years Claudius dyed:A. D. 271. an Emperour highly esteem'd by the Romans for his courage wisdome and morall vertues: but yet he was a persecutour of Christians. After his death his Brother Quin|tillus took the Name of Emperour, but within seaventeen days was slain by his own soldiers, either for his austerity, or because they had heard that Aurelianus was chosen Emperour by the Eastern Armies: who therfore in history is esteemed the immediate Successour of Claudius.
6. Notwithstanding the family of Clau|dius, which was Flavian, was sufficiently recompenced for the misfortune of his Brother Quintillus, in that a daughter of his other Brother Crispus, called Claudia, being maried to Eutropius an eminent person of the Dardanian Nation, bore to him Constantius Chlorus, who established the Empire in his family for severall ge|nerations.


XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1. Aurelianus the Successour of Claudius overcomes Zenobia, and leads her Cap|tive.
2. He marches against the Tyrant Te|tricus.
3.4. He his accompanied by Constan|tius, who makes himself illustrious.
5 6.7. The Emperour Aurelianus his just Sentence in a controversy among Christians.

1. AMong all the late Vsurpers of the Empire there remained only two in the beginning of Aurelianus his raign, Zenobia, in the East, Queen of Palmyrene, and Tetricus in the West. Against these two therfore the Emperour turn'd his Arms: be|ginning first with Zenobia, a Lady of most masculin courage, whom at last notwith|standing he with much difficulty subdued, and lead with him in triumph to Rome, where she and her off spring lived in a private but splendid fortune.
2. After this Aurelianus march'd against Tetricus who had severall years acted the Emperour in Gaule,A. D. 274. with whom likewise conspired the Brittish Army. But not da|ting to oppose the Emperour in battell, he retired into Catalonia, whither being pur|sued, he voluntarily surrendred himself to him, and was permitted not only to live, but to live in esteem with him, being trusted with the government of a Province in Italy.
3. In this expedition Aurelianus was accompanied by Constantius Chlorus, who here layd the foundations of bringing the Empire into his own family. For behaving himself with admirable courage and con|duit in freeing the Citty call'd Augusta Vin|delicorum (or Ausburg) from a streit seige with which the barbarous Germans had sur|rounded it, and afterward defeating the Enemies forces in a battell near the said Citty, he gained so great a share in the Emperours favour and opinion, that he made choice of him to be trusted with a Army into Brittany, a Province then un|quiet and ill affected.
4. In this voyage of Constantius were layd the grounds of strange revolutions, not only in regard of his own family, but of the whole Church of God: For now it was that he maried the so famous Brittish Lady S. Helena, of whose birth we have already spoken: Now it was that the glo|rious Emperour Constantin the Great was born, and educated by his holy Mother in at least a love, if not a Profession of Chri|stian Religion: by whom in a few years the Catholick Church was not only freed from the most heavy persecution it ever had groand under, but made to triumph over Hell it selfe, and the Kingdom of Hell, Pagan Idolatry. But a more full account of these things, deserving our most exact inquiry, we will referre to the following Book.
5. And we will conclude this with rela|ting a memorable passage out of Eusebius, touching a most just and impartiall iudg|ment given by the Emperour Aurelianus, alhough a Heathen, in a controversy among Christians, by which he acknowleg|ed the authority and dignity of the Bishop of Rome, contradicted and despis'd by Mo|dern Sectaries. The busines in debate was this
6. Paulus Samosatenus having broached a most execrable Heresy, by which he denyed the Divinity of the Son of God, was in a Synod of Eastern Bishops reduced from his Errour: But upon his relapse, he was by them excommunicated and deposed from his Bishoprick of Antioch. But the obstinate Arch. heretick refused to relinquish either his opinion or his See. Hereupon the said Bishops gave an account both of their iudg|ment and his perversenes to Dionysius Bi|shop of Rome and other Bishops in the West.

Now this controversy coming to the No|tice of secular Magistrates, the Emperour himselfe was desired to pronounce sentence therin, which he performed in a manner that might have become a good Christian Prince, related thus by Eusebius:7. When Paulus, saith he, refused to de|part out of the house belonging to that Church of Antioch,Euseb. hi. l. 7. cap. 24. the Emperour Aurelian being desired to give his iudgment on the matter, made a most holy and religious Decree: For he commanded that the Episcopall house should be given to those to whom the Christians of Italy and Bishops of the Citty of Rome should by their letters assign it. And thus at last Paulus to his great shame and infamy, was by the authority of the Secular supreme Power entirely expelled from his Church.




THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAP.

1.2. Constantius his first Expedition into Brittany.
3. He was then only a Roman Sena|tour.
4. He is received peaceably by the Brittains.
5.6. c. He associates himself with Colus a Brittish Prince, and marries his daughter Helena.

1. _THERE are mention'd in Story two Voyages of Constan|tius Chlorus into Brittany: The first was now in the year of Grace two hundred seaventy four, and the fourth of Aurelianus his raign, presently after Tetricus had submitted to him in Spain: The other was almost twenty years after, when Carausius in Brittany took on him the Title of Emperour, against whom he was sent. Now for want of distinguishing these two Voyages, great confusion has been brought into the History of Constantius and his Son Constantin by Grecian Writers, as shall here|after appear.
Baron. ad A. D 306. . 162. Concerning this first Expedition, Baro|nius in a discourse proving his son Constan|tin to have been born in Brittany, thus writes, This hapned in the time of the Empe|rour Aurelianus, by whom Constantius, illis|strious for the fresh memory of the Emperour Claudius to whom he was allyed, was sent with an Army into Brittany, to the end he might contain that Nation frequently accustomed to tumults, in their duty and fidelity to the Empe|rour.
3. Suitably hereto we read in the life of S. Helena,Cap grav. in vit S. Hlenae. That the Romans taking into consi|deration the dammage they had receiv'd by the losse of the Kingdom of Brittany (which always adhered to the interests of such Tyrants in Gaule as had usurped the Title of Em|perours: such were Posihumius, Tetricus, c) sent thither the Senatour Constantius with au|thority, who had lately subdued Spain unto them, a man wise, courageous, and beyond any other zealous to enlarge the Majesty of the Em|pire. Constantius therfore at his first arrivall into Brittany was not Emperour, nor so much as Caesar, that is, deputed to succeed in the Empire, but simply a Patritian and Se|natour. This not being observ'd by certain Authours, has occasion'd great obscurity in history, and given advantage to some Greekish Writers to entitle other Provinces to the Birth of Constantin.
4. Constantius being arriv'd in Brittany, was beyond expectation with all quietnes and submission receiv'd as the Emperours Lieutenant, both by the Brittains and Ro|mans.

That which may be supposed to have been the principall cause of such compliance in the Brittains,A. D. 274 was the Re|ligion profess'd by them, which taught them as to yeild Faith and worship to Christ, so also their duty and obedience to Caesar, that is, to Aurelianus universally acknow|ledged the only lawfull Emperour. The Ro|mans likewise in Brittany being but few, and withall having among them no Gene|rall Officer: (For Tetricus whom they formerly obeyd, had newly deposed himselfe) they had but small encouragement to resist a Generall so famous as Constantius, guarded by an Army lately victorious.
5. To such a quiet reception of him, the many vertuous qualities of Constantius, no doubt, much contributed: The which we find celebrated by Eumenius a Rhetori|cian of these times in a Panegyricall oration pronounced to his son Constantin: By con|sidering the passages wherof we may be better directed to a view of the state of these times, then by almost any succeeding Historians. The clause therin referring to our present subiect is this. What shall I speak (sayes he) concerning your Fathers recovery of Brittany?umen. Pa|negyric. 9. The sea was so calme when he passd it, as if being astonish'd at the burden it caried, it had lost all its motions: And when he aborded the Island, victory did rather expect him there, then accompany him thither. What shall I say of his clemency and mercy, by which he for|bore to insult over those whom he had conque|red? What of his iustice, by which he restored all dammages to those which had been pillaged? What of his Providence, by which having strength+ned him self with associations, he so be|haved himself in the exercise of his iurisdiction, that those who had formerly been treated as slaves, were made happy by a liberty restored to them: and those who had been guilty of crimes, were by forbearing of punishment moved to re|pentance?
6. Now wheras the Oratour here men|tions associations made by Constantius with the Brittains, it is most probable that he re|flected on the freindship and affinity contracted by him wich such Princes as were then of power in the Island: among which the most eminent was Coellus Prince of the Trinobantes and Iceni, of whom we spoke before. To him therfore did he in a particular manner apply himselfe, and not only induced him to submit to Aurelia|nus, and renew his former tribute: but moreover to make the league more invio|lable, and to endear the minds and affe|ctions of the Brittains to himself, he deman|ded affinity of that Prince: and espoused his only daughter, S. Helena, then a Virgin. All this is confirmed by an ancient Poet,Vsser. in Pri+mord. f. 989. whose verses the learned Bishop Vsher cites from Ioannes de Garlandia.
Cap. grav. in vit S. Hele|nae.7. The same likewise is recorded in the life of S. Helena extant in Cap-grave, to this effect,A. D. 275. Moreover Col King of the Brittans and Father of Helena, assoon as he was informed of Constantius his arrivall, fearing to make war with a person so famous for many noble victories, he directed Embassadours to him to demand peace, and to promise subiection upon those terms that he should still enioy the possession of his Principality, paying the accustomed tribut. To these conditions Constantius agreed, and having demanded hostages, confirmed a peace With him. Not long after a greivous sicknes sei|sed on Col, of which in a short time he dyed: After whose death Constantius having maried the beautifull Princesse Helena, took possession of his Principality.
8. To this effect doe our ancient Records relate Constantius his first expedition into Brittany, and the consequences of it. And hereto doe subscribe the most lear|ned Historians of the Western Church, in op|position to the fables, grounded on mani|fest mistakes, which some Writers of the Greek Church have publish'd: which shall shortly be examined and refuted.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. The Birth of Constantin in Brittany.
3.4 5. A Controuersy about the place of his birth.

1. THE year after the happy mariage be|tween Constantius, then only a Roman Senatour, and Helena in Brittany was born Constantin, afterward worthily sirna|med the Great; not only for his Vi|ctories over severall Tyrants, and redu|cing the Roman Empire to a peaceable and flourishing state: but principally for destroying the Empire of Sathan and ad|vancing the Kingdom af God over Idolatry and all kinds of impious superstitions. At this time there sate in the Chair of S. Pe|ter Eutychianus the successour of Pope Foelix, who immediatly followed S. Dionysius: And in this year were Consuls, Aurelianus and Bassus.
2, That Constantin was born this year appears evidently out of Eusebius, an Au|thour familiarly known to him,Euseb. de vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 1. who in the first Book of Constantin's life says: That God continued his raign the space of more then thirty years: that is, thirty two years and a few months,Id. ibid. l. 4. c. 53. as he saies in another Book: and that the said number being dou|bled was the measure of the years of his life. Now the common opinion of Chronologists being, that he dyed in the year of Grace three hundred thirty seaven, since Eusebius allows to his age little above sixty two years: it will follow that his birth was in this year.
3. The speciall relation we have to this

glorious Prince will deserue our inquiry into the place likewise of his birth: con|cerning which there is some disagreement among Historians: For besides Authours of of good esteem,Ferreol. in Chron. Bozius de signis Eccl. l. 24. c. 5. Vid. Vsser. in Prird. f. 990. as Ferreolus Locrius and Thomas Bozis, the publick Oratours sent from our Kings to the Councills of Constance and Basil positively affirm that he was born at York in a place called Pertenna, which B. Vsher interprets to be the Colledge of Vicars atten|ding the Quire, at this day called Bederne, which heretofore was a part of the Emperours Palace. And certain it is that in following times Constantius had his cheif residence there, where at last he also dyed.
4. Others there are which assign London for the place of his birth, as William Ste|venson in his Description of London: groun|ding their opinion probably on this, for that afterward at the request of his Mother Helena he caused London to be compass'd about with a wall of stone and brick,Camden. in Tribant. as Camden affirms. Whereas Henry of Huntingdon and Simon of Durham report Saint Helena her self to be authour of that work: which saith B. Vsher,Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. 176. is confirm'd by a great num|ber of Medalls stamp'd with her image, which have frrequently been found under the said walls. But all this is no proof at all that Constantin was born there.
5. It is most probable that he was born, as his Mother before had been, at Clqestor,H. Huntingd. about which also she built a wall: For this was the Citty where her Father usually resided, and where Con|stantius his affairs at this time cheifly lay: For in the Northern parts there were as yet no troubles at all: it will be al|most twenty years before Constantius toward the end of his life be called into those Provinces upon occasion of sedition among the Calednian Brittains.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1.2. c. The relation of Nicephorus, c. touching Constantins birth in Bithynia, confted.

1. WHatsoever hath been hitherto written out of approved Authours either touching Saint Helena's quality, birth or countrey, or Constantins originall, is contradicted, especially by some Greek Historians, particularly Cedrenus and Ni|cephorus, to whose authority, though of no moment, considering both their ma|nifest fabulousnes in other matters, their contradicting one another in this, and the latenes of their writing, yet some learned Authours of our Age doe deferr, par|ticularly Lipsius, a person eminently skill'd in all Antiquities.
2. The relation given by Nicephorus tou|ching the mariage of Constantius with He|lena is this,Niceph. hist. Eccl. l 7, c 17. The Roman Empire (says he) having been cruelly wasted by the Persians, Parthians, Sarmatians and other bordering Nations, Diocletian and Maximianus then Emperours sent Constantius (call'd by him Constans) as their Embassadour to the Per|sian King to pacify him with kind speeches and gifts. Constantius in his way thither putt in at a haven called Drepanum in Bithynia in the bay of Nicomedia. Where to satisfy his lust his host prostituted his own daughter, a maid of great beauty; to whom Constantius gave for reward his royall vesture embroydered with purple. The same night upon occasion of a wonderfull vision Constantius gave a strict chge to the maids father that he should not permitt her to be touchd by any other, and that he should with all care see the child well educated, because, sayd he, in my sleep, I saw a sun against nature rising from the westhern sea. Having then perform'd his Em|bassy he return'd to Rome another way, where he was presently created Caesar together with Galerius: and not long after they were both of them Emperours, c.
3. This story of Nicephorus, saith the Il|lustrious Cardinall Baronius,Baron. ad A. D. 306. n. 12. may by many unanswerable arguments be confuted, being evidently contrary to certain Chro|nology. For if Constantin was born when his father was created Caesar, which was in the year of Grace two hundred ninety two, it will necessarily follow that he was but fourteen years old when he was pro|clamed Emperour: wheras by Eusebius his account, who was inwardly known to him, he was at least seaventeen years old when his Father was first design'd Caesar, and above thirty at the beginning of his own raign. It is very probable therfore that Nicephorus mistook Bithynia for Brit|tany, and because afterward the Town call'd Drepanum was beautified by Con|stantin, and from his Mother call'd He|lenepolis, therfore he fancied it to be the place of her birth. Whereas besides many Authours of good credit, the Gallican Oratour who pronounc'd a solemn Pa|negyrick at the mariage of Constantin and Fausta the daughter of Maximian, saith in expresse words that he ennobled Brittany with his birth.
4, Notwithstanding in confirmation of Nicephorus his relation (at least for as much as concerns the exclusion of Brit|tany from being the place of Constantins birth) the learned Lipsius adioyns a te|stimony of Iulius Firmicus Maternus a wri|ter of those very times, whose words are, Our Lord, Augustus, Emperour of the whole world, the Pious, happy and wise Prince Constantin the greatest, the Son of late Deified Constantin, of most happy and venerable memory, who by the propitious fa|vour

of God was elected to free the world from tyrannicall excesses, and domesticall seditions, that so the deformity of slavery being taken away, we might enioy the blessing of a secure liberty, and shake from our weary necks the yoak of captivity: a Prince who whilst he fought for our freedom was never deserted by for|tune, though otherwise most instable in affairs of Warr: He was born at Naisus (a Citty of Illy|ricum) and from his almost infant years managed the stern of the Commonwealth, which authority having fortunatly obtain'd, he with wholesom mo|deration governs the Roman world. This noble Character Lipsius will needs apply to Con|stantin the Great, and consequently affirms that he was born, far from Brittany, at Naisus a Citty of Illiricum, or Dardania con|fining to Thrace.
5. But, as M. Camden in an Epistle to Lipsius declares (which is further strongly confirm'd by the R. F. Michael Alford a learned Iesuit of our Nation) it is evident that Firmicus published his Book during the raign of Constantius Son of Constantin the Great, as appears by his dedicating it to Ma|vortius Lollianus by the Title of Proconsul, who was Consul in the eighteenth year of Constan|tius. So that the Constantin mention'd by him as then alive, could not be the first of that name Who was then the Constantin so highly extoll'd by Firmicus? Surely no other then his Son Constantius, who most frequently in his Edicts call'd himself Constantin: And being ambitious of Titles, as Historians ob|serve, he usually annexed the word Magnus and Maximus to his name. And that Constan|tius alone was intended by that Authour in this glorious Character appears by that clause, That from the first step of his age he managed the stern of the Commonwealth, for he was created Caesar being only eight years old, wheras his Father was above thirty be|fore he governed the Empire.
6. Now whereas Firmicus extolls his Con|stantin for freeing the world from tyrannicall ex|cesses and domesticall seditions; this does ex|actly fitt Constantius, who as Aurelius Victor, Eutropius and Ammianus Marcellinus observe, was very fortunate in civill warrs, as he was unprosperous in extern: for he depress'd these Tyrants, Magnentius, Decentius, Poten|tianus, Vetranio, Silvanus, Chonodomarius, Ba|domarius, c.
Ob.7. There remains one only difficulty, in a heathenish Prayer which Firmicus makes to the Sun, Mercury and Venus to continue for ever the raign of Constantin and his children, Lords and Ceasars, c. for it is certain that Constantius had no children.Sol. Notwithstan|ding such a Prayer might properly enough be made, in hope that the Emperour might have children afterwards. And besides, though Constantius had no children born to him, yet he had children by adoption, to wit, Gallus and Iulianus, both of them created Cesars by him: Now the Form of adoption was this, I doe affirm that this man is my Son: and I have bought him with this mo|ney. So that Firmicus his prayer applied to Constantius might be very proper and sea|sonable.
8. Now of Constantius the Son of Con|stantin,Iulian. Orat. 1. it is certain that be was born at Nasus a Citty of Illyricum: this is express|ly affirmed by Iulianus his Nephew in an Oration made in his praise. This Citty indeed was the Native soile of the whole fa|mily: Iulius Constantius the Father of Con|stantin was there born, as likewise Diocletian and both the Maximians. And wheras Lici|nius had possess'd himselfe of this coun|trey, Constantin in the twelfth year of his raign overcame him here: after which vi|ctory he continued severall years in those parts, and Nasus being the Metropolis of the region, he adorned it much with buil|dings, and from thence published many Rescripts. Here then it was that his second son by Fausta, Constantius was born: For at Arles in France she brought forth her first son Constantin, five years before this. So that it is apparent that the Testimony of Iulius Firmicus does nothing at all avayle Lipsius his pretention against Constantins being born in Brittany.
9 To conclude this controversy, a witnes of great authority may be produced for ours, and against Lipsius his assertion, which if he had well considered, doubtles he would not have prefer'd so highly the authority of so inconsiderable an Authour as Nicepho|rus. This is our glorious Bishop S. Aldelm, who lived not much more then three hundred years after this time. He in his excellent Treatise of Virginity expressly affirms that S. Helena was a Brittish Lady. And this Treatise having been with high commendation mention'd by S. Beda, an advantage is added to our assertion, by his testimony involved in the other: And one considerable argument therby is wan|ting to our adversaries, who make Saint Beda's silence touching S. Helena and Con|stantins birth in Brittany, a strong proof that they were born in the Eastern parts.



IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2. c. The honour and reputation of Helena Mother of Constantin cleared from aspersions layd on her by Nice|phorus and other Grecian Writers.

1. HAving thus cleared the title which Brittany hath to the birth of Con|stantin: justice requires that we should be as diligent in clearing the reputation of his Mother Helena, who has indeed been most rudely treated by the penns of many Writers. We have seen how Nicephorus has publish'd her for a vile prostituted harlot: S. Ambrose upon report calls her Stabula|riam,Ambr. Orat. fane. de obit. Theodo. a common hostesse (Stabulariam hanc primo fuisse asserunt, sic cognitam Con|stantio Seniori) Some affirme, says he, that she was a publick hostesse, and as such was first known to the Elder Constantius.Bed. hist. l. 1. cap. 8. S. Beda gives her a little better title, writing thus, Con|stantius left his Son Constantin, begot of Helena his Concubin, Emperour of the Gaules.
2. Now whilst Christian Writers thus dis|gracefully set her forth, we will not wonder to find Zosimus a Heathen, and profest enemy both to Constantin and his Mother,Zosim. hist. l. 2. reporting that Constantin was born () of a dishonourable Mother () and one who against law cohabited with Constantius.Id ib.
3. These imputations, though in proprie|ty of language they were indeed injurious, Yet it cannot be denyed but there was some shadow of truth in them: For by the Ro|man Laws it was enacted, That if any Pre|fect of a Cohort,L. Praefectus ff de vita Nuptiarum. or Troop of horse, or any Tri|bune should against the Prohibition of Law marry a Wife in the Province in which he bore Office, that Matrimony should be null. Now this was the very case of Constantius with He|lena, who married her when he was sent by Aurelian the Emperour with authority into Brittany.
4. Notwithstanding this Roman Law did not so indispensably condemn such Mariages,L. Etos. ff. de vit Nuptia|rum. but that they might afterward be rendred lawfull; for the famous Lawyer Paulus thus states the matter, If after such an office is depos'd, the person shall persevere in the same will to acknowledge her his wife, then such a mariage becomes iust and lawfull. Now it is certain that severall years after Constantius had quitted the government of Brittany, he constantly cohabited with Helena. It was therfore a slanderous speech of Zosimus to say that Constantin was born by one nights meeting of them two, since it is evident that they continued together a very long space as in a lawfull and chast mariage.
5. Moreover Constantins succession in the Empire, without any contestation de|clares him a legitimate Son of Constan|tius. Which is further confirmed by seve|rall passages in the Orations of Rhetori|cians in those days:Eumen. Pa|negyr. among whom Eume|nius commends Constantin for the No|blenes of his Extraction, saying that by his birth he deserved the Empire:Panegyr in|certi Autho|rit. and that his Father on his death bed being demanded, to whom he would leave the Empire, answered as became a Prince truly Pious. And another French Rhetorician in an Oration pro|nounc'd at the Mariage of Constantin with Fausia, among other Vertues of his Fa|ther imitated by his Son, insists much on the speciall vertue of Continence. Now it had been ridiculous and most uncivill to commend the Fathers continence before a son who was a bastard. But so far was Constantin from being esteem'd the issue of an unlawfull bed,A. D. 292. that when afterward his Father upon reason of state and policy was obliged to marry Theodora the daugh|ter of Maximianus, before this second mariage was executed he was forced to repudiate his former wife Helena, which proves her to have been esteemed his le|gitimate wife.Baron. ad A. D. 306.
6. Vpon consideration of which grounds we may conclude with Cardinall Baro|nius, We are of necessity compell'd to say, That Helena was the lawfull wife of Constan|tius. And indeed so honourable an esteem had shee with posterity, that her memory is celebrated by diverse Authours with many illustrious Elogies.Collat. 14. Constit. 28. Quod pulchro. Particularly the Emperour Iustinian in her honour made a Decree: That the Name of the Sea formerly call'd Polemacum, should in future times be called Heleno-pontus: Which name, saith he, was by the most Pious Emperour Constantin formerly impos'd by the occasion of his most honourable Mother Helena, a woman of eminent Piety, who likewise found out for us the Holy Crosse vene|rated by all Christians.



V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Faith of Helena vindicated: who by the Grecians is affirm'd to have been a Pagan, and a Iew.

1. THE imputations against S. Helena doe not end here. Not only the ingenuity of her birth, and lawfullnes of her mariage are question'd, but her Faith likewise and Religion are by severall Modern Authours, most greivously blackned. For besides Vincentius Beluacensis and others, S. Antoninus thus writes of her,Amon. 2. p. c. 1. tit. 9. . 3. When He|lena the Mother of the Emperour Constantin, then residing in Bethania (or as other copies read, Bithynia) heard that her son was becom a Christian and baptis'd by Silvester Bishop of Rome, she in her letters commended him that he had renounced Idolls, but most horribly reprehended him, because neglecting the God of the Iewes, he worshipped a man who had been crucified, as a God.
2. This unworthy imputation received its first ground from the ancient Acts of Pope Silvester, which doubtlesse require correction in severall passages.Acta Silve|stri. In those Acts is declared how Helena being in the Eastern parts together with her Grand Children Constantius and Constans Emperours, and being yet a Pagan, she was circumvented by the Iews: and therupon was angry with her Son Constantin for embracing the Christian Faith: desiring him by her letters rather to ioyn himself to the Iews, then Christians: Whereupon he calld together an assembly of Iews at Rome, to the end that by a disputation between them and the Christians, it might be determined which beleif was most to be approved. These things, say the Acts, befell in the year when Constantin and Licinius were fourth time Consuls.
3. But if there were nothing else to dis|prove this Relation, the date of these Acts would be sufficient: for in the year when Constantin and Licinius were the fourth time Consulls, his two Sons Constantius and Constans were but infants, and not as yet created Caesars, much lesse Emperours. Again it would from thence follow that Helena was above seaventy years old before she was a Christian: which is contradicted by the generall consent of Historians.
7. On the contrary that Helena from her infancy was brought up in Christian Reli|gion is by many poofs confirm'd by Cardi|nall Baronius,Baron. hc. Helena her self, saith he, did instruct Constantin her son from his child hood in piety. I speak this upon the authority of S. Pantinus, who was in this very age a famous Senatour of Rome: for he writing to Severus saith thus, The impious Idolatry of the former age remain'd to the times of Constantin imme|diatly before ours: Who received the happines of being a Christian Prince and to have Christians his suceessours, not so much by his own,Ambr. de obi|tu Theodos. as the faith of his Mother Helena. S. Am|brose likewise affirms, That Helena confer'd more on her Son Constantin, then she receiv'd from him. Likewise S, Gregory in an Epistle to Aldiberga Wife to Ethelbert king of Kent exhorts her to dispose her husband to embrace the Christian Faith,Gregor. l. 9. Epist. 59. and uses this inducement, For, saith he, as God was pleased to kindle the hearts of the Romans to a love of Christian Religion by the perswasions of the renouned Lady Helena, Mother to the most pious Emperour Constantin: so we trust that by your Maiesties endeavours his mercy and grace will be operative on the English Nation.
5. Neither is this an assertion peculiar to the Latins, for the Grecians likewise confesse that Constantin received the first rudiments of his Faith from Brittany.Sozom. It is clearly agreed on by all, saith Sozomen, that Constantin was first imbued with Christian Religion among the Brittains, and other in|habitants of those coasts. And Theodoret, speaking of Constantins letters comman|ding that the Church at Ierusalem should be built, saith, No other but the Emperours own Mother undertook the bringing of these letters, whose praise is celebrated by the tongues of all that have any piety. She it was who brought forth this glorious Light of the world, and ministred also the nourishment of piety to him,
6. I will here adioyn that which seems to have been the occasion of the Errour of S. Antoninus mention'd in the begin|ning of this Chapter: And that is a false copied passage of Marianus Scotus in his Chronicle at the year of Christ three hund|red twenty and one:Marian. Sect. in Chron. ad A. D. 321. Where in most of the printed Copies are found these words: When Constantin was baptis'd by Pope Silvester, his Mother Helena wrote to him out of Brit|tany, that he should deny Christ and follow the Iewes. Which passage out of Florentius Vigorniensis (whom Pitfius and Bale call the Abbreuiatour of Marianus) ought to be cor|rected thus, Constantin being baptiz'd by Pope Silvester, his Mother wrote to him out of Brittany, that he should persecute the Iews who denyed Christ.
7. Certain it is out of Ecclesiasticall Hi|story that upon the Conversion of Con|stantin, the Iews were enraged with envy and malice, and exercised all manner of contumelies against Christian Religion, espe|cially against those of their own sect which became Christians: which might incite this pious Lady to suggest thus to her Son. For at the very same time Constantin publish'd a most severe Edict against the Iews, the Tenour whereof followeth:
8. The Emperour Constantin to Evagrius. It is our Will that intimation be given to the Iews, their Magistrats and Patriarcks, that if after this law any of them shall presume (as we are in|form'd they have dome) to persecute with stones or any other way any one who shall forsake their damnable Sect, and have recourse to the true worship of God, he together with all his partakers shall be adjudg'd to be burnt with fire. And if any one among the Christians shall adjoyn him|selfe to their abominable Sect and conventicles, he shall suffer the same punishment. Given from Margillum the fifteenth of the Calends of November: the Emperour Constantin and Lici|nius being fourth time Consulls.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. Aurelianus a great Persecutour.
3. He is slain by his soldiers.
4. Tacitus succeeds him: and after|ward Probus.
5.6. Bonosuus a Brittain, Vsurps the Title of Emperour.
7. He his slain by his freind Victori|nus.
8. The Emperour Probus is slain by his Army: to whom succeeds Carus: and after him his Sons Carinus and Nume|rianus. To whom, being slain, Diocle|tian succeds in the Empire.

1. THE mariage of the Senatour Constan|tius with a pious Christian Lady, and the birth of Constantin, though they were the seeds of infinit blessings to Gods Church, yet they were seeds as yet hid in the earth: for Christian Religion and the Professours of it were never more cruelly persecuted, then during the time between Constantins birth and the beginning of his raign.
2. The Emperour Aurelianus, who sent Constantius into Brittany was one of the most inhuman adversaries of Gods truth, as the Churches Martyrologe in a world of places does witnes.Apud Euseb. in Orat. ad Sanctorum cae. c. 4. And this, Constantin when he had obtain'd the Empire exprobrated to his Memory, in an Oration which he made to an Assembly of Bishops, Thou likewise, O Aurelianus, saies he, wert the incentive of all mischeif. But when thou with horrible fury marched'st through Thrace, thou wast slain in the midst of thy iourney, and filled'st the tracts of the high way with thy impious blood. He was the Authour of the Ninth Persecution, and both the Eastern and Western Church groaned under his cruelty. Only Brittany was free from violence, enioying great tranquillity by the moderate government of Constantius, now become not averse from Christianity.A. D. 281.
3. But after seaven years raign God re|venged his own cause upon Aurelian, who was slain by his own soldiers between Byzantium and Heracla. In whose place the Roman Senat chose Tacitus, famous for nothing more then his moderation,A. D. 278. and refusing to continue the Empire hereditary in his family.
4. Tacitus after six months concluded both his Empire and life, to whom suc|ceeded Probus, a person of so great renown for his military vertues, saith Vopiscus, that the Senat wish'd him, the Army chose him, and the people with acclamations approv'd the Ele|ction.
5. In the third year of Probus his raign,A. D. 281. after an admirable Victory gain'd by him in Gaule, where he slew four hundred thousand of his Enemies by his own te|stimony in a letter to the Senat,Vopic. in Elorian. Vopisc. in Probe. Id. in Bonoso a certain man call'd Bonosus, by originall a Brittain, whom the Emperour had left Admirall of the Roman fleet upon the Rhene, fearing his anger because most of the ships by some ca|sualty had been set on fire, in his absence took on him the Purple and Title of Emperour, and continued his dominion over Brittany, Spain and a part of Gaule, a longer time then he deserved, saith Vopiscus: But in the end his army with great difficulty being de|feated by the Emperour, he was forced to hang himselfe.
6. This mans rebellion no doubt cau|sed great disquiet in Brittany, from the government of which Constantius had been removed, and returning to Rome had been made Prefect of Dalmatia.
7. After Bonosus his death troubles were renew'd in Brittany by him who admini|stred that Province, suppos'd by M. Camden to be Cl. Cornelius Laelianus, recommended to that Government by a frein'd of the Em|perours call'd Victorinus of Mauritania. For Laelianus invaded the Tyranny, upon which Victorinus fearing the Emperours in|dignation, went presently into Brittany and by subtilty procured the death of the Vsurper: which restored peace to the Pro|vince. The security of which,Zosim. hist. lib. 1. saith Zosimus, was much confirmed by the sending thi|ther great numbers Franks then of taken prisoners in a battell by Probus, which in following seditions were proffitable to the Emperour.
8. After five years raign Probus was also slain by his own army, and in his place Carus Manlius Aurelius was chosen Empe|rour, who created his two sons Carinus and Numerianus, Caesars. But Carus the next year being kill'd by lightning, and Nume|rianus by the treason of his father in law Aper, and Carinus by one of his Tribuns whose Wife he had abused, Diocletian was by the generall acclamation of the Army pronounced Emperour, Diocletian the Au|thour

of the last,A. D. 286. most dire, and most pro|longed persecution that ever the Church of God suffred.


VII. CHA.VII. CHAP.

1. Diocletian stiled Britannicus.
2. He makes Maximianus his partner in the Empire.
3 4 5. A most furious Persecution rais'd by them against the Christian Church. Brittish Martyrs.

1. THere is extant an ancient Inscription, recited by Baronius, and dated the second year of Diocletians raign,A. D. 285. wherin among other Titles he is stiled Britanni|cus, which imports some victory gained by him, or his Lieutenant in the Island. Certain it is that though Carinus was not slain till the year following, yet at this time Britta|ny and the Western regions of the Empire, following the example of Rome, had sub|mitted to Diocletian, deserting Carinus.
2. Who being slain the year following at Murgum,A. D. 286. Diocletian assum'd as Companion to himself in the Empire M. Valerius Maxi|mianus, committing to him the government of Gaule, Brittany, c. These two Emperours, of which Diocletian from Iupiter took the Sirname of Ioviu, as Maximianus from Her|cules did that of Herculius, at the beginning of their raign conspired in a resolution to be the Defendes of their Pagan Gods, and pro|fes'd enemies of Christ, whose Religion they intended wholly to extirpate out of the World.
3. Certainly there was never given a stronger proof that Gods Church is built upon a Rock, impossible to be shaken by human force, then the unsuccesfullnes of the rage of these two Emperours against it. They had the whole power of the world in their hands, they were Princes of eminent valour, wise|dom and policy, above twenty years they governed the Empire, and employed all that time, without any relaxation, in executing their rage against Christ and his truth, they omitted no manner of tentations, by fa|vours and terrours, to withdraw his ser|vants from their Worship of him, all mens witts were exercised in devising the most exquisite torments against them, not only magistrates, but private persons were arm'd to destroy them, they were not only execu|ted and tortur'd singly one by one, but whole armies of them were butcher'd toge|ther, and the most effectuall means to ob|tain the Emperours favour or pardon for the greatest crimes, was the heaping of all dis|graces and unjust violences upon poor Christians. Yet with all this, Christian Re|ligion was so far from being destroyed, that the Emperours cruelty and injustice gain'd more soules to Christ, then the Sermons and exhortations of devout Preachers could doe in time of peace: insomuch as these two Princes, though vainglorious and ambitious beyond any of their predecessours, seeing all their endeavours against Christ to prove fruitles, out of rage and despair voluntarily depos'd themselves from the government of the world, which they had undertaken principally in design against Christ.
5. One notable proof of the supereminent cruelty of these two Emperours against the Professours of the name of Christ was this, that the Isle of Brittany divided from the Ro|man world, which in former persecuting Emperours times had been exempted from participating with the suffrings of other Nations, was now made a scene of blood: Yea it may truly be affirmed that Brittany was the first Province dignified by our Sa|viour to become the Theater on which those glorious Champions S. Albanus, S. Amphi|balus, S. Iulius, S. Aaron and their Associats afforded to other Christians a blessed exam|ple of conquering the world and hell it self by Faith and patience: Of whose Gests and suffrings, the proper subject of this Hi|story, we shall consequently treat: premi|sing notwithstanding sufficient proofs, that these holy Martyrs were the first who in the beginning of Diocletian and Maximian's raign, dedicated their cruelty.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. c. That the Martyrdom of S. Alba|nus, c. in Brittany hapned in the be|ginning of Diocletians raign: contrary to the assertion of severall writers.

1. IN relating the Martyrdom of S. Alba|nus and the rest, our Historians, both ancient and Modern, doe much vary among themselves concerning the precise time of it, many of them consigning it to the latter end of these Emperours raign, in which their cruelty was arrived to its height, others to the middle time, and but few to the begin|ning. Yet upon a serious consideration of severall circumstances concerning it, it may be made appear that these holy Martyrs suf|frings cannot well and conveniently be as|sign'd to any but the third year of Diocle|tians raign, which was the first of his Com|panion Maximianus, being the year of Grace two hundred eighty sixe: And therfore that William of Malmsbury, Radulphus, David Powell, c who refer it to the two hundred ninety thir'd year of our Lord, place it too late: and much more is the computation of

Baronius, Harpsfeild and Mathew of Westmin|ster, who assign it to the third year of the following century,
2. It will be sufficient to discover the Errour of their account, if we take notice in what year it was that Constantius was reman|ded into Brittany: For certain it is that in his goverment there was no persecution, as being,Euseb. hist. lib. 8. cap. vit. according to the testimony of Euse|bius, and all historians, a Prince of wonder|full meeknes, humanity and benignity, who never was partaker of the persecution rais'd against Christians: on the contrary he was care|full to preserve all those who liv'd under his Do|minion free frrom all iniury and oppression: Nei|ther did he ever demolish any of their Churches, c.
3. Now by agreement of all Chronologists, Constantius was sent into Brittany the second time in the year of Grace two hundred nine|ty two, which preceded the time assign'd by any of the foremention'd Authours. Wherupon it is that David Powell in his An|notations on Giraldus Cambrensis his Itinerary was not asham'd to affirm,Ap. Girald. Cambr. Itin. lib. ..5. that the Martyr|dom of S. Albanus and the rest was consumma|ted in the year of our Lord two hundred ninety two, when Constantius Chlorus raigned in Brit|tany: thus wrongfully charging a vertuous innocent Prince with their blood.
4. But though this be sufficient to disprove the said Writers account, we must search other authorities which may warrant us to affixe their Martyrdom to this present third year of Diocletians raign, when he assum'd Maximian to partake of the Empire. And such authorities doe freely offer themselves; for the most ancient Writer of S. Albanus his life in Capgrave sayes expressly,Ap. Cap|grav. in S. Alba. The glorious Martyr S. Albanus suffred on the tenth of the Calends of Iuly in the year of our Lord two hundred eighty sixe. The same is proved by those Authours who commemorate the invention of the Holy Martyrs body in the dayes of King Offa, in the year of our Lord seaven hundred ninety fower, which, saith Matthew of Westminster,Westmst. ad A. D. 94. was the five hundred and seaventh year after his Passion. To this account subscribes likewise Matthew Paris, who recording another opening of the Holy Martyrs Sepulcher in the year of Grace one thousand two hundred fifty seaven, adds these words,M. Paris. ad A. D. 1257. We may take notice, saith he, that from the Passion of the Martyr to this time had pass'd nine hundred and seaventy years, that is, one thousand wanting thirty.
5. We will conclude this with the weighty testimony of S. Beda, as it is to be found in a most ancient Manuscript, for the Printed Copies are imperfect. There in the first Book of his History and seaventh Chapter is found this passage,Bed. M.S. histor. lib. 1. c. 7. Finally at that time Brittany was glorified by severall mens Confes|sions of the Faith of Christ: for in the same two hundred eighty and sixth year of our Lords In|carnation S. Albanus suffred Martyrdome there. By which speech he confirms what he had before written,Id. ibi. l. cap. That the Brittains preserved unto the raign of Diocletian the Faith entire and inviolate, which they received at first: implying that till then nohing had hindred its grouth and flourishing.
6. Now having thus determin'd the pre|cise time of the Martyrdom of S. Albanus and the rest which immediatly followed him, we will proceed to a distinct relation of the particulars concerning it.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP

1. The Emperours Edicts against Christians in Brittany.
2.3. c. Of S. Amphibalus his return into Brittany who he was: and whence he came.
9. Of S. Albanus: and his Title of Oeconomus Britanniae.

1. THE New Emperour Maximianus, cho|sen by Diocletian not so much for his propinquity in blood, as resemblance in cruelty and hatred to Christians, was not slow in publishing his Edicts every where against them: Some he sent into Brittany, a Province subject to him, as being a part of the Western Empire. This was the first time that such Edicts had been publish'd there: and therfore it may be suppos'd that they caused great terrour among the poore Chri|stians.
2. Vpon this occasion most probably it was that Amphibalus,Sup. lib. 5. ch. 5. if he be the same of whom we treated before, return'd into the parts of Brittany which were subject to the Romans, to the end he might confirm his countreymen in the Faith which they had been taught. The Scottish writers will needs have him their Bishop,Vid Brought. cent. 3. cap. 18. n. 2. placed in the Isle of Man, and fauou|rably received by their King Chrathlintus: that both by preaching and writing he had demonstrated the vanity of Heathenish superstitions, and propagated the Christian Faith among the Scots and Picts, and that in his old age returning into the Southern parts of Brittany, he ended his life by a glorious Martyrdome.
3. That Amphibalus preached the Faith in those Northern Provinces, may be granted: but no histories or other Monuments doe as yet mention the names either of Scotts or Picts there. Therfore omitting this Contro|versy, we will out of the life of S. Albanus written by an unknown Authour in very ancient times, before Beda, relate the successe of S. Amphibalus his last voyage into Brit|tany, how he happily brought S. Albanus to relinquish the Roman Idolatry, and embrace the Christian Faith, and how that blessed

Disciple of his, though a Neophyte, scarce perfectly instructed in Christian Religion, pre|vented his Master in confessing of Christ, and suffring for him.
4. But first shall be premised certain ob|servations touing the persons and quali|ties of these two nts, which being colle|cted from other Authours and records may render the following Narration more perspicuous.
5. And concerning Amphibalus some Writers doe not without some reason doubt whether Amphibalus the Teacher of the Ca|ledonians be the same with him who taught S. Albanus: Because both the regard of time, and quality of their persons seem to pro|nounce them to be severall. He who taught the Caledonians is in ancient Writings said to have been forty years before a Bishop of the Prime See in the North under King Crathlintus: wheras this Amphibalus the Converter of S. Albanus to the Faith is by our Historians simply call'd a Clark, some times a Preist, or a Monk:Ap Brought. cen. . cap. 19. num. 2. for so we read in the Annalls of Winchester, S. Amphibalus a Monk and Doctour in the Church of Caermardin, otherwise call'd the Citty of Melin in wales.
6. But as touching the time, it does not necessarily proove his age to have been so excessively long, but that he might have lived to this time: and those who describe his Martyrdom affirm him to have been very old.
7. Again considering his Titles, it is well known that the name of Sacerdos (Preist) and Bishop, were in those ancient dayes used promiscuously. And moreover Amphibalus having had his Mission from the Bishop of Rome to preach the Gospell in Brittany, no doubt was qualified for Episcopall fun|ctions. Then whereas he is stiled a Monk, it was the usuall practise among those Primi|tive Apostolicall Missioners to spend much of their time in solitary retirements, to exercise prayer and Mortification. And Cairmardin being not far distant from Car Leon, the place of S. Amphibalus his Nativity, might probably be chosen by him for such a retreit.
8. But it will be more difficult to deter|min the place from whence he last came into the Southern parts of Brittany: for if we beleive the Scottish Historians, we must say that he came from the Caledonians: though indeed they declare that their Amphibalus dyed quietly without any violence or per|secution: Whereas our writers professe that he came from the Western provinces of the Silure: or Dimetae, now South Wales. But according to the more Authentick Narra|tion of S. Albanus his life, he seems to have come into Brittany from Rome and through France, for he is sayd to have pass'd through regions of Heathens, or such as professed the Pagan Idolatry of the Romans.
9. Next for as much as concerns S. Albanus, in our English Martyrologe he is stiled the Cheif Procuratour (Oeconomus) of Brittany:Martyrolog. Anglican 22. Iulij. from whence we may collect that he was the Emperours Quaestor or Treasurer, to gather his rents and Tributs. For such Officers were usually sent into the Provinces, which were not Consular. And these Procurators were some times Gentlemen of Rome, of which rank S. Albanus his family seems to have been: Some times likewise they were the Emperours (liberti, or) freed servants,Dio. hist. l. 53. as Dio informs as.
10. Having premis'd these remarks touching the two holy Martyrs, we now proceed to the Narration of their Gests, ac|cording to the ancient authentick relation preserv'd by Capgrave.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Ancient authentick Acts of S. Albanus: his wonderfull Conversion by S. Amphibalus, c.

1. THis then is the tenour of the Acts of the holy Proto-martyr of Brittany Saint Albanus: thus they begin:Act. S. Alba|ni apud Cap|grav. when the perse|cution under the Emperour Diocletian moved against Christians began to rage through the whole Empire, a certain man named Amphi|balus illustrious for his vertues, and learning, having pass'd (the Sea) into Brittany, came through the divine conduct, to Verolam. And having entred the Citty, he resorted to the house of Albanus, desiring to be entertain'd as a stran|ger. Now this Albanus was a Cittizen of Ve|rolam, eminent for his quality, being descended from an illustrious Roman family. He received the holy man with great kindnes and liberality. And having withdrawn him from the noise of the servants into a privat room, he ask'd him secretly, How could you, being a Christian, passe without danger through the regions inhabited by Gentiles, and arrive safely  his Citty?
2. This question was seasonably indeed made, considering the subtile means em|ployed by Diocletian for the discovery of Christians: for as we read in the Acts of Martyrs cited by Baronius, it was not permitted to any one either to buy or sell,Acts Mart. ap. Baronis ad A. D. 26. till he had offred incense to certain little Idols sett up in the Mar|kets: And moreover about all streets, passages and fountains were placed Officers with order to compell all that would draw water or have their corn ground, to sacrifice first to such Idols. To this question therfore S. Amphibalus thus answered:3. My Lord Iesus Christ, the son of the living God, sayd he, preserv'd mee safe among all dangers, and sent mee into this Province for the salvation of many, to the end that by preachin his holy Faith I may prepare a people acceptable to him. But who is this Son of God, replied

Albanus? Can God be said to be born? These are strange speeches, such as I never heard before. I de|sire therfore to be inform'd what opinion you Chri|stians have of these matters. Then the Holy man answered thus, Our Faith teaches us to acknowledge the Father to be God, and the Son likewise to be God. Which Son of God in infinite mercy vouchsa|fed to take our flesh upon him for the salvation of mankind, that he might redeem us by suffring death. And discoursing at large of the Birth, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, he added, If you, O Albanus, will beleive these things to be true, you will receive power, by calling on the name of Christ, to restore to health any infirm sick persons. And the truth is, I an come into this Citty on purpose to preach to you the healthfull Doctrin of our Lords Passion: because our mercifull God will reward your kind offices of humanity and hospitality, to which you frequently addict your selfe, with the inestimable recom|pence of eternall happines. Then Albanus ask'd him, What honour and worship must I exhibite to Christ, in case I embrace his Faith. The other answered, Beleive this, that our Lord Iesus, to|gether with the Father and the Holy Ghost is one God, and thou wilt have perform'd a work of high esteem in his sight. But Albanus sayd, what is all this? Sure thou art mad, thou knowst not what thou sayst: No human understanding or reason can comprehend these things. But be sure of this, that if the inhabitants here of this Citty came to know that thou makest such discourses of Christ, without delay they would put thee to a cruell death. For mine own part I am very soli|citous in thy behalf, for fear some mischeif befall thee before thou departest from hence. Having said this, be arose and went his way much di|sturbed. As for Amphibalus he spent the whole night alone in watching and prayer.
4. The same night whilst Albanus was sleeping on the topp of the house, wonderfull visions from heaven were presented to him: With which being much affrighted, he rose presently from his bed and went down to the lower rooms, where coming to his guest, he said thus to him, Freind, If those things which thou told'st mee lately concerning Christ be true, I beseech thee to declare to mee freely and without any feare the meaning of my dream. Mee thought I saw a certain man come down from heaven: and presently an innumerable multitude of men laid hold on him, and tormen|ted him all the wayes they could devise: they bound his hands with chaines, they tore his flesh most greivously with whips, they hung him on a tree, stretching his hands a crosse. The man thus tormented was quite naked, not having so much as shooes on his feet. His hands and feet were fastned to the wood with nailes, and his side was peirced through with a spear, and from his wound, as it seem'd to mee, there flowd both blood and water On his right hand they sett a reed, and upon his head they put a crown of thorns.
5. And when they had exercised all that hu|man cruelty could devise, they began to insult on him with despightfull speeches, Saying to him, Hayle, King of the Iewes: if thou art the Son of God, come down from the Crosse and wee will beleive in thee. And when they had con|tinued a good while thus reviling him, the Young man answerd them not a word. To conclude, after they had sayd what so ever they thought good to him, at last he cryed out with a loud voyce, and sayd, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and having said this, he expired. His live|lesse body was afterward taken down from the Crosse, out of which the blood still flowd abun|dantly. They then layd it in a sepulcher of stone, sealing the monument, and setting guards to watch it. But then followd a wonderfull thing: for this bloodlesse carkeys return'd to life, and resu|ming its former strength, came out of the sepul|cher which remaind seald as before. I my selfe with mine own eyes saw how he rose again. Then came from heaven certain men cloathed with Vestments white as snow, and taking the man with them, returned from whence they came, and were attended by an infinite number of others in white garments, which all the way ceased not to sing praise, incessantly blessing the Father (I know not who he was) together with his Son, saying, Blessed be God the Father, together with his onely begotten Son. They express'd such wonder|full ioy, as nothing could be compar'd to it. These things I saw, and besides these many other, which I neither will nor ought to declare. I beseech thee now tell mee what is signified by these things which were represented to mee in Vision: Doe not fear any danger to your selfe at all, but speak freely.
6. The holy man Amphibalus having heard all this, sensibly felt his heart visited by our Lord with incredible ioy. And presently taking out a Crucifix which he had born secretly, he said to Albanus, Behold, in this figure and image thou maist manifestly perceive the meaning and im|portance of thy last nights Vision. For the man who came from heaven is this Iesus Christ my Lord, Who refused not to undergoe the punish|ment of the Crosse, to the end that by his blood He might free us from the guilt which we had contracted by the transgression of our first Father Adam. Now those men which layd violent hands upon him, and afflicted him by diverse sorts of torments, were his own people the Iewes. For though they had a promise from God that he would send unto them from heaven his own Son, yet when he, whom they so much and so long a time expected, was come, they did not acknowledge him to be the Authour of their salvation, but con|tradicted him in every thing and returned to him evill for good, and hatred for his love: and in conclusion being agitated with extreme envy and malice against him, they broke forth to such hor|rible impiety, that they layd hold on him, cruci|fied and murdred him. Thus it was that our mercifull Lord redeem'd us with the price of his own blood: thus by dying he became victorious over death, and being rais'd upon the Crosse, he drew all to him: For descending voluntarily to the enclosures of Hell, he freed from Captiuity his own servants detain'd there, and binding the Devill in everlasting chaines, he cast him into

the utmost places of darknes.
7. Then Albanus being fill'd with wonder at these speeches, broke forth into these words, All that thou hast said of Christ is most true, and can not be charged with any falsity. For this last night I evidently perceived, and with mine own eyes saw how Christ overcame the Devill, how he bound him and thrust him down into the bottom of Hell, where that abominable wretch lyes fast tyed with chaines: So that hereby knowing that all things told by thee are true, from this moment I doe professe that I will be thy most obedient Disciple. Tell mee therfore, I beseech thee, for I know thou art ignorant of nothing: how must I behave my self to the Father and the Holy Ghost, now that I professe my self a servant of the Son?
8. Amphibalus at this question with great ioy sayd, I give thanks to my Lord Iesus Christ for that thou of thine own selfe hast had the know|ledge to pronounce these three adorable Names. Beleive therfore firmly, and professe faithfully that the three Persons express'd by thee with their proper names, are one onely God. Albanus an|swered, I beleive, said he, and from hence for|ward my firm Faith is, that there is no other God besides my Lord Iesus Christ, who for the salvation of mankind took our nature, and suffred death on the Crosse: He together with the Father and the Holy Spirit is one onely God, and besides him there is no other.
9. Having said this, he oft times cast him|self prostrate before the Crucifix, and as if he had seen our Lord Iesus himself hanging on the Crosse, this happy Penitent earnestly begg'd pardon for his sins. Such affectionate kisses he often pressed on his feet, and places of his wounds, as if he had lie prostrate as the feet of his Redeemer whom he had seen crucified. Teares mixt with blood flowd abun|dantly from his eyes upon the Venerable Crosse, which he accompanied with these words, I renounce the Devill, said he, and I detest all the enemies of our Lord, in whom only I beleive and resigne my self to him, who, as thou affirmest, rose the third day from the dead.
10. Then Amphibalus said to him, Be of good courage, our Lord is with thee, and his Grace will never be wanting to thee. That saving Faith, which other men attain to by ministery of men, thou hast learnt not of men, nor by men, but by the revelation of Iesus Christ himself. Therfore being assured of thy constancy, my purpose is to leave thee and to travell further, that I may shew the way of Truth to other Gentiles also. By no means, said Albanus, Stay at least one week longer with mee, that I may be more perfectly instru|cted in the Faith by thee: To which request of his Amphibalus condescended.
11. This exact Relation of the wonderfull manner of the Conversion of S. Albanus by the Ministery of S. Amphibalus we re|ceive from a Nameles Authour of great An|quity, concerning whose authority and cre|dibility we shall speak hereafter. We will now proceed to the Narration of his suf|frings and glorious Martyrdom, which fol|lowed presently after.


XI. CHAP.XI. CH.

1.2. A prosecution of the Acts S. Albanus: who dismisses S. Amphibalus, changing garments with him.
3.4. The change of S. Albanus his life.
5.6. c. He is accused: apprehen|ded, and brought before the Roman Magistrate: examined and cast in prison.
10.11. A miraculous drought, testi|fying the Martyrs innocence.

1. ALbanus having been thus instructed, baptised and confirm'd in Faith by Amphibalus,A. D. 287. was at last content to be sepa|rated from  The manner  hus related by Mathew of Westminste, banus,Florileg. ad. A. D. 29. saith he, exhorts Amphibalus to take care of his own safety and depart the Citty (of Verolam.) And to disguise him he gave him his own military vestment, woven with gold, that so he might be more safe from the soldiers. And in exchange he takes for himselfe his Masters, (called Caracalla:) being assured that his raging enemies would look upon it with envious and malicious eyes. Am|phibalus therfore in compliance with Albanus his request early in the morning before day began his flight northward from the Citty, being condu|cted in his way by Albanus as far as they iudged expedient. When they were to part and take their last leave of one another, who can without tears call to mind the bitter sorrow and teares shed by them both? Thus Amphibalus hastens to Wales, there expecting his Martyrdom. And Albanus cloathes himselfe with his Masters vestment, thinking to divert hereby the rage of the Heathen Romans against himselfe only.
2. Concerning this vestment of Amphi|balus, Baronius thus writes, We will not omitt, saith he, to declare that the robe called Ca|racalla was anciently worn by Ecclesasticall persons: for being a long vestment descending to the anckles, it gave a comely gravity to those who wore it. And hence it is that Beda from the ancient Acts of Saint Albanus affirms that the same Saint cloathed himself with an Ecclesiasticall habit, to wit a Caracalla be|longing to Amphibalus a Clark, whom in his

flight he had entertain'd at his house. Now this Vestment though for the length of it is was incom|modious in a iourney, Yet for all that Amphiba|lus would not change it. From this gar|ment Antoninus the Son of Severus had the Sirname of Caracalla because,Spartian. in Antonin. Ca|racalla. saith Spartia|nus, he bestow'd on the Roman people vest|ments of that fashion.
Harpsf. 6. Sac. c. 8.3. S. Albanus now left alone made great hast in his iourney to immortality. All the enticements of the world became odious to him, saith Harpsfeild, and he found no pleasure but in teares and prayers at the foot of our Lords Crosse: he burns with a desire to requite the love of Christ by dying for him.
4. His domesticks and neighbours ob|serving the wonderfull change in his man|ner of life, began to suspect and quickly found out the true cause of it. So that in a short time he is publickly known to be a deseour of Heathenish Superstition, for which he is complain'd of and conven'd before the Roman Magistrate. How he be|hav'd himselfe in so glorious a Tryall we will relate out of the authentick Acts of his Martyrdom which Baronius affirms to be very ancient, and which S. Beda follows in his history concerning him.
Ap. Cap|gr. in S. Alba.5. In those acts the Authour thus wri|tes concerning S. Albans apprehension. A certain Gentile went to the Iudge and disco|vered to him all that had pass'd between S. Albanus and S. Amphibalus. At which the Iudge being highly incensed gave command that S. Albanus and his Master should be brought before him. But Amphibalus being privily departed, a great number of soldiers, horse and foot, which were sent by the Iudge found the illustrious S. Albanus in a strange habit, and with naked feet before the Crosse of our Lord devoutly attending to his prayers.
6. The Soldiers rushing in upon him in troops, ask'd him where the Clark was, whom he had entertain'd. His answer was, That holy man is under the protection of God, and fears not the threats of men. When they heard this, they layd hands on him, bound him with chains, and violently drew him away, some laying hold on his garments, and some on his haire. Now he had still kepd the Vest|ment of his Master, knowing well that the sight of it was odious to his enemies. Being cloath'd with this garment, be caried conti|nually in his hand our Lords Image that therby he might openly shew to all that he was a Servant of the Crosse.
7. Being come before the Iudge, he was examin'd in many particulars, but all his answer was that his name was Albanus, and that he was a Christian: this he with great courage and liberty of speech profess'd. At last the Iudge said to him, O Albanus, what is become of that Clark who was lately sent hi|ther by one call'd Christ, I know not who he is, and  vily into this Citty to illude and seduce the inhabitants? If he had not had a guilty conscience,A. D. 287. and been distrustfull of his own cause, this worthy Master of yours would have freely presented himselfe before us, to defend both himself and his Disciple. But by his own cariage he makes known the falsnes and fraudulence of his doctrine, since he deserts and is cowardly run away from thee, whom if his cause had been good, he ought to have justified though with hazard of his life. By which behaviour of his, i I be not deceiv'd, thou now perceivest how silly a fel|low he was who seduced thee into Errour, and by whose suggestion thou art fal into such a frenzy, as not only to renounce all worldly advantages, but to contemne even the immor|tall Gods. The injury aginst whom since we ought not to leave unpunish'd, my resolution was to have reveng'd it by the death of the profane delinquent. But since such is our hu|mane infirmity, that there is none but is ob|noxious to errour, thou maist yet by repen|tance escape their indignation, and again make them propitious to thee, if thou wilt now re|nounce that abominable Sect.
8. Hereto Albanus answered. It is a very easy matter to declare how vain and impertinen this long discourse of yours is. For if it had either seemed good, or proffitable, or agreable to each of us, that holy Clark would not have fayled to come to this audience. But I confesse his stay here could not be pleasing to mee, knowing how prne to mischeif this people allways has been. The Doctrin taught by that good man I con|fesse I have heartily embraced: neither can I therfore repent mee of it. For the Faith which I professe will be proved to be holy and divine by the testimony of infirm sick people who by vertue therof shall receive their health. I will not sacri|fise to your Gods: Neither doe I fear your threat|nings or torments, being secure under the prote|ction of my God.
9. When he had said this, the throng of Offi|cers which stood about him, at the Iudges com|mand, began cruelly to scourge him for refusing to sacrifice: and during that torment, lifting up his eyes to our Lord, he with a chearfull counte|nance said, O Lord Iesus Christ, I beseech thee keep this mind and good resolution which thou hast given mee firm and stable. My desire is, O my God, to offer my soule a whole burnt sacrifice to thy glory, and with my blood to seale thy truth. Now when the Officers hands were become weary with tormenting him, the holy man was thrust into a deep dungeon, where he continued the space of six months.
10. But presently after, all the elements gave testi|mony of the injury and injustice done to him. For from the time of his apprehending to his death, nei+ther rain nor dew refresh'd the earth: the winds were silent, and the region thereabout was conti|nually parch'd with excessive heat of the Sun: in the night time likewise the fling heat was into|lerable. Neither feilds nor trees produced any fruit: so that the world it self fought in the just mans quarrell against his impious enemies.
11. That which this devout Authour

writes of the excessive heat and drought which God sent on Brittany as a just judg|ment for their cruelty against this holy Mar|tyr,  impiety against God, is taken notice of by the Heathen Oratour in a Panegyrick which this very year he pronounced before the Emperour Maximian, then preparing an Ex|pedition against the Tyrant Carausius, who had possess'd himself of Brittany: but as became an impudent flatterer, he ascrib'd the intolerable heat and want of raine to the favour of their false Gods to the Empe|rour, saying, During the space of that whole year almost,Mamert in Panegyr. 2. in which a clear untempestus season was necessary for thy design of building ships, hewing of timber and beams, encouraging the minds of thy soldiers to labour, there was scarce one foule rainy day: The winter it self imi|tated the warm temper of the spring. We thought now that we were not in a cold Northern Climat, but as if there had been a translation both of heaven and earth, we felt the heat of the Sou|thern Sun, c. Of this expedition of Ma|ximian against Carausius we shall treat assoon as we shall have finish'd the glorious Mar|tyrdom of S. Albanus.


XII. CHA.XII. CHAP.

1.2. S Albanus his devotion: and Prayer against Idolatry.
3 Yet he venerates the Holy Crosse.
4.5. S. Albanus restores a Sick man to health.
6.7. Being condemn'd and lead to his death, he converts his Executioner.
8. By his prayer he obtains a fountain of water.
9. Another Executioner having cut off the Martyrs head, looses his eyes.

1. THE Infidel Iudge expected that by a tedious and painfull prison the Holy Martyrs Constancy should be broken and spent: but on the contrary having an op|portunity in that solitude to unite himself to God by Prayer, his courage and strength was much encreased. The ordinary subject of his dayly Spirituall meditations and en|tertainment with God, and the effect they had, is by the devout Writer of his life com|prehended in this Prayer c.
Vit. S. Alba|ni apud Cap|grav.2. O Lord Iesus Christ, doe not permit the Devills malice so much to prevaile, as by his cunning machinations and this peoples relen|ting, my suffring for thee may be hindred. And being come out of prison to suffer, addressing his speech to the unbeleiving people which flock'd to see him, Know all of you for a truth, said he, that I am an irreconciliable enemy of your false Gods. Can any one iudge them to be worthy of any honour which manifestly have no divinity in them, being the work of mens hands? You your selves can testify that they neither see, heare nor understand any thing. O detestable vanity, to expect life from them which have no life them|selves to offer up prayers to those who never could heare to expect safety or happines from those, which are not sensible of the least good to them|selves! Therfore I confidently protest that who|soever exhibits any honour to such dead Idolls, is utterly voyd of all reason. For tell mee I pray you, what can be more desperatly miserable then that man who suffers himselfe to be enslaved by puppets of his own fashioning? We therfore to Idolls, and a greater  to those who adore them.
3. Here the discreet Reader may observe with how vehement a sharpnes this holy man contends against Idolatry, whilst him|self at the same time with great fervour and devotion venerates the Crosse of our Lord. From whence will necessarily follow, that those who in our times impute Idolatry to Catholicks who give due honour to Sa|cred things, are meer strangers to S. Alba|nus his Religion. In those ancient times the Pagans usually called Christians (Crucicolas) Worshippers of the Crosse:Magdeburg. Centur. 3. fol. 121. and the Centuriators of Magdeburg, though Protestants, acknow|ledge that Tertullian in his Apology testifies how the Christians at that time had all Idolls and the ornaments about them in horrible dete|station: Whence proceeded their vehement and bitter invectives against them: Yet the same Authour in the same book seems to declare that those Christians usually had the Image of the Crosse which they sett up either in the places of their publick meetings, or in their privat houses. For which reason the Heathens oftimes objected to them, that they religiously adored the Crosse. Thus were Christians from the begin|ning treated by Pagans: and in the very same manner are Catholicks at this day trea|ted by Sectaries: Whence evidently appears that Modern Sectaries are in their hatred to the Church and the Venerable Crosse of Christ the Successours of Pagans, as Catholicks are of the Primitive Christians. But we will pro|ceed in the Acts of S. Albanus.
4. When these words spoken by S. Albanus in detestation of Pagan Idolatry were heard by the Iudge and the rest who were present,Acta S. Alb. ap. Cap grav with unanimous consent they pronounced sentence of death against him, and lead him to execution to a certain place call'd Holmhirst. Which place is described by S. Beda to be a very agreea|ble plain,Bedae hist. lib. cap. 7. cloath'd with all sorts of flowers, and about five hundred paces broad, a fit Theater for so glorious a Martyr. The same Authour adds, that S. Albanus being lead to his death,Id. Ibid. came to the river, which with a swift torrent ran between a wall on one side, and a sandy shore on the other, where the holy Martyr was to be behea|ded: where he saw great multitudes of all con|ditions, ages and sexes, which, no doubt, by divine instinct were assembled to honour his death: and they so choaked the passage of the

bridge, that before night they could not all have passed over. As for the Iudge he had no inten|tion to shew any respect to the Martyr, but staid behind in the Citty. S. Albanus therfore in|flamed with a devout desire of a speedy Martyr|dom, approached neer the river, and lifting up his eyes with prayer to God, the river became presently drye, and the water gaue free way to the passengers. Thus S. Beda.
5. The manner how this Miracle was wrought, is more expressly declared in the foresaid authentick Acts of S. Albanus, from whence S. Beda borrowed his Narra|tion: For there it is said,Act 8. Alb. vbi sup. that when he was come to the river side, he fell on his knees, and prayed saying: O Lord Iesus Christ, from whose most holy side I my self (in a vision) saw both water and blood to flow, I beseech thee that thou wouldst cause these waters to be diminished, and the floods to return back, to the end that this people may without any danger or inconvenience be present at my Suffring. O wonder full! he had us sooner bowd his knees, but the channell was immediatly dry. The tears flowing from Saint Albanus his eyes left no water in the river. The power of his Prayer emptied the torrent, and cleared a passage for the people between the floods on both sides.
6. Then the Officer who conducted Saint Albanus to his death by the merits of the holy Martyr obtaind his own eternall happines. For when he saw these miracles, he threw away his sword, and casting himself at the holy mans feet, begg'd pardon of him. Which when the people saw, they laid hold on the man, beat out his teeth, tore his sacred mouth, and in a man|ner broke all his bones.
7. S. Beda thus relates this passage: The soldier,Beda Hist. l. 1. c 7. saith he, fell down at S. Albanus his feet, instantly desiring that himself might ra|ther be slain with, or for the Martyr, whom he had been commanded to putt to death. Now whilst he of a persecutour was chang'd into a companion of the true Faith, and, the sword lying on the ground, the other officers were at a stand what they should doe, the most venerable Confessour ascended the hill together with the multitudes.
8. The Acts further declare, as likewise S. Beda, that when the people being come to the top of the hill were tormented with extremity of thirst:Act  Alb. S. Albanus kneeling down, thus prayed to God, O God who didst create man of the clay of the earth, suffer not, I beseech thee, any of thy creatures to receive any harm by my occasion. After which words there presently broke forth a fountain before his feet, which with a rapide course flowed down the hill: so that the people being refreshd with those waters, escaped all danger by their thirst.
9. In the mean time another Executioner was chosen from among the people, into whose hands the sword was delivered: who to his own great unhappines discharged that impious office. For, saith Mathew of West|minster,orileg. ad A. D. 303. while the holy Martyr kneeling offred his prayers to God, and frequently with great fervour kiss'd the Crucifix which he held in his hands, the Executioner drawing his sword, cutt of his head: and immediatly by a wonderfull miracle Almighty God by the losse of the Execu|tioners eyes gave testimony to the Martyrs in|nocence. For, as S. Beda relates, he who stretch'd forth his impious hand to cutt the pious Martyrs neck,Bd. hist. l. 1. c 7. was not permitted to insult over him being dead, for together with the blessed Martyrs head the Executioners eyes also fell to the ground. This Miracle is confirmed not only by the foreci|ted Acts, but many other Authours, of forraign Nations: and particularly by Hie|ricus a French man, who seaven hundred years since wrote the life of S. Germanus.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. The Martyrdome of the Converted Soldier, his name, c.
3. The glorious assumption of S. Al+banus his soule into heaven.

1. SAint Albanus had a companion in his death, the Soldier who was design'd to be his executioner. Concerning whom S. Beda thus writes. There was beheaded with him likewise the foresaid Soldier,Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 7. who being moved by a divine instinct refused to kill the Holy Con|fessour of our Lord. Concerning whom this may without all doubt be affirmed, that though he was not outwardly cleansed with the water of Baptism, yet being washed in the Laver of his own blood, he became worthy to be admitted into the kingdom of heaven.
2. The Acts of S. Alban doe affor'd us a more exact relation both of this Soldiers name,Act. S. Alb. and occasion of his Martydom: Where we read how the said Soldier, by name Hera|clius, who, as hah been declared, was left half dead by the people, afterward creeping on his hands and feet as he could, followed them up the Mountain.To whom one of the Iudges then present said in scorn, Go to now, addresse thy prayers to thy Patron Albanus even now executed, that he would restore soundnes to thy bruised bones and limbs. Run, make hast, ioyn his head to his body, and no doubt thou wilt not fayle to obtain perfect health: why doest thou stay? bury the dead carkeise, and thou maist be assured that whilst it is in thy hands, it will bestow an entire cure on thee. The Soldier answered, I doe most firmly beleive that this Blessed Saint Albanus by his merits can restore unto mee my perfect health for that which you speak in derision, may in earnest be fullfill'd in mee. And having say'd this, he embraced the head, and adioyning it to the body, he became immediatly as sound as before.
When the Infidells saw this, they were filld with envy and malice, and said, what shall we doe? Sure no sword can kill this man. We have bro|ken all his bones, and yet now his former strength

is restor'd him. Then laying hold on him, they bound him fast with chaines, and tore his body with severall sorts of tortures, and in the end with a sword cutt off his head.
3. Now how acceptable to Almighty God the Martyrdom of this glorious S. Alba|nus was, was presently after declared from heaven in a wonderfull manner, for thus we read in his Acts,Ibid. Behold, the night imme|diatly following his suffring, a pillar of light was seen to raise it self from the sepulcher of S. Al|banus up to heaven, by which Angells descended and ascended, spending the whole night in Hymns and praises of God, frequently also repeating these words, The illustrious Albanus is now a glorious Martyr of Christ. And hereto the an|cient Christian Poet Venantius Fortunatus had regard,Ven. Fortun. l. 8 de Virg. c. 4. when in a Poem of his among other Saints celebrating the memory of S. Albanus and his companion suffring in Brittany, he says, that Quires of Angells from heaven did with songs wellcom them at their entrance into glory, and the glorified Saints enrich'd with the Crosse and blood of Christ did make hast to ioyn in Hymnes to God for them.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2.3. Of the Authour of the ancient Acts of S. Albanus.
4.5. His Relation confirmed by the testimony of Gildas.
6.7. Iohn Fox his unfaithfullnes.

1. HAving thus with as much fidelity and exactnes as we could, given an account of the Gests of our first most glo|rious Brittish Martyr S. Albanus, in which we have principally follow'd the Authour of his life, being a precious Monument of Antiquity preserved by our Countrey-man Capgrave: The faithfullnes of whose relation is, we see, attested by other Historians also of good note and Authority, as S. Beda, Mathew of Westminster, c. It will become us to say some thing of the said Authour himself: and all that can be said is the Te|stimony that he gives concerning himself, in these words full of Christian Modesty and Humility;Author ap. Capgrav. in vt S. Alba.2. Least posterity saith he, be solicitous to know my name, let them be contented to be informed, that if they will give mee my true name, they will call mee the miserable wretch, worst of all sinners. I am undertaking a iourney to Rome, intending there to renounce the Errour of Paganism, and by the Laver of Regeneration to obtain the pardon of all my sins. This Book also I will present to the examination of the Romans, to the end that if therin any thing should be found written otherwise then becomes a good Christian, it would please our Lord Iesus Christ by their correction to amend it. By which it ap|pears that this Authour was at the writing of his Book as yet onely a Catechumen, newly converted from Heathenish superstition. What became of him in his voyage to Rome is known only to God, who doubtlesse rewar|ded him highly for his piety and zeale to communicate to posterity the Gests of our glorious Martyr.
3. This is he whom the learned Ecclesia|sticall Historian Harpsfeild calls the nameles Authour,Harpsf. in 6. primis saec. c. . in marg. whose Book was found in the Monastery of S. Albanus, and who was more ancient then S. Beda. And this Authour is frequently quo|ted by the Illustrious Cardinall Baronius, who follows him likewise in his Narration tou|ching this our glorious Martyr. And to for|tify the credit of his Authority in severall points before related touching the Martyr|dom of S. Albanus, we will here adioyn a memorable passage out of our ancient fa|mous Historian Gildas, who writing concer|ning this Persecution rais'd in Brittany by Diocletian, saith as followeth:4. Almighty God who is willing that all men should be saved,Gildas de Ex+cidio. and who calls as well sinners as those who esteem themselves just, hath mag|nified his mercy to us; for in the foresaid perse|cution, least our countrey of Brittany should be obscured by a dark night of ignorance, he in his free bounty enlightned us by the bright shining Lamps of his holy Martyrs, the places of whose Martyrdom, and sepulchers of whose bodies would even now also imprint in our minds a great ardour of Divine love, were it not that by the wofull aversion of barbarous Enemies and our own ma|nifold crimes an accesse to those holy places is denyed us: Those places, I mean, where repose the bodies of S. Albanus at Verolam, and S. Aaron and Iulian at Car-len, and many others of both sexes in severall quarters, all which with great magnanimity have stood up courageously in our Lords army. Of which the first, S. Albanus I mean, after he had, with much charity, in imitation of Christ who lay'd down his life for his sheep, entertain'd in his house, and disgui|sed with exchanging his own garments with him the holy Confessour of our Lord Amphibalus, who was pursued by the Enemies of Christ, and even ready to be apprehended, moreover willingly of|fred himself in his foresaid brothers vestments to the persecutours. Thus rendring himself accepta|ble to God, he was during his holy Confession (till he shed his blood in the presence of his impious Enemies who with a horrible pompe produced all the sorts of Roman tortures) wonderfully ad|orned and glorified by God with many admirable miracles: insomuch as by his fervent prayer, in imitation of the passage of the Israelites with the Ark of the Testament through the waters of Ior|dan, he with thousands following him went with drye feet over the Channell of the Noble river of Thames, whilst on both sides the floods stood still like steep rocks: By which miracle he converted the first Soldier deputed to be his executioner, from being a wolf into a lamb, and gave him the courage both vehemently to desire and va|liantly

receive the triumphant palm of Martyr|dom.
5. We here see the exact agreement be|tween the ancient Brittish Historian Gildas and the foresaid Authour of the Acts of S. Albanus. But our Modern Protestant Hi|storians in relating this glorious combat and Victory of our first Martyr, cutt of what they think good, and decry or accuse of forgery whatsoever agrees not to their own faction, without so much as pretending to any Anti|quity to iustify their partiality.
Fox in Acts and Monu|ments f. 88.6. Particularly Iohn Foxe in his new fashion'd Martyrologe, though he commends Saint Albanus and vouchsafes to call him a Martyr, yet severall particulars mention'd by the forecited Authour of Saint Albanus his Acts in S. Beda and Gildas, he superci|liously censures or despises, saying that he saw neither any necessity nor convenience why they should be recited by him. For this reason he passes over with silence all men|tion of the Crosse, with teares and great reve|rence honourd by Saint Alban, and retain'd till the last moment of his life. And as for the miracles perform'd by him, the iubi|lation of Angells after his death and the like, he confidently pronounces to be con|trary to the truth of history. And why? Surely because he could not parallell such Miracles in the Gests of his new Pro|testant Martyrs: no Angells, God knows, reioyced or praised God at their Execu|tions.
Id. ibid.7. One observation of his, full either of ignorance or malice, must not be omitted. That is where he says, That the History of Saint Albanus his Martyrdom reports how the holy Martyrs head when it was cutt and separated from the body spoke some thing. But this, says he, is like a Monkish fiction: As if that namelesse Au|thour had been a Monke, who was not so much as admitted into the Church by Baptisme. But neither he, nor any an|cient or Modern Catholick Authour speaks of any such thing: So that it seems he mistook the relation, ascribing the Angells hymns to the Martyrs tongue.


XV. CHAP.XV. CH.

1. The Pious devotion of Ancient Chri|stians to the Relicks of Holy Martyrs.
2.3. Confirmed by the Acts of S. Sebastian, c.
4. The Manicheans contemners of such Relicks.
5.6.7. Temples built by Brittains to the honow of S. Albanus, c.
8.9. Protestants wrongfully ascribe this Veneration of Relicks to S. Gregory.
10. S. Albanus venerated at Mentz by the name of S. Albinus. And why.
11 12 The Controversy about the Body of S. Albanus between the Monks of Ely and S. Albans, decided
13. S. Gregory Nazianzens testimony of the Veneration of Relicks.

1. BEfore we quitt this argument, we will shew with what piety and reverence the devout Christians in that and the following ages behaved themselves toward the ashes and sacred Relicks of our Holy Martyr. This we may collect from the practise of those times in other Pro|vinces: For the persecuting Infidells knowing well with what solicitude Christians ga|thered the bodies and members of dead Martyrs, and with what devotion they venerated them, used all manner of des|pight to them, and endeavoured either to hide or consume them with fire and cast the ashes before the wind.
2. Thus in the Acts of S. Sebastian,Ap. aron. A. D. 286. who suffred the same or next year to S. Albanus, we read, That they tooke the Body of Sebastian by night, and cast it into a common sink, saying, Least perhaps the Christians make him their Martyr. And again three years after we find in the Authentick Acts of S. Tharacus this passage,Id. ib. A. D. 290. The President sayd to him, Doe not think thou shalt be dispatch'd at once: I will make an end of thee by peece meale, and the remainders of they carkeise shall be devoured by beasts. Tharacus answered him, what thou hast a mind to doe doe quickly: doe not delay mee by promises. The President said, Thou thinkest, villain, that after thy death silly women shall have thy body and embalme it with unguents and spices, c. And afterward, The President said, Doest thou not think that I will thus destroy thee and thy relicks? least foolish women should enwrapp it in clean linnen, and honour it with unguents and odours. And concerning the Martyr Andronicus, The President said, Con|sume him to ashes, and disperse them before the wind, least some of his impious Consorts, or

foolish woemen should gather up any of them, and preserve them, as if they were some precious holy thing.
3. Now how acceptable to God this de|vout reverence of Christians to the Relicks of Martyrs was, was often declared by the mi|raculous ways which God shewed in disco|vering the said holy Relicks, when they were either conceal'd, or their members mix'd and confounded with those of impious ma|lefactours putt to death with them. Thus we read in the said Acts of S. Tharacus,Id. ibid. n. 31. S. Andro|nicus and another Christian martyr'd with them, how when some devout Christians adven|tured to search them out by night, three bright torches, like starrs, appeard over their bodies, and afterward went before them conducting them to the other side of the Mountain, where they secret|ly buried them.
4. This practise was so generall among the Primitive Christians, that the Manicheans only were observed to be contemners of it, as if there were in it some Idolatrous Superstition But their folly and profanenesse is excellent|ly confuted by S. Augustin,Aug cont. Faust Ma l. 20. c. 21.  .32. c. 11. who distingui|shes the Veneration due to Saints and their holy Relicks, which he calls Dulian, from the Supreme degree of adoration due only to God, which he terms Latrian.
5. Now that such reverence was express'd to the Body of S. Alban, is not to be doub|ted. Which that it may appeare, a passage in our ancient Brittish Historian Gildas will suf|ficiently confirm it. Who after he had treated of the Martyrdome of this Holy Martyr, as we declared before, consequently shews the great change in Brittany nine years after this tempest rais'd by Diocletian: His words are as followeth:Gildas in xcidio.6. The space of two lustres (that is, ten years) after the foresaid storm being not entirely full|filld, when the violence of those bloody Edicts against Christians abated, all the devout Soldiers of Christ with ioyfull eyes beheld and received the lightsomnesse and temper following so tedious a winters night: Then they began to restore Chur|ches formerly demolishd, they founded new sacred Temples consecrated to the honour of Holy Mar|tyrs, these they erect, accomplish and adorn, cele|brating publick Festivities, and Sacrifices with pure hearts and mouthes, as manifest signs and tropheys after their victory.
7. This happy change hapned when the Tyrants Carausius and Allectus were vanqui|shed and expell'd by Constantius, who in the year of Grace two hundred ninety two being created Caesar, received the govern|ment and administration of Brittany. By which calculation of Gildas evidently ap|pears, that S. Albanus suffred Martyrdom in the beginning of Diocletians raign, nine years before Constantius the second time go|verned Brittany.
8 Likewise by this Testimony of Gildas is reproved the assertion of Protestant writers, who attribute to S. Gregory the Great the bring|ing into Brittany the custome of dedicating Churches to the honour of Martyrs, in the time of the Saxons. Wheras besides this autho|rity of Gildas, the said assertion is manifestly confuted by the story of S. Germanus of Au|xerre, and S. Lupus of Troyes, French Bishops, who came into Brittany before the entrance of the Saxons, to root out thence the Pelagian Heresy For thus we read in the Galliean Mar|tyrologe, The Memory of S. Albanus shined glo|riously in Brittany,Martyrolog. allican. 22. un. to whose honour a famous Church was erected in the place whereby shed|ding his blood he had triumphed. The which Church was by S. Germanus visited with great devotion, to the end he might there pay his thanks to God for his victory against the Pelagian Here|ticks. There opening the holy Martyrs Sepulcher, to honour him he repos'd in it severall Relicks of Apostles, and Martyrs which he had brought out of France. And because he would not depart thence without the protection of the Holy Martyr, from the place where the Martyrs blood had been shed, he took a lump of earth, which at his return he caried to his own See. And from this action of S. Germanus the Veneration of S. Albanus the Brittain was spread through allmost all the Chur|ches of France, being consign'd in all the Eccle|siastical Tables of most Episcopall Churches there: particularly of Bourges, Sens, Orleans, Austun, S. Malo, Constantia, c. The same story con|cerning S. Germanus is related likewise by S. Beda.Beda Hist. l. 1. cap. 18 upplem. Martyrolog. Gallic. 16. pril.
9. Hence may be argued the mistake in the supplement to the French Martyrologe, where it is sayd that Otho, the second Emperour of that name, translated to Colen the Body of S. Albanus which S. Germanus had brought out of Brittany into France. For certain is is that, not his body, but only a portion of earth dyed with the Holy Martyrs blood, was transferd by Saint Germanus, as S. Beda expressly affirms, and as the following Annalls of Brittany confirm, where we read how Off a King of the Mercians translated the sacred Body, and built over his Monument a most magnificent Church.
10. It is here to be observed that S. Albanus is venerated at Ments in Germany under the name of S. Albinus. The occasion wherof was this:Ap. Crom|bach. in V|sul vir. dic. p. 110. Theophania wife to the Emperour Otho the second having obtained at Rome a portion of the Relicks of S. Albanus, caried them with her into Germany, intending to place them at Colen in the Monastery of S. Pantaleon. In her way she pas|sed through Mentz, in which Citty was celebrated with great devotion the Memory of another S. Al|banus, a Martyr also. Hereupon Wiltegecus Bishop of Mentz, deeply apprehending least the Memory of our Brittish Albanus should obscure the glory of their Speciall Patron Albanus, by reason of agreement in name, together with the Imperiall Authority, which probably would promote his ve|neration, made it his most humble and earnest suit unto the Empresse that our Brittish Saint should afterward in those countreys be call'd Albinus, for distinctions sake: which humble request by

the assistance of the Nobility about her and her Counsell, he at last obtained. Thus Her|mannus Cromback relates the matter out of an ancient Manuscript belonging to the Monastery of S. Pantaleon in Colen: who adds, that this Translation befell in the year of Grace nine hundred eighty four.
11. To conclude this subject, and to demonstrate with what devotion our whole nation hath always celebrated the memory of this our first Brittish Martyr, shall be here annex'd out of Thomas Walsingham a breif narration how the Controversy was ended betwen the two Monasteries of S. Alban and Ely, both which earnestly and confidently pretended that S. Alba|nus his body repos'd among them.
The Wals|gham in bd. 2. A. D. 1313.12. For King Edward the second celebra|ting Easter in the Monastery of Ely employed his authority to procure that the Tomb, in which the Monks affirm'd that the Body of S. Albanus lay among them, should be ope|ned. Which at last, though with great relu|ctance of the Monks, being perform'd, there was nothing at all found in it but only a course hairy garment, in the upper part where|of was seen sprinckled in severall places thick congeald blood, as fresh as if it had been shed a few dayes before: which garment was without all question the Caracalla which S. Albanus received from his Master Saint Am|phibalus, and wherin he suffred Martyrdom. And by this discovery the Monks of S. Al|ban to their great ioy, gained their cause.
13. Neither let any one wonder that the same Veneration should be pay'd to a Mar|tyrs Vestment sprinkled with his blood, which would be given to his whole body: for by many miracles God hath testified that this is acceptable to him. A more authentick witnes hereof cannot be required then the Holy and learned Fa|ther S. Gregory Nazianzen,Gregor. Na|zianz. amb. 18. de vis. whose words are these, A little portion of dust, a par|ticle of bones, a little haire, part of the Vest|ment, or the marks of the blood of a Martyr sprinckled ought to have as much veneration as the whole body. Nay I have known where onely the name of a Martyr attributed to a place, has produced the same vertue that the Martyrs whole body would have done. O wonderfull! the memory alone of Martyrs is sufficient, in my opinion, to conferr health.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1.2 c. The ancient Acts of S. Amphibalus.
3. Great multituds present at the death of S. Albanus, converted.
4.5. S. Amphibalus venerates the Crosse.
6.7.8. A thousand Brittish Christians martyrd in the presence of S. Amphi|balus.
9. The place of their Martyrdome, Lichfeild.

1. THE first that follow'd S. Albanus by the way of Martyrdom to heaven, was his Master Amphibalus, who first shewd him the way thither. Concerning who~ thus wee read in his Life extant likewise in Capgrave, but written by a lesse ancient Authour, as appears by the context of it, for he mentions some Provinces by names, which were not given them till some ages after these times, as wallia (Wales) c.
2. When S. Amphibalus had by his preaching and exhortation,Vit. S. Am|phib. ap. Cap grav. through the operation of the Holy Ghost converted the glorious Martyr S. Al|banus to the Fatih, his Venerable Disciple earnest|ly perswaded him to depart that Citty of Verolam, and withall gave him his own Soldiers garment richly woven with gold, that so he might travell more safely from his enemies. To whose request Amphibalus condescending, began his flight early in the morning, directing his iourney northward, with an intention to preach the word of God to the Gentiles in Wales.
3. After whose departure followd the Martyr|dom of S. Albanus: and when the multitudes which accompanied him to his death saw the pil+lar of light which from his tombe rais'd it self up to heaven, and the Angells descending and as|scending with praises to God all the night, they were amazed at that unusuall ligt, which they ascribed to the miraculous power of God. Where|upon one of the~, seeing the rest astonishd, thus spake to them, It is manifest that it is Christ the Son of God who hath wrought these wonderfull things. The Gods which we have hitherto worshipped are rather Monsters then Deities, having no power nor Divinity in them, so that we have spent our dayes in their worship, without any proffit at all. See how the nights darknes gives way to celestiall splendours: See how the heavenly Cittizens come and goe, celebrating the Sanctity of Albanus. Let us therfore forsake our former Errours, and be converted from lyes to truth, from infidelity to Faith. Let us goe and enquire out the man of God, who, as you know, converted by his preaching Al|banus to the Faith. This man having with these and other like speeches exhorted the rest, they all with one accord presently profess'd a detestation of their former Heathenish Errours, and exalted the Faith of Christ.
4. Thus with great hast they directed their iouney into wales, where the servant of God Amphibalus

was suppos'd to remain. To whom when they were come, they found him preaching the word of life to the people of that Region: and told him the cause of their coming: withall presenting to him the Crosse which himself had before bestow'd on his Disciple Albanus, and which was sprinck|all over with fresh blood, thereby exhibiting manifes igns of the Blessed mans Martyrdom.
Florileg. ad A. D. 303.5. As touching this Crosse thus Mathew of westminster writes, The Crosse, says he, which the holy Martyr Albanus was wont almost conti|nually to carry in his hands, at his death being sprinckled with his blessed blood, fell upon the grasse: which a certain Christian privily took up, and conceal'd it from the Pagans.
Id. ibid.6. The same Authour pursuing this Story, adds, That S. Amphibalus having heard and seen these things, gave thanks to Almighty God, and made a Sermon of Christian Religion to these his new Auditours, who were in number about a thousand. To whose doctrin they all imme|diatly profess'd their consent and beleif, and ther|upon chearfully received from his sacred hands the Seale of Faith which is in Christ, to witt, his holy Baptism.
7. In the mean time the conversion and departure of such great multitudes caused great trouble among the Pagan Cittizens of Verolam: wherupon the Ministers of the per|secution rais'd against Christians there re|solved to pursue with all cruelty the holy man Amphibalus, who had been the cause of so great a change: and in order thereto they with armed forces march'd the same way which their companions had taken, inten|ding to find out this publick and profess'd Enemy of their Superstition. In conclusion they easily found him who sought not to escape from them: and they found him em|ployed in his usuall office of preaching the word of God to his new Converts.
Vit. S. Am+phibal. ap. ap. grav.8. Then (according to the relation of the Acts of this holy Martyr) rushing with violence upon him: O seducing wretch, said they, how darest thou with thy fallacious inventions deceive this simple people, and teach them to trample under t the Imperiall Lawes, and contemne our Gods?
They said no more, but mad with rage presently without any distinction, or regard of age or affinity mercilesly without any resistance putt to the sword all their thousand countreymen for the Faith of Christ, neighbours murdring neighbours, freinds freinds, and kinsmen kinsmen, As for the holy man Amphibalus, who was reserved to a more cruell death, being compass'd aboue with the livelesse bodies of these holy Martyrs, he with ioy commended their happy soules to God.
9. As touching the place where so cruell and inhuman a butchery was made, it is not agreed by Historians, some affirm it to have been among the Silures, in the Province of Monmouth: and hereto the Authour of Am|phibalus his life seems to accord: but others more probably say that these holy Martyrs suffred among the Cornavij (in Warwick shire)Camden. in Cornav. where their persecutours overtook them in their way towards Wales, at Lichfeild, which Citty seems to have taken its name from this slaughter of so many Martyrs, for as Iohn Rosse of warwick interprets the word, it signifies the feild of dead bodies, which are also to this day the Arms of the Citty.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

1.2. S. Amphibalus lead prisoner towards Verolam: in the way miraculously cures a sick person.
3. He is barbarously tormented: his gutts wrapp'd about a stake.
4. During his torments he enveighs against Idolatry.
5. His Executioner is converted.
6. A voyce from heaven testifies S. Amphibalus his Sanctity: He dyes: and his Body is privatly buried.

1. AFter the offring made of so many im|maculate Victimes to God,Florilig. ad A. D. 303. S. Amphiba|lus, saith Mathew of westminster, became the sole object against whom these bloody Executioners powrd forth all their rage: for binding his arms with sharp and streit cords, they so drove him with naked feet before their horses toward the Citty of Verolam: who the nearer he approached to his be|loved Disciple S. Albanus, the lesse was he sensi|ble of the roughnes of the wayes and toyle of the iourney: Moreover in the way Amphibalus fast bound as he was, had yet the vertue to unloose a sick person from the bonds of his infirmity,
2. This miracle is thus related in the life of S. Amphibalus:Act. S. Am+phib. ap. Cap. grav. In the way as they pass'd, a cer|tain infirm person began to crye out:O servant of the High God, help mee, that by thy intercession I may be freed from this my greivous infirmity: for I beleive that by calling on the name of Christ over mee, thou maist speedily restore my health.
Whereupon immediatly in the sight of them all the sick person arose chearfull and perfectly reco|ered. This miracle finds credit generally among all,. Fox. in Acts and M. in perscent. 10 except Iohn Foxe, who says there was no cause which might move al|mighty God to shew his power: As if there were neither infidells to be converted, nor beleivers to be confirm'd, nor such mali|cious Sectaries as himself to be preiudged.
3. But to proceed in the suffrings of this glorious Martyr,Act S. Am|phib. as they are related in his Acts to have been inflicted on him at the end of his long iourney, when he was entred into the confines belonging to the Citty of Verolam. There the foresaid Inhabitants of Vero|lam barbarously stripp'd him of his garments: and fastning a stake into the ground, they with a sword ripp'd up his belly, and tying the end of his gutts about the stake with cruell whipping thy forced him to walk about it, so inwrapping it with his bowells: And not content thus, they with knives and lances tore the rest of his body, as if he had been a mark sett on purpose to exercise their wea|pons

upon. All this while the man of God stood with a cheerfull countenance, as if he had suffred nothing, being every moment more constant, though there was not left any part of his body in which there were not imprinted marks of his Martyrdom: insomuch as it seemd a prodigious thing, that after so many tortures and sorts of death, he could have any life remaining in him.
4. The same moment, diverse who were there present and saw the constancy of the holy Martyr, renounced their Idolls, and submitted themselves to the Faith of Christ, beseeching the Blessed man to pray to God for them that they might par|take eternall Happines, for the obtaining of which they were ready to lay down their lives. Which when it was known, the Cheif Magistrate calling the Officers gave them command to kill all those who had cast off the worship and reverence of Heathen Gods, and embraced the Doctrine of the Christian Preacher. Immediatly they executed this horrible Edict, and putt to death a thousand persons, whilst Blessed Amphibalus look'd on, and commended their soules to our Lord.
5. Then one of the by-standers, ruder then the rest, thus spake to the man of God, O pttilesse wretch, way hast thou deceived these simple people with thy frudulent speeches, withdrawing them from the worship of the Gods? By thy cunning per|swasions we have utterly lost our parents and freinds. Notwithstanding though hereby thou hast above measure incensed both Gods and men, yet even now at last by thy repentance thou maist re|cover their pardon and favour. And this will be a proof and sign of thy repentance, if thou wilt re|nounce the impious Sect, which hitherto thou hast followed, and begin to adore the omnipotent Gods, which perhaps out of ignorance thou hast offen|ded. If thou wilt doe this, then the same all-power|full Gods will restore again to life those whom thou hast murdred.
6. To whom the Holy man thus answered, O In|fidell, whilst thou endeavourest with thy false praises to exll thy Gods, be assured that thou hast offended the true God by thy speeches. For it is Iesus Christ my Lord who alone has the power to raise and give life to the dead. As for those whom yee worship as Gods, and think them to be power|full in heaven, they doe now suffer most horrible torments in hell. And partakers in the fellowship of those torments shall be all injust persons, adul|terers, slanderers and such as by their reprobate actions whilst they liv'd here, rendred themselves like to Devills. And for thy part, O Pagan, and all who like thee worship Idolls, except you quickly renounce your heathenish Superstition, and con|vert your selves to the Faith of Christ, you shall all incurr the same punishments in hell. Doe not des|pair, for the mercy of God is great. Breake off your evill wayes, and make hast to be partakers of the Grace of Baptism. By Baptism all sins are forgiven; Heaven is opened to men, who therby become as it were new creatures, having devested themselves of their old wicked inclinations. For those who be|fore Baptism, by their sinns were Children of the Devill, become afterward Sons of God. Run ther|fore for refuge to this Grace, that you may escape everlasting torments.
7. When the impious Pagans heard these spee|ches, they were kindled with rage, and with all their forces laboured to deprive him of life. But the holy Martyr, though he was on all sides brui|sed with a great multitude of stones, which were thrown at him, yet he remain'd immoveable in prayer, not stirring any way from the place where he stood.
8. But when at last the hower was come in which he was to surrender to God his victorious spirit, lif|ting up his eyes to heaven, he saw our Lord Iesus standing at the right hand of the Father, and heard an harmonious co~cert of Angells in heaven, amongst whom he saw his beloved Disciple S. Al|banus whom he presently invoked to his help, saying, O Holy Albanus, pray to our Lord that he would send his good Angell to meet and protect mee, that the accursed fiend and his associats may not binder my passage into life Immediatly after which Prayer, there appeared two Angells, glo|riously shining with celestiall splendour, which came to him: And a voyce from heaven was heard saying, Verily I say unto thee, thou shalt presently be in Paradise with thy Disciple.
9. When the Pagans heard this celestiall voyce, they stood amazed. But the holy Angells took with them the Blessed mans soule, shining with a brightnes white as snow, and with hymnes and praises carried it into heaven. In the mean time the Pagans ceased not to overwhelm with stones the livelesse body, bound as it was with cords. But afterwards, a certain Christian privily took away the Body, and with a diligent care buried it. This is the summ of the Life and Martyrdom of S. Amphibalus, recorded by an ancient British Authour,Hrpsf in 6. aecul. cap.  who, saith Harpsfeild, lived before the time of S. Beda,


XXIII. CHAP.XXII. CHAP

1.2. S. Amphibalus martyrd, or buried at Rudburn near Verolam:  his Sepulcher miraculously discovered by S. Albanus
3. His Body translated to S Albons.
4 The day of his Translation.
5. His Tomb venerated for miracles, c.

1. IN the foregoing relation there is no particular mention either of the precise time or place where S. Amphibalus was mar|tyrd. But touching the place Harpsfeild, saith,Harpsfeild. vbi sup. that the Holy man of God was putt to death in a village call'd Rudburn, distant from Verolam three miles, where, as Thomas Rudburn relates, there were reserved to his time two great knives with which he was killd: Which Thomas liv'd about the year one thousand four hundred and eighty. And indeed in the same village there seem to remain to this day some marks of his Martyrdom: for in the way between Rudburn and Verolam there is shown a

certain Tree, of late enclosd within walls, where it is beleiod was fixd the post to which the holy Martyr was tyed, and where his bowells were forn out.
2. Or rather probably there was the place of his buriall: which was perform'd with such secrecy, as hath been said, that till the year of Grace one thousand one hundred seaventy and eight the sacred Body could never be discovered. But in that yeare, saith Mathew of Westminster,Westm. ad A. D. 1178. the Blessed Martyr S. Albanus was seen visibly to goe out of the Church dedicated to him, and to come to a certain man inhabiting in the town of S. Albons, to whom he said, Follow mee. Who seeing him shining glo|riously like the Sun, was affraid: yet in obedience followd him Northward: and the high way shone with his brightnes. As they walked, the man said to the Holy man, Sir who are you? Who answered, I am Albanus the first Martyr of Britta|ny, and I now lead thee to the Sepulcher of S. Amphibalus, by whose preaching I was converted to our Lord, and became a Martyr; that his bones may be discovered and reverently removed to a more decent place. Thus they talked together familiarly like two freinds: and in the end he shewd him the place: which the man diligently observed, setting certain stones in order there to be a mark for the finding it againe.Math. Paris A. D. 1178. Thus writes that Authour: and the same is related more diffusedly by Mathew Paris.
3. Then it was that the Sacred Body was translated to the Church of S. Albans, where  any Miracles were wrought by his in|tercession, that the year following Lewis King of France, who came into England in devotion to visit the Shrine of S. Thomas of Canterbury, was desirous to continue his voyage likewise to S. Albans, but was dis|swaded by his Nobles accompanying him,Westm. ad A. D. 1179. as the same Authour reports.
4. As touching the time time of this Holy Martyrs death, though the year be well-enough known, to witt, the two hundred eighty seaventh year of our Lord: yet for the day, it is not particularly design'd in any Hi|story or Monument. For wheras in the English Martyrologe his passion is celebrated on the twenty-fifth of Iune, three days after that of S. Albanus: yet surely then was commemo|rated not his death, but the Translation of his sacred ashes to Verolam where they were re|pos'd in the Church of S. Albanus built by King Offa.Harpsfeild in 6 svve. cap. 0. This day it is which Harpsfeild meant when he wrote thus, Verolam never saw any day more joyfull and beneficiall. A Martyr meets a Martyr, the scholler meets his Master, the Host meets his Guest, and one Cittizen of heaven meets another. Albanus now openly and honou|rably entertains that guest at his return, whom before he had secretly dismis'd, least he should fall into his Enemies hands: He now leads him into a magnificent Temple, to whom before he could give no security in a cottage. These things happned in the year one thousand one hundred sea|venty eight, on the five and twentieth day of Iune.
5. But though the Brittains had been for|merly ignorant of the place where S. Amphi|balus his Body lay, yet that was no hindrance to their Veneration of him from the be|ginning. For as may be gathered out of a forecited passage of Gildas, within ten years after his Martyrdom a Church was erected to his honour: And in the year of our Lord three hundred and nine another Church at Winchester was consecrated to S. Amphibalus, which the Saxons afterward rebuilding dedi|cated to S. Peter.


XIX. CHAP.XIX. CH.

1. Severall companions with S. Amphibalus in his Martyrdom: whose names are not known.
2.3.4. Martyrdon of S. Iulius and S. Aaron at Caer-leon.
5 6 Churches built to their memory: long before the Saxons entrance.
7. S Stephanus and S. Socrates Brit|tish Martyrs.

1. BEsides S. Albanus and S. Amphibalus, Brittany at this time was glorified with severall other Martyrs. Capgrave writes that when S. Amphibalus his Body was found, there were discovered likewise with it two other Bodies of Martyrs: A namelesse Au|thour quoted by Bishop Vher reckons three: to which Mathew Paris adds five more, so that saith he,N. Paris. A. D. 1178. Blessed Amphibalus was reckoned the tenth. And Thomas Rudburn, as also the breif History of the Church of Winchester affirm that the bodies of S. Amphibalus and eight of his companions were discovered: Which in all probability were the Relicks of these Martyrs which together with him suffred for the pro|fession of the Christian Faith: their names are only known in heaven.
2. But that part of Brittany from whence S. Amphibalus drew his originall hath more carefully preserved the Memory of their fel|low cittizens and Martyrs which suffred there: Among whom the most illustrious are S. Aaron and S. Iulius, who in this persecution of Diocletian and Maximianus consummated a most glorious Martyrdom there.
3. Concerning whom our Countrey-man Bal,Balaus in Ca|talog. though, as became an Apostat, a bitter Enemy of the Roman-Catholick Church, writes thus: Iulius and Aaron Noble Cittizens of the famous Citty of Caer-Leon (for so Isca of the Si|lures is called from two Legions garrisond there) and Disciples in Christ of the holy Martyr Am|phibalus, were most illustrious ornaments of pie|ty to our Countrey of Brittany. These two addi|cted themselves with much diligence to the study of learning, not only in their own countrey, but also undertook a Voyage into forraign Nations for the attaining skill in good arts: for history informs us that they studied at Rome especially: and ther|fore

celebrates them much for their Learning.
4. Iohn Fox likewise commends these two holy men: but mistakes when he calls them Cittizens of Verolam, whom Gildas and S. Beda positively affirm to have been inhabitants of Caer-Leon. The words of S. Beda are these; At the same time (during the persecution of Dio|cletian) Aaron and Iulius Cittizens of Caer-Leon, together with very many others in diverse places of both sexes suffred Martyrdom: Who after the suffering of severall tortures, had their mem|bers torn asunder by unheard of cruelty, and at last consummating a glorious Martyrdom they sent up their soules to the ioys of the heavenly Citty. The same expression is used concerning them in the Roman Martyrologe on the first of Iuly,Martyrolog. Angl. 1. Iulj when the Martyrdom of Aaron and Iulius is commemorated. And both the said Martyro|loge and S. Beda have borrowed the phrase de|scribing the manner of their death from our most ancient Historian Gildas.
5. And the deuout Brittains of those times after the same manner honourd the Memo|ry of these two Holy Martyrs, as they had done that of S. Albanus and S. Amphibalus, by erecting Altars and Churches to their ho|nour.Girald. Cam|bres. inea Thus Giraldus Cambrensis in his Itinera|ry of Wales, treating of the famous Citty of Car-Leon writeth: Here lye the bodies of two Noble Christians, and next to S. Albanus and S. Amphibalus the most illustrious Protomartyrs of Brittany, who were here crowned with Martyrdom: I mean Iulius and Aaron: each of which had a famous Church erected to his honour in this Citty. For there were in ancient times in the said Citty three magnificent Churches. One of the Martyr S Iulius, adornd with a Quire and Convent of Religious Virgins. A second dedicated to the ho|nour of his Companion S. Aaron, and graced with a Noble Quire of Canons. The third was the Me|tropolitan Church of all Cambria This last Church was afterward translated by the holy Bishop S. David to Menevia, the authority of Dubri|tius Legat of the Bishop of Rome concurring thereto.
6. It is observable that all these Churches were built by Brittains, long before the Saxons entred into this Island. So that there is no need of expecting S Gregory the Great or S. Augustin the Monk to him who would find arguments to proove the Antiquity of the Roman Faith touching the Veneration of Saints, in Brittany.
7. Besids these wee find celebrated in an|cient Martyrologes the memory of two Noble Brittish Christians, the Disciples of S. Amphi|balus, who were crownd with Martyadom in the same persecution of Diocletian: their names are Stephanus and Socrates. Mention is made of them likewise by S. Beda, Vsuardus, Ado and others: whereto also severall an|cient Manuscripts doe accord. We find no par|ticular Gests of theirs: only in the English Mar|tyrologe it is said that in the Province of the Silures, Churches were built to their honour. Now whether this Stephanus was Bishop of London, it is a doubt. A Bishop of that name is sayd to have governed that See in this age: though Authours place him somewhat later. To this time likewise is referd the murdring of all the Monks in the Monastery of Winchester, built by King Lucius. Of which wee shall speak in the next year but one.
8. Whilst the Romans thus raged in Brittany, very many Christians, not having the courage to keep their ranks,  expose themselves to their Enemies Violence; yet resolving not to betray their Faith, withdrew themselves from the fury of men, least by the imma|nity of torments they should be compell'd to renounce it. Thus Gildas writes of the re|mainder of Christians in those dayes, Those per|secuted Christians,Gildas de Excidio. saith he, which were left, hid themselves in woods, defarts and caves of rocks, expecting from God the iust Iudge of all when he would please to execute his iudgments on their persecutours, and restore safety and liberty to their own soules.
9. This Christian prudence and caution of theirs was suitable to the advice given the year before by the holy Pope and Matyr Caius at Rome, when the persecution first began: For he in an Assembly of beleivers meeting together on that occasion, thus spoke to them,Ap. Baron. A. D. 286. n. 5. Our Lord Iesus Christ, who perfectly foresees and knows the frailty of mankind, hath ordained two ranks and degrees of Beleivers, namely Con|fession and Martyrdom: to the end that those who have not strength or courage enough to sustain the weight of Martyrdom, may at least hold fast the Grace of Confession. Let such yeild up the glory of Martyrdom to the valiant soldiers of Christ which are resolved to co~bat for him, and take a sollicitous care of their own soules. Let them therfore who are so disposed, depart out of this feild of battell whi|ther they please, together with our dear children Chromatia and Tiburtius: and for the rest who are more courageously resolved, let them remain still here in the Citty with mee.
10. This flight of Christians in Brittany, sui|table to the Roman practise, gave occasion to Persecutours to extend their rage upon Chur|ches and Monasteries, all which by this tempest were so uterly destroyd that,Gildas de Excid. as Gildas saith, in severall Provinces of this Island there remained no marks at all of Christian Religion. This deso|lation continued about seaven years, till the happy return of Constantius, as soon as he was created Caesar, by whose clemency the Christian Faith and worship again flourishd in Britta|ny, and this much sooner then in any other parts of the Roman Empire. Which mercy of God seems to have been extended in a speciall manner toward the Brittains, because, as S. Beda saith,Bed. hist. L. 1. c. 4. they only preserv'd among them their primitive Faith, received in the dayes of King Lucius, entire and inviolate till the Raign of Dio|cletian.



XX. CHA.XX. CHAP.

1.2.3 Carausius the Admirall of the Em|perours Navy: his rapines: and rebel|lion: he takes possession of Brittany.
4.5. Maximianus his preparations against him: without effect.
6. The Tyrant left in quiet possession of Brittany; subdues the Caledonian Brit|tains, A monument of his Victory.

1. THIS Tyranny of the Roman Empe|rours against Christian Religion God was pleased to revenge, by permitting another Tyrant to raise himself against them in Brit|tany.Vct. de Cae+sar c. 39. This was Carausius, who, saith Victor, drew his Originall from Menapia, a Belgick Pro|vince in Gaule, confining on the Rhine. He is describ'd by the Roman Historians to have been a man vigilant and active both in counsell and execution: and was employ'd by the Emperour at Boloign in Gaule to have care of the Navy appointed to free the Seas on the coasts of Gaule and Brittany from the infestation of the Franks and Saxons,Oross. hist. l. 7. c. 25. Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 6 Europ. la. who most violently exercised Piracy in those quarters.
2. This Employment Carausius dischar|ged more to the destruction then advance|me~t of the Roman Commonwealth. For though he often vanquish'd and took prisoners many of those barbarous Pirates, yet all the spoyle he kep'd to himself, neither resto|ring it to its former owners, nor consign|ing it the Emperours treasure.
3. Such behaviour rendred Carausius sus|pected of some ill design against the Empire, as if he had on purpose permitted the said Pirates to range freely, to the end he might either partake, or intercept them returning with their spoyles: with which he had rais'd to himself an immense wealth. Hereupon the Emperour Maximianus gave command that he should be put to death Which to avoyd, he assum'd the Emperiall purple, and possess'd himself of Brittany. A great en|couragement and help to which design was afforded by a sedition and rebellion at the same time rais'd in Gaule by Amandus and Aelianus two Roman Generalls; Who notwith|standing were quickly subdued by Maxi|mianus: but after their defeat he was called by Diocletian into Italy, because another rebellion was then egan in Africk.
4. But Maximianus was presently after recalled into the West to oppose Carausius. For which purpose he made great prepara|tion, especially of Shipping, to pursue the Tyrant into Brittany. Which gave occasion to the foremention'd Oratur Mamertinu to procounce before him his Panegyrick, wherein whith many flowers of Rhetorick he magnifies both the greatnes of the pre|paration, and the wonderfull favour of their heathenish Gods in affording the Em|perour so miraculous a calmnes and warmth of weather unusuall in so Northern a cli|mat.
5. And though the Oratours flattery pro|mis'd a happy successe to that expedition: yet it seems it fell out otherwise. For Eutro|pius expressly declares that severall attempts by war had been in vain undertaken against Carausius, a man very skillfull in military affaires: so that in the end they were forced to make a peace, leaving him the posses|sion of Brittany. A proof wherof is afforded us by Camden, who produces a Coyn, in the one side wherof was this Inscription, C. Carausius Emperour: and on the other, The peace of Augustus.
6. It seems Carausius being left in quiet possession of the Island employ'd well the power allow'd him, for he drove the Northern Caledonian Brittains beyond the wall rais'd by the Emperours Hadrianus and Severus: and rais'd a new rampire to en|close them, more Northward then any had been before.Nennius. For thus writes Nennius the Disciple of Elvodugus, Carausius, saith he, built a wall between the mouthes of the two rivers Cladus and Carunus, and fortified it with seaven Castles, adding withall a round house built of polish'd stones upon the bank of the River Carun: he likewise ere|cted an Arch triumphall, on which he im|pos'd his own Name, in memory of his Victo|ry. This building remaines to this day, vulgarly call'd Iulius Hof, as if Iulius Agri|cola had been the Authour of it.


XXI. CHAP.XXI. CH.

1. Carausius his Tyranny lasted seaven years.
2. Persecution ceases in Brittany
3. Yet Monasteries and Churches are demolish'd particularly Winchester
4 The Church of Westminster conver|ted into a Temple of Apollo.
5. Helena not in Brittany at this time.

1. THE Tyranny of Carausius conti|nued the space of seven years, for he began his piracy in the year of Christ two hundred eighty six, and about two years after assum'd the Title of Em|perour, invading and possessing Brittany, which he quietly governed till the year two hundred ninety three, when Con|stantius made his expedition against him.

So that during the said two first years Brit|tany was under the government of Diocle|tian and Maximianus, to whom must be at|tributed the Martyrdom of S. Albanus, Am|phibalus, c.
2. Now though by Carausius his invasion of the Government the persecution ceased; at least so far as that no Edicts were publi|shed against them, nor any search after them ordained, nor Tribunalls erected: Notwith|standing the soldiers of Carausius having been bred up in rapines, spoyled and de|stroyed all Churches, and Monasteries remai|ning.
3. Among other places the ruins of the Monasteries of Winchester and Westminster are by Historians celebrated: both which had just a hundred years before been built by King Lucius. Concerning the former, thus we read in an ancie~t Manuscript of the Church of Winchester,Hist. Vena|na M. Christian Religion remained the space of a hundred years, from the first year of King Lu|cius, the first Christian King of the Brittains. And so long did the Monks quietly serve God in that ancient Monastery. But they were all slain in the Church of Winchester, which was also de|stroyd by the Ministers of the persecuting Empe|rour Diocletian in the second year of his raign. To which year also we before refer'd the killing of the Monks, as we doe the ruining of the Monastery to this present year two hundred eighty nine.
4. As for the Church of Westminster how it was at this time profan'd and converted to a Temple of Apollo, thus Iohn Fleet an ancient Historian declares, Whilst the most greivous persecution rais'd by the Emperour Dio|cletian raged in Brittany,Ap. Vsser. in Prim. f. 9 l 5. among other Churches this of Westminster was destroy'd, and afterward by the sacrilegious power of Magistrates chang'd into a profane temple of Apollo, in which were exercis'd the superstitious Rites of the Gentiles. By which it came to passe that in the same place where God had been devoutly worshipped in his own Church, there Idolatrous abominations were afterward perform'd. That place loosing the me|mory of its former Christian inhabitants, became the Head and principall seat where Pagans exer|cised their execrable Superstitions.
5. During all these cruelties against Chri|stians, and devastation of Churches there is no mention of S. Helena the Wife of Con|stantius. Most probable it is therfore that she was before this time departed out of Brittany with her husband, who now go|verned Dalmatia or Illyricum:Aur. Vict. de Caesar. c. 40. and with them both lived likewise their Son Constan|tin, now fifteen years old, who from his child, hood, saith Victor, shewd an aspiring mind, in|flam'd with a desire of rule.


XXII. CHAP.A. D. 292.
XXII. C.

1.2. By reason of distractions in the Empire, two new Caesars elected, Galerius and Constantius.
3. Constantius marries Theodora daughter in law to Maximianus.
4 5. Helena divorced and seated at Triers: Of which many proofs.
6 Constantin left in Diocletians Court, as a pledge.

1. IN these days there was a great concus|sion of the Roman Empire on all sides, both by open invasions and civill dissen|tions.A. D. 290. For the Persians in the East, and the Sarmatians in the North made furious irru|ptions into the Provinces adioyning: like|wise besides Brittany possess'd by Carausius, Achilleas vexed Egypt, and Iulianus, toge|ther with the Nations called Quinquegenta|na, Africk.
2. These distractions occasion'd the Ele|ction of two New Caesars,A. D. 291. that so the Empire might rest more securely upon more pillars. Constantius was chosen by Maximianus, and Galerius, sirnamed Armentarius, by Diocle|tian. Notwithstanding the supreme autho|rity and Majesty of the Empire resided in Diocletian, to whom the other three impu|ted their advancement, and were his hands and instruments to fight and overcome for him.
3. Moreover it was prudently advised among them to streiten their Society by the bond of affinity.A. D. 292. Whereupon Diocletian gave his daughter Valeria a wife to Galerius, and Maximianus his wifes daughter Theodora to Constantius: before which mariage he was compelled to a divorce from his beloved Wife Helena, who after this was esteem'd his Concubine, or at least a wife in the second and inferiour place. Which divorce not|withstanding brought no prejudice to their Son Constantin who was born in mariage be|fore, and enioyd his right of Primogeniture, and succeeded his Father in the Empire, not|withstanding other Sons born to Constan|tius by Theodora.
4. What became of Helena after this new mariage,Malbranc. l. 2. c. 15. will deserve our enquiry. Malbran|que a French Historian affirms tha she lived at Quantia a Town in the Province of Belgick Gaule, where now Hesdin is situated. But more probable it is that Constantius fixd her habitation at Triers where he built her a sumptuous Palace, saith the Abbot Beren|gosius,Berengos. l. 3. de invent. cru. cap. 2. who stiles her an inhabitant of the Citty of Triers (Trevirorum:) adding this passage, The ancient magnificence of her Palace at Triers

argues the Nobility of Helena's race: where the Pavement strow'd with marble of severall sorts declares how much that house excelled all other. The walls also enrich'd with gold and purple doe gracefully testify the marks of their Mistrisses high extraction. Besides all this, the great number of possessions conferr'd by her on Gods Churches loudly speak the ancient Nobility of her stock.Lupold. l. de zelo Princ. Germ. c. 5. From hence it is saith Lupoldus Bebenburgius, that many Authours (as Otto Frisingensis and Godefridus Viterbiensis) doe affirm that S. Hele|na the Mother of Constantin had her originall from Triers.
5. Certain it is that there are many marks which testify her affection to that Citty, which a little while after this, to declare its relation to S. Helena and to eternise her name, caused Medalls to be coyned with this Inscription on the one side, FLAVIA HE|LENA AVGVSTA: and on the other, SE|CVRITAS REIPVBLICAE: whereto was ad|joyned underneath, S. TR. importing that it was Signed (or Coyned) at Triers. Which In|scription evidently declaring Helena to have been adopted into the Imperiall Flavian fa|mily, and honour'd with the Title of Au|gusta or Empresse, sufficiently evict that He|lena was not the daughter of a mean host, nor cast off by Constantius after his mariage with Theodora.
6. As for her Son Constantin, he was at this time received into the family of Diocle|tian at Rome, there to remain as it were a pledge of his Fathers fidelity.Euseb. in vit. Constantin. l. 1. c. 8. Where (saith Eu|sebius) being then but a youth, though his con|versation was among persons full of all impiety, yet he was not infected by them: For his naturall good disposition directed by an instinct of Gods holy Spirit, drew him from their vitious customs to a course of life acceptable to God, and exem|plary for piety. Besides this, an earnest desire to imitate his Fathers vertues invited him power|fully to conform his practises to the good examples given him by those who were pious and good. Thus writes Eusebius, who professes that himself was an eye-witnes of all this in a progres of the Court through Palestina,Id. ib. c. 13. and how he saw the great esteem that Diocletian had of him when he was but very young; at whose right hand he commonly stood, highly graced by the Emperour, and acceptable to all that saw him, for his beauty, grace fullnes and modesty. But leaving young Constantin at Rome, or perhaps in the East, we must return to his Father Constantius.


XXIII. CHAP.A. D. 294.
XXIII. C.

1. Constantius his expedition against Ca|rausius into Gaule.
2. He win Gessoriacum, or Boloign. He subdues the Franks in Batavia.
3. Caransius slain by Allectus in Brit|tany: who succeeds in the Tyranny.
4 Constantius passes into Brittany.
5. Allectus defeated and slain by Con|stantius his Generall.
6. Constantius saves London from ruine: and makes the Franks captives and slaves to the Brittains.
7. The ioy of the Brittains at the re|ception of Constantius.
8. Constantin accompanies Diocletian into the East: his vertues.

1. COnstantius being created Caesar, im|mediatly made an expedition into Gaule with an intention to passe over into Brittany against the Tyrant Carausius.A. D. 293. Being in Gaule he by admirable art and industry took the Sea-town Gessoriacum, now call'd Boloign, which Carausius had for his own safe|ty and use strongly fortified. Which ex|ploit of Constantius is elegantly celebrated by the Oratour Eumenius in his Panegyrick pronounced before him.Eumen. Pa|negyr. 10.
2. There likewise we read how Constantius, not to be idle during the time that a fleet was preparing for his expedition into Brit|tany,Ibid. subdued Batavia, Carausius his own countrey, then possess'd by severall Princes of the Franks, who were a German Nation, great numbers of whom had transplanted themselves thither.
3. Now whilst Constantius thus employ'd himself on the other side of the Sea, Carau|sius in Brittany was murdred by C. Allectus,Arel. Vict. whom he had made Generall of his forces, and who for diverse flagitious acts done by him feared his just revenge. After which the Traytour thinking that the better way to se|cure himself, assumed also the Title of Em|perour, as is declared by his Coyns yet extant bearing the said Title.
4. Against this new Tyrant, Constantius the year following sailed into Brittany. Alle|ctus then had a strong fleet in the Isle of Wight, to oppose his Enemies coming. But such was Constantius his felicity, that by reason of tempestuous weather his fleet pass'd undiscovered by Allectus his Ships, and landed without opposition in Brittany: where being arrived, Constantius in excesse of courage sett on fire all his own ships, to let his soldiers know, that they must either over com, or be slaves. All this we learn from the forementioned Oratour.
5. After this, saith the same Authour, Con|stantius marching against the Tyrant divided his Army, one part he lead himselfe, and the other he committed to the conduct of As|clepidous Praefect of his Praetorian bands. Al|lectus avoyding the opposing himself against Constantius, chose to try his fortune against Asclepiodotus, by whom without any losse of the Romans side, he was utterly defeated, and notwithstanding his design to disguise himself by casting off his Imperiall Purple, he was found out and slain.
6. But a great part of his Army, consi|sting of strangers, Franks and Batavians, seeing their Prince and Tyrant dead, fled diligently towards London, with an intention to take the spoyles of that rich Citty, aboun|ding with merchandise. When on the sud|den Constantius happily appeard unawares, and cutt them in peices, so freeing that Citty from ruine. Those who escaped the slaughter he gave for captives to the Brit|tains, who affectionatly ioynd with him. But afterwards he thought it more secure to remove those barbarous strangers into Gaule where he dispers'd them into severall Provinces, as Amiens, Beauvais, Troyes and Langres.
7. After this Victory it is incredible with what universall ioy Constantius was receiv'd by the Brittains, who for the space of almost nine years had been op|press'd by Tyrants, suffring all manner of indignities in the violation of their wives and daughters, the slavery of their sons and losse of all their subsistence: and at last by this Victory were restored to the Roman Government, now most acceptable to them under Constantius, not only a Prince of great moderation and Clemency, but allied to them by his mariage with Helena, and affording them a Prince of their own blood.
8. Which young Prince Constantin at this time accompanied Diocletian into Egypt, where he gave egregious proofs of his excellent disposition. For thus writes Paulus Diaconus of him,P. Diaco. l. 10 l. 42. There was with Dio|cletian in Egypt Constantin the Son of Constan|tius: who being then a very young man shewd illustrious marks of his courage in battells: and in his heart also favoured the Christians. Whose progresse in all endowments of mind and body Diocletian with envy observed: and foreseeing that he would prove the ruine of his Tyranny, and a destroyer of his Pagan Errours, he had a design by subtilty to take away his life. But Almighty God beyond all expectation saved him from the others cruelty, and restored him to his Father. The Tyrant, no doubt, knew that he had been from his infancy nourish'd with Christian milk: and could not but observe that he lookd on his cruelties against poore Christians, with unwilling eyes: therfore he detain'd him under strict guards intending probably greater mischief to him.
9. It is not here to be omitted that this young Constantin at this time took to wife Minervina, of whom he begott his eldest Son Crispus, who was twelve years old when his Father married his second wife Fausta. Zosimus according to his costum slanderously calls Minervina Constantius () strumpet or concubine: whereas both Eusebius and the Authour of the Pane|gyrick pronounc'd at his second mariage highly commend him for his chastity,Panegyr. 5. in that, saith he, imitating the continence of his Father, he would not admitt into his un|stained breast any wandring lusts, nor so much as those pleasures which custom allows to youth, but was a new miracle, a young man uxorious. Which encomium could not without extreme and most ridiculous impudence have been spoken at such a time in such an assembly, if either Helena had been his Fathers Con|cubine, or Minervina his own.


XXIV. CHAP.XXIV. CHAP.

1.2. Persecution ceases in Brittany by Con|stantius his clemency: contrary to the the assertion of Lesley and Hector Boe|thius.
3. S. Nicholas a Brittish Bishop and Martyr.
4. No Scots yet in Brittany.

1. WHat a happy change the oppress'd Christians in Brittany found in their condition after this Victory of Constantius over the Tyrant Allectus,A. D. 295. is further declared from the testimony of our ancient Brittish Historian Gildas,Gildas de xcid. who says that nine years of persecution being ended, they began to repair Churches demolish'd, and to build new ones to the honour of Martyrs, that they publickly cele|brated divine Mysteries and solemne Festivities c. The which is confirmed by Eusebius,Euseb. in vit Constant. l. 1. c. 9. who says, That wheras there were fower persons ioynd in the government of the Roman world, Constantius only, having entred, as it were, into a covenant of freindship with God the supreme Governour, was utterly averse from the practises of the other three: For wheras they wasted the Churches of God, and defil'd their Provinces with the blood of innocent Christians shed with utmost cruelty: Constantius on the contrary was Authour of most perfect tranquillity to his sub|jects, like an indulgent father allowing them a free pover of exercising the duties of the true Christian Religion, without any molesta|tion.
2.Leslaeu l. 3. in Rege 34. H. Boeth. hist l. 6. Which Testimonies so ancient and au|thentick doe manifestly disprove the asser|tion of Lesley the Scottish Historian and Hector Boethius who uniustly impute cruelty against

Christians to Constantius.A. D. 299. For thus Hector writes concerning him. The fame of Constan|tius, though otherwise a worthy Prince, was much tainted with posterity, because he imitating Diocletian, endeavoured the ruine of Christian Religion. Vpon which occasion great numbers of pious Brittish Christians flying the rage of perse|cutours, came to the Scots and Picts. The King Crathlintus receiv'd them with great kindnes, per|mitting them to reside in the Isle of Man: where having overthrown the Temples of Pagans, and exterminated the profane Rites of the Druids, which till this time had continued there, he built for the reug'd Christians at his own cost a Church, called by the name of our Saviour, c.
A. D. 296.3. The Scottish Writers likewise, about this time, to wit, in the year of Grace two hun|dred ninety sixe, doe place the Martyrdom of a famous Brittish Bishop call'd S. Nicholas, and for his piety stil'd Culdeus, or a worshipper of God. Of whom Dempster thus writes, S. Nicholas Culdeus one of the first Bishops of the Scottish Church, during the rage of persecution rais'd by Maximianus in Brittany was crown'd with Martyrdom: The holy Relicks of his Body cutt in peices were put into an Vrn of Stone and together with a venerable Crosse were buried in the earth: Afterwards being digg'd up, they were found with this Inscription, Of S. Nicolas Bishop. To whose honour in succeeding time King Alexander the third at the request of the Bishop of Glasco built a sumptuous Church at Pebles, which whilst Catholick Religion flourished among us became illustrious for the grace of Miracles, and was freque~ted with great concourse of devout Christians. He suffred Martyrdom in the year two hundred ninety six: and his Sacred body was found, known by the inscription, and together with the Crosse exalted on the seaventh of the Ides of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand two hundred sixty two.
4. These three Writers doe confidently mention the Scotts as inhabitants of those Nothern Provinces: Where as not any ancient Authours doe as yet take Notice of their name.Eumen. Pa|negr. 10. Indeed Eumenius the forecited Pane|gyrist says that the Brittains in those times were molested with two people their Enemies, the Picts and the Irish: and he is the first Writer who calls the Caledonian Brittains by the name of Picts, because their arms and leggs, which were naked, were usually painted with the figures of beasts: by which may be collected that that Name was given them about the time of Constantius. And as for the Irish, who also were termed Scots, though probably at this time many of them came over to assist the Picts or Caledonian Brittains, yet that they took possession of any part of the Countrey, or however that the Name of Scotts was given thus early to the whole countrey, cannot out of any approved Au|thours be demonstrated.


XXV. CHAP.A. D. 302.
XXV. CH.

1. Constantius goes into Gaule against the Alamanni.
2. He is accompanied by Brittains who build towns there.
3. He overcomes the Germans at Langres.

1. AFTER three years abode in Brittany, Constantius was oblig'd to passe over into Gaule to oppose a German Nation call'd by some Carpi,A. D. 299. by others Alamanni, by others Marcomanni, which grievously infested that Countrey: and in his absence he left Ascle|piodotus Governour in Brittany.
2. It seems great numbers of Brittains at|tended Constantius in this Expedition,Adol. Meker. l. de Vet. pronunc. l. Gr. c. 0. if the conjecture of Adolphus Mekerchus be true that the Town of Bretta in Germany was at this time built by Brittains who followed Constantius. The same Authour fancies likewise that the town of Heidelsheim was named by them from Helena the wife of Constantius, whose name was most acceptable and precious to the Brittains. But leaving conjectures, let us pursue the more certain story of Constan|tius his Expedition, thus related by Eutropius:
3. At the same time, saies he,Eutrop. l. 9. Constantius Caesar fought against the Germans in Gaule neer the Citty of Langres, where in one day he had experience both of very great good and ill fortune. For he was obli|ged upon a suddein and violent assault of the Ene|mies to retire into the Citty, with so great hast and danger, that they were forced to shut the gates, and draw him up with ropes: and a few hours after upon the approach of his army, he set upon the Ger|mans, and kill'd neer sixty thousand of them. The same Victory at Langres is likewise celebrated by the Oratour Eumenius, who adds,Eumen. Pa|negyr. 9. who adds, that in that combat Constantius received a wound. After which Victory, he dispersed the remaining Germans into severall vacant places of Gaule.


XXVI. CHAP.XXVI. C.

1. Stephanus Bishop of London; how a Martyr.
2. Constantius returns into Brittany.
3.4.5. Memorable examples of his Vertues. His moderation. For which he is tenderly af|fection'd by his subjects, and master of their wealth. How he tried the Constancy of his Christian servants.
6. Brittish Guards.
7. Constantius and his family, Christians.
8. Hereto S. Helena contributed much.

1. THE quietnes which Brittany hap|pily enioyed under Constantius is the cause that for some few years it af|fords little matter to furnish History.A. D. 300. Only in the year three hundred Stepha|nus Bishop of London, highly commended

for his sctity is said to have ended his life by Martyrdom. Not that any were then putt to death for Christian Religion, but he is call'd a Martyr, according to the phrase of that Age, for the persecution he had suffred formerly during the rage of Dio|cletian and Maximianus. He is in the English Martyrologe stiled the eighth Bishop of that See: wheras more truly he should have been call'd the seaventh: for S. Augulus, of whom shortly, is by Historians nam'd the eighth.
A. D. 302.2. In the year of Grace three hundred and two upon occasion of the death of Ascle|piodotus whom he had left President here, Constantius seems to have return'd into Brit|tany, establishing peace in that Church which himself had begun: whilst in all other Pro|vinces of the Empire whole rivers of Chri|stian blood were shed with all imaginable cruelty and immanity.
Zosim. l. 2.3 Now Brittany being the countrey where, as Zosimus says, Constantius made his longest abode (,) and where for diverse respects he both express'd and received the greatest proofs of affection, it is most pro|bable that in Brittany, and about these times were performed by him those memorable actions of bounty, clemency and piety recor|ded by Historians, which rendred him admi|red and beloved through the whole Empire.
4. An illustrious Example of the prudent moderation of his Government, of his libe|rality, and of the mutuall affection between him and his subjects,Euseb. in vit. Constantin. l. 1. c. 9. was, as Eusebius, records, declared on this occasion. The Emperour Dio|cletian being inform'd that Constantius by his too profuse liberality and negligence had utterly impoverished his Treasure, by messengers sent on purpose sharply reproved him for it. Constantius, having desired the messengers to expect a few days for his answer, in the mean space sent notice through his whole dominions to all his subjects, especially such as abounded with wealth, that he stood in great need of money, and that a more fitt opportunity could never be offred them to testify their duty and affection to him. Hereupon with|out any delay, and with extreme chearfullnes and ardour each contended with other who should send most, so that in a short time his Treasure was filld with innumerable summes of money. This being perform'd, Constantius invited the Messen|gers to be spectatours of his wealth, desiring them to testify to the Emperour what they had seem Telling them withall that all, those riches had been deposited by him in the owners hands, as the most safe guardians. The Messengers seeing the wonder|full aflection shew'd to Constantius by his subjects, were astonishd at it. When they were gone, the kind and bountifull Emperour restored all that mase of treasure to the owners, expressing withall an affectionat resentment of their duty and good will to him.
3. Another worthy action of the same Prince, denoting both the sharpnes of his iudgment, and religious disposition, is to this effect related by the same Authour:Bring desirous to order his family and Court distracted into factions by persons of va|rious Sects and Religions,Id. ib. he publish'd an Edict, That whosoever would continue in his office, should conform himself to the Roman Idolatry: for he was resolved that no other should remain in his Court. As for others, they should be permitted to enioy the liberty, and possession of what they had, but they must avoyd his presence. This Or|dinance caused great trouble in the minds of such Christians as ambitiously affected worldly honour and wealth, who therfore preferring Mammon before God, relinquishd their profession to conform themselves to Caesars Religion. But severall other sincere and genuine Disciples of Christ, shewd them|selves willing rather to forsake their Princes seruice then Gods. Which being observ'd by Constantius, he chased from his Court all those fainthearted, hypocriticall dissemblers, saying, they would never preserve their fide|lity to him, which had basely betrayd their Faith to God. And those who continued con|stant, he prefer'd to dignities, committing the care of his safety to them.
6. From hence it came that the Brittains, who generally were Christians, became Guards both to him and other Emperours. This is affirm'd by Nicetas Choniates, who therfore calls them () Brit|tish Guards which always encompass'd the Emperour, being arm'd with long halberts.
7. Such piety and constancy of Brittish Christians being observ'd by Constantius, might probably be one strong motive indu|cing him to forsake Idolatry: For so much is implied by Eusebius,Euseb. vbi sup saying, Constantius having for a long space shewd forth illustrious signs of vertues becoming a Prince, at last he wholly re|nounced the impious Idolatry and worship of many Gods, willingly acknowledging the onely true God, Governour of all the world, and firmly establsshd his Court by the Prayers and assistance of holy men. Thus with great glory he pass'd the remainder of his life in tranquillity, being free from all trouble.
8. To this happy change it is not to be doubted but S. Helena his wife did much contribute, whose presence with him at this time the same Eusebius seems to imply in the words following:d. ib. Thus did he through all the remaining time of his raign procure a constant peaceable state to his children and wife, together with his whole family, all which he consecrated to God the supreme king, insomuch as his Court seem'd litle to differ from the form of a Church: in which the Ministers and servants of God offre continually Prayers and Sacrifices for him: wheras in the other Princes courts and countreys the very name of the true Gods worshippers could not without utmost danger be pronounced. Thus wri+tes he of Constantius his family. Now if inqui|ry be made which was that wife mention'd by him, it cannot be suppos'd to be Theodora the daughter in law of Maximianus, for w

no where read that she ever entred Brittany,A. D. 305. and much lesse that she was addicted to Christian Religion: so that it can be no other but S. Helena, a Brittish Lady and a Christian, who doubtles was always attended by Preists dayly praying for Caesar.


XXVII. CHAP.XXVII. CHAP.

1. Diocletian and Maximianus depose them|selves: to whom Galerius and Constan|tius succeed Constantius his moderation.
2. The persecution continues at Rome. S. Agnes Martyr.
3 Constantius courage against the Sar|matians. His Duell.
4 S. Augulus Bishop of London: and Martyr: in what sence.
5. Ilutus, or Restitutus succeeds in that Bishoprick.

A. D. 304.1. IN the year of Grace three hundred and four the two Emperours Diocletian and Maximianus after twenty years raign together, weary of the fruitlesnes of their cruelty, voluntarily depos'd themselves from the Empire, Diocletian at Nicomedia and Ma|ximianus at Milan in Italy. In Diocletians place Galerius succeeded in the Government of the Eastern Empire, and in Maximianus his room Constantius govern'd the western. Yea so moderat was he in his ambition that, as Eutropius says,. contenting himself with the Title of Augustus, or Emperour, he refused to undetake the solicitude of administring Italy and Africk: (esteeming France and Brittany sufficient) where all his care was to enrich his subjects, not affecting at all to heap up treasure.
2. Constantius his absence from Rome was the cause that the former Edicts of Diocletian against Christians were still in force: For not only Pope Marcellinus was crownd at this time with Martyrdom, but the blessed Virgin Saint Agnes triumphed also most gloriously over the New Emperour Galerius his cruelty.
A. D. 305. Zonariann. 2.3. Zonaras reports that in the year three hundred and five young Constantin accompa|nied Galerius in his warr against the Sarma|tians, where he was by the Emperour expos'd to a single combat with their Cheif leader: whom by Divine help having overcome, he lead him prisoner to the Emperour: so reaping great glory by that which was intended for his destruction. The same is likewise confir|med by Eumenius the Oratour in his Panegyrick to him,Eumen. Pa|neg. where he says, Although fortune had already placed thee in a condition, wherin glory could not be wanting to thee, yet thou wouldst encrease it by warfare: and combatting in thine own person with the Enemy, yea entring into a single appointed combat, thou mad'st thy self more known then before, when thou couldst not be more noble.
4, This year out English Martyrologe cele|brates the Martyrdom of S. Augustus Bishop of London. S. Beda likewise,Martyrol. Anglican. 7. ebr. Ado Viennensis, Vsuar|dus and others make mention of him. Now wheras he is call'd a Martyr, it is to be under|stood that in the late persecution he suffred many things for Christs cause, and this year receiv'd the reward of his Confession. He is sayd to have dyed at Augusta in Brittany, which Citty, saith Ammianus Marcellinus was anciently called Londinium. He is called by some Authours Augulinus, Augurius. And concerning him Bishop Vsher thus writes,Vsser. in Pri|mord f. 169. we find a commemoration of the same Bishop not only in the Martyrologes of Ado, Ricemarchus, and Beda: but also of Vsuardus, Rabanus, Wandel|bertus and that of Rome: moreover in the Manu|script Martyrologes of the Churches of Salisbury, Evesham and Winchester. Genebard in his Chro|nology wrongfully calls him an Irish Bishop: and Dempster according to his custom will needs have him a Scott.
5. To him succeeded in the Bishoprick of London Iltutus: whom Iocelinus omitts in his Catalogue of the Bishops of London. But since he omitts likewise the name of Restitutus, who a few years after this is known to have assisted at the first Councill, to which his name with the Title of his Bishoprick is found sub|scrib'd, it may probably be conjectur'd that Iltutus and Restitutus were the same person.


XXVIII. CHAP.XXVIII. CHAP.

1.2. Constantius wars against the Picts: and returning to York falls sick.
3. He is troubled for the absence of Constantin.
4. He is warn'd by an Angell to leave the Empire to Constantin.
5.6. Constantin escapes wonderfully.
7 His affectionate wellcom.
8. Constantius dyes, and is Christian|ly buried by his Son: and by the Romans consecrated.
9. He is buried at York: not at Caer|narvon.

1. THE year of Grace three hundred and six was notable for the death of the Emperour Constantius,A. D. 306. and the succession of his eldest Son Constantin. Constantius was at this time in Brittany, where some commo|tion among the Picts or Caledonian Brittains drew him into the Northern parts: where ha|ving removed those unquiet enemies be|yond the limits prescribed them, he return'd to York, and there being old, was assaulted by his last sicknes: in which how piously he dis|posed himself for death may be collected from the Character before mention'd which was given him by Eusebius
2. And moreover the same Authour treating particularly of his death addeth:Euseb. It may easily

be conceived by any one who shall seriously ob|serve the nature and condition of the actions per|formd by the Emperours Diocletian,A. D. 306. Maximia|nus and Constantius, how happy a death this Em|perour obtain'd from God, whom he served with such zeale and piety, far unlike in his manners and life to those who were partakers of the same Empire with him.
3. Only one thing was now wanting to his full contentment, which was the pre|sence of his Son Constantin, who at this time was at Rome, there detained, as a pledge or hostage by Galerius. This was a great affli|ction to Constantius, who though he had with him other Sons born to him by Theodo|ra, received small satisfaction from them, considering their want of spirit and cou|rage.
4. Zonaras reports that at this time whilst Constantius was sick,Zonar. l. 2. Aal. and afflicted in mind by reason of the unfitnes of his other children to suc|ceed him, an Angell appeard to him, comman|ding him to leave the Empire to Constantin. Eu|sebius likewise more then once affirmeth that it was by Divine counsell  ordinance that Constantin succeeded his Father in the Empire. And hereto the Oratour Eumenius though a Pagan,Eumen. Po|negyr. 9. may seem to allude, where speaking to Constantin he says, But why should we flatteringly commend thy Fathers private af|fection to thee? Thy Succession in the Empire was the Decree of all the Gods, first prescribed by their authority, and afterwards confirm'd by mature counsell of men. At that time thou wast call'd to be a saving guardian of the Empire by celestiall signs and divine suffrages.
5. This affliction of Constantius for the absence and dangerous condition of his be|loved Son, did not long continue: for God was pleased in an extraordinary manner to restore him to him before his death. This is thus express'd by Eusebius,Euseb. in vit. Constant. l. 1. cap. 14. Those Princes, saith he, which then govern'd the Empire, with envy and fear look'd upon Constantin, observing him to be a generous, valiant, tall young man, of a noble and erected mind. Whereupon they watch|fully sought an opportunity to doe some notable mischeif to him. This the young man perceiving (for by a Divine instinct their private designs against him were severall times discovered) he at last sought to secure himself by flight: therin imi|tating well the example of the great Prophet Moyses. Now Almighty God graciously disposed all things for his safety and advancement, wisely ordaining that he should opportunely be present to succeed his dying Father.
6. Aurelius Victor adds an Act of Constan|tins, full of prudence and subtilty,Victor de Cae|saribus. c. 40. by which he secured his flight from all danger of pur|suers, to elude whom, he through all his long iourney from Rome to Brittany gave command that all the publick Post-horses should be killd:Eumen. Pa+negyr. 9. by which means, saith the Oratour, he arriv'd in Brittany with so prosperous a voyage, that he seem'd to have been brought thither not riding by the ordinary Post, but moun|ted and flying in a heavenly Chariot.
7. Now with what ioy and affection he was received by his Father,Euseb. in vit. Const. l. 1 cap. 15. Eusebius thus describes, Assoon as Constantius saw his Son beyond his expectation arriv'd, he leaping from his bed with a tender affection embrac'd him, saying that now his min'd was freed from the only trouble remaining in it, which was his Sons ab|sence: for which he offred his Prayers and thanks|giving to God with great devotion. Now he esteem'd death almost as wellcom to him as im|mortality. Presently after this he disposed of his family and all worldly affaires in good order: and placing himself in the midst of his Sons and daughters, which like a Quire encompass'd him lying in his royall Palace and bed, he bequeathed the inheritance of the Empire, according to the common Law of Nature, to that Son which in age went before the rest, and so departed out of this life.
8. When Constantius was dead, his fune|ralls were celebrated by his Son with all pompe and solemnity,Id. ib. c. 16. infinite numbers of people assisting, and with ioyfull acclamations and sweet harmony of Hymns celebrating his happines, saith the same Eusebius. Moreover that he was according to the Roman Heathe|nish manner consecrated and refer'd among their Gods ancient coyns doe testify, in which he is inscribed with the Title of Divus, or a person Deified, and on the other side is repre|sented a Temple and two Eagles, over which are the words Happy Memory: all which are manifest signs of Consecration, as it is des|crib'd by Herodian.
9. He was buried in the Citty of York:Camden. in Brigant. For, saith Camden, men of good credit have re|ported to us that when the houses of Monks there were in the memory of our Fathers demolish'd, there was found a lamp burning in a little vaul|ted Chappell, in which the Tradition was that Constantius had been buried. For Lazius a lear|ned writer relates that the Ancients had the art to maintain a flame burning for many ages, by the means of gold dissolved into a kind of li|quid oyle.Florilg. ad A. D. 1282 So that Mathew of Westminster is mistaken when he reports that at Caer-cu|stenith neer Snoudon hills was found the body of the glorious Emperour (Constantius,) Father of the Noble Emperour Constantin, and by the Kings command removed, and honourably placed in the Church of Carnarvon. That body questionles belonged to some other of the same name: for all Historians agree that this Constantius dyed and was buried at York.





THE SEAVENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAP.

1.2. Constantin succeeds his Father.
3. c. At first refuses the Title of Emperour.

1. _CONSTANTIVS dying left behind him severall children of both sexes: for besides his eldest son Constantin born to him by Helena, he had by Theodora daughter in Law to the Emperour Maximianus Hercu|lius three Sons, Constantius (the Father of Gallus and Iulian) Dalmatius and Annibalius; to whom some adde a second Constantin; and two daughters, Constantia maried to Licinius, and Eutropia.
2. Notwithstanding Constantius at his death, passing by all these his sons, though born to him by a Wife of the Imperiall family and then present with him, he left the Em|pire to his eldest son Constantin only. Which is an undoubted argument that he acknow|ledged him for his legitimate Son.Euseb. in vit. Const. l.  cap. 16. Whence it is that Eusebius writes, that Constantius at his death did by the common Law of Nature leave the inheritance of the Empire to that Son who in age went before the rest: and that this disposall was ratified by the suffrages and accla|mations of the Army.
3. Notwithstanding Constantin not so much out of moderation, as prudent caution contented himself with the Title of Caesar, refusing that of Augustus or Emperour: in so much saith the Panegyrist,Eumen. Pa|neg. as when the soldiers with great affection and ardour would have cast on him the Imperiall Purple, he sett spurs to his horse and fled from them.
4. There may be supposed more then one Motive to induce Constantin to this modest refusall. For Diocletian and Maximianus, though they had relinqush'd the admini|stration of the Empire, were yet alive, and by their counsells and authority had a great influence on the state, by whom Galerius Maximinus and Severus were chosen Caesars and Successours, who had the posses|sion of the Eastern Empire and Italy. Ther|fore Constantin being young and at so great a distance from the Imperiall Citty, had reason to think it dangerous without their consent to assume the Supreme Au|thority. Wherfore his first attempt was to gain the affection and consent of Maximia|nus Herculeus, from whom his Father Con|stantius had received the Purple robe, and who having then a daughter mariageable, called Fausta, Constantin demanded her for his wife, presuming the Empire should be her dowry.
5. That such was the mind and intention of Constantin,Panegyr. a Panegyrist of that time hath well express'd, Such was thy prudent modera|tion (saith he) O Constantin, that whereas thy Father had bequeathed the Empire to thee, thou thoughtst fitt to content thy self with the Title

of Caesar,A. D. 307. expecting till the same Maximianus who had before declared thy Father Emperour, should doe the same to thee: for thou esteemedst it more glorious by thy vertues to deserve the Empire as a reward, then to enioy it as an inheri|tance by succession. Neither was it to be doubted but that he would conferr on thee supreme Power, who had destind thee for his Son in Law, before thou couldst request it.
6. Hence appears the mistake of those Writers who affirm that Constantin was crea|ted Emperour in Brittany immediatly after the death of his Father. For it certainly ap|peares that he took not that Title till the year after, when he pass'd out of Brittany nto Gaule. In the mean time he finish'd his Fathers Victories in Brittany aganist the Picts and Caledonians who rebelled, and were re|pulsed by him beyond the Wall. In which expedition he was assisted by a barbarous King of the Alamanni, called Erocus: by whose counsell likewise and endeavours he assum'd the Title of Emperour the year fol|lowing, as Aurelius Victor testifies.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1. Constantius overcoms two German Prin|ces.
2 Treats with Maxentius, and is refused.
3. Marries Maximians daughter, Fausta, and receives the Title of Em|perour.
4 c. Maximians treachery, and punishment.

1. THough Constantin at first refus'd the Title of Emperour, yet he kepd a re|solution to aspire to it either by agreement or force: For which purpose he pass'd over with a great army into France: Where his first exploit was to represse two barbarous Princes,Nazar. pa|neg 7. Eumen. Pa|negyr. 9. who fill'd the Countrey with fa|ctions, inciting the Gaules to rebellion. Their names were Ascaricus and Gaisus, or Regaisus, call'd his Comes: Whom having overcome in battell, for a terrour to others, he expos'd them to be devoured by wild beasts. This Victory of Constantin is celebra|ted by Eusebius in generall terms,Euseb. l. 1. c. 61. but with a notable errour in Chronology, being placed by him before his voyage into Brittany.
2. A firm peace being hereby restored to Gaule, Constantin began to treat a league with Maxentius, who the year before hauing been inform'd of the death of Constantius, had possess'd himselfe of Rome, and usurped the Title of Emperour, being assisted by the Pretorian soldiers, and hoping that Maxi|mianus Herculius whose daughter he had maried,A. D. 308 would favour him in his ambition. With which successe being puff'd up he re|jected the motion of concord offred by Constantin, whom he would not admitt into fellowship in the Empire.
3. But Maximianus Herculius having heard the late glorious victory obtain'd by Con|stantin over the fore-mention'd barbarous Princes, voluntarily bestow'd on him his daughter Fausta, and with her the Imperiall Purple. This is testified by a nameles Pane|gyrist of those times,Inceri Pa|ng. 5. who expressly affirms that at this mariage the name of Emperour was given him, and added to that of Caesar.
4. But presently after this mariage was ce|lebrated, Maximianus began to discover his treacherous mind and intention, again to possesse himself of the Empire, which he had voluntarily resigned, and bound himself by a Solemne oath in the Capitol never to re|sume it. This intention he had made known to his daughter Fausta before the mariage:Eumen. Pa|neg. 9. and for the execution of it he sent letters to solicite the armies, and with promises of great rewards attempted the fidelity of the soldiers. All these designs Fausta (bearing a greater affection to her husband, then her Father) discovered to Constantin, informing him that the Mariage was intended only to make him secure, and that her Fathers pur|pose was to deprive him of the Empire and perhaps his life too.
5. Hereupon Constantin found it neces|sary to prevent such treacherous designs of his Father in Law: who presently after pu|blickly resumed the Name and Authority of Emperour at Arles: from whence retiring himself to Marseilles, he was there beseiged by Constantin, and afterwards made prisoner. Whereupon he executed on himself the just vengeance of his perjury and treason by the most ignominious kind of death, strangling himself with a halter. Such a deserved end had this Tyrant, who defiled the Western Em|pire with the blood of so many Christians: Thus did Constantin a Brittish Emperour ex|piate the death of those glorious Martyrs S. Albanus and his companions who suffred in Brittany.Eumen. ibid. In which action Eumenius the Oratour, though a Heathen, elegantly frees him from all suspicion of cruelty.
6. Constantin having composed affaires in Gaule, prosecuted after ward his Victories into Germany, into which he pass'd his army upon a bridge which he built over the Rhene about Triers. There he subdued severall Nations, especially the Bructeri which re|belled. The Belgick Historians write that in Constantins army were many noble Brittains, among which they name three Vncles of his Mother Helena, Iohelin, Trar, and Marius: Which gave occasion to the Panegyrist Eu|menius to expatiate upon the praises of Brit|tany,Id ib. which he concludes thus, O fortunate Brittany, now happy beyond all other countreyes, inasmuch as thou wast the first which didst

see Constantin Caesar!A. D. 310. Nature did deservedly enrich thee with all the blessings of heaven and earth, c.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1.2.3 Monasteries buil in Brittany: Namely Winchester and Abingdon.

1. THough Constantin himself was not yet a Christian, as appears by the Ora|tions of Panegyrists to him,A. D. 309. Eumen. Pa|neg. 9. in which he is ex|tolled for his devotion to heathen Gods, Mars, Victoria and especially Apollo, whose temples he visited to give them thanks for his Victories, presenting there most magnifi|cent Gifts and offrings: Notwithstanding Christians enioyed the same peace and secu|rity through all his dominions, and particu|larly in Brittany, which had formerly been granted them by his Father Constantius.
2. Hence it is that our ancient Records mention the rebuilding and replenishing severall Monasteries in this our Island. Among which the most famous were the Monaste|ries of Winchester and Abingdon. Concerning the former, Bishop Godwin out of ancient Monuments testifies that it was begun and per|fected with such admirable devotion and zeale that within the space of one year and thirty dayes both the Church,Goin. in W. the lodgings of the Monks and all other Offices and buildings for their severall uses were entirely finished: And at the request of Deodatus the first Abbot of this New Mo|nastery,A. D. 310. it was by Constans Bishop of Winche|ster consecrated to the memory of S. Am|phibalus Martyr. In which state it continued more then the space of two hundred years, till Cerdics the first King of the Western Saxons driving away and killing some of the Monks, turn'd it into a Temple of Idolatry. The same account of it is given by Thomas Rudburn (quoted by Bishop Vsher) from Giraldus Cornu|biensis and Vigilantius, ancient Writers: though he erre much in his Chronology,Vid. Vsse. Antiq. Brit. f. 194. pla|cing this restitution in the year of our Lord two hundred ninety and three.
3. As for the Monastery of Abingdon, if the Chronicle of that place may be credited, Constantin himselfe in his younger dayes had his education there: And thereto be|longed no fewer then five hundred Monks, which liv'd by the labour of their hands in Woods and deserts, and every Sunday and Sabbath day resorted to the Monastery to perform their devotions: Besides which five hundred, there remain'd constantly sixty Monks attending to dayly reciting of Psalms and holy Christian Sacrifices.


IV. CHAP.A. D. 312.
IV. CHAP.

1. Miserable death of the persecutour Gale|rius and peace of the Church.
2. Four persons assuming the Title of Em|perour.

1. ABout this time Galerius Maximianus, sirnamed Armentarius,A. D. 311. felt the just avenging hand of God, who visited upon him all the innocent blood of Christians most cruelly shed by him: for he dyed miserably consumed by peece-meale, an incurable rot|tennes corrupting all his members with in|tolerable torments and stench. Neither could the wrath of God be pacified towards him, though he acknowledged his justice, and wrote Edicts in favour of Christians, im|posing an end to the long and furious per|secution rais'd by Diocletian.
3. There yet remain'd in the Roman Em|pire fower persons who supremely and in|dependently administred their severall re|spective Provinces; Constantin in Gaule and Brittany, Maxentius in Italy and Africk Ma|ximinus in the East, and Licinius in the Pannonies, Greece, Illyrium and Thrace: All which Provinces in a short time became united under the Monarchy of Constantin.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2. c. Constantins attempt against Ma|xentius.
4. He prays to the true God.
5.6. c. Wonderfull appearance of the Crosse.
11.12. The Veneration of it encreased.

1. NOW follows the three hundred and twelfth year of Christ in all respects prosperous to the Church of God:A. D. 312. for, saith Baronius, then it was that a New persecu|tion begun by Maximinus in the East was interrupted by many calamities sent from God: And in the West the Tyrant Maxentius by the divine Vertue of the Holy Crosse was conquered and slain.
2. But omitting Eastern affairs, not perti|nent to our present History, design'd to shew the succession of our Christian Faith in Brit|tany: I will the more copiously prosecute the Exploits of this glorious Brittish Prince the Emperour Constantin in the West, his pro|sperous expedition against the Tyrant Ma|xentius, and miraculous Victory over him, the consequent wherof was the establishing of Christian Religion, and its victory over all other Professions of Divine Worship.
A. D. 313.3. It was a great happines to Christians that Maxentius refused those conditions of agree|ment offred him by Constantin: for had he accepted them the Christian Faith had much more late become the publick Faith of the Roman Empire, and Constantins invasion of him had wanted a considerable part of its justice. Wheras Concord being denyed, and all Italy,Eusb. in Vit. Const. l. 8. c. 16. especially Rome, groaning vnder the Tyranny of Maxentius, exercised all manner of ways, by infinite Murders, oppres|sions, adulteries, Violations of Virgins, and all manner of abominable Vices, it was not only a necessary care of his own safety, but a duty which he owd to mankind that moved Constantin to free the world of such a Monster, odious not to Christians only, but Pagans also,Vid. Incerti Pangyr. 6. who employ'd their tongues and penns to give a fitting Character of his dete|stable life. Hence it is that Constantin himself in an Epistle written by him afterwards to his Subiects in Palestina,Euseb. ib. l 2 1.28. professes that he was called and incited by God himself to free the world not only from Idolatry, but innume|rable calamities with which it was oppress'd under the Tyranny of its Pagan Gover|nours.
4. Constantin concluding a warr against Maxentius to be both most perfectly iust and necessary, his next thoughts were busied how to prosecute it. He had an Adversary far stronger then himself, his own forces when he pass'd the Aspes,Incert Pane|gyr. c. 6. as the Oratour testifies, being little more then a fourth part of the others. In this exigence, as Eusebius reports from Constantins own information,Euseb i. Vit Const. lib. 1. c. 21. he had recourse to Divine assistance: and a multi|tude of Gods being then worship'd in the world, he was uncertain to which of them he should addresse himself. After a long sad consideration, calling to mind how the former Emperours had been abused to their own ruine by false Oracles, incantations, and inhumane Sacrifices offred to their Heathen Gods, he resolves to put his confi|dence in that onely true God worshipped all her life long by his Mother Helena, and by his Father Constantius towards his end. And he offred zealous and devout prayers unto him, that he would discover to him who he was, and how he would be worship'd, and that he would protect him in the dangerous condition he then was.
5. This devotion of Constantin was not without a signall reward, for by a wonderfull and stupendious miracle in the sight of the whole Army Almighty God declared how acceptable it was to him. The relation is re|corded by Eusebius from Constantins own mouth,Euseb. in Vit. Const. l. 1. c. 2. and attestation of his oath, after this manner: The Sun having pass'd his Meri|dian, and beginning to decline, He saw manifestly the sign of the Crosse over the Sun in heaven figu|red by a resplendent light, together with these words inscrib'd (,) By this be Victo|rious. Which spectacle caused great admiration both to himself and his whole army then attending him.
6. Among other Spectatours of this prodigy, was one Artemius, a man of great quality, being afterwards Prefect of Egypt: who gave this account of it to Iulian the Apostate, Constantin,Act. S. Artem. apud Metaphr. 10 Octob. said he, forsaking Pagan Idolatry converted himself to Christ, being divinely called thereto when he waged a dangerous warr and full of difficulty against Maxentius. For at that time about noon there appeared to him the Sign of the Crosse, more bright then the Sun-beames, together with golden letters signifying his Victory in that warr. For wee also being engaged in the same warr beheld it, and read that Inscription. Moreover the whole Army saw it, and there are yet alive in thine own army many witnesses of the same.
7. Sozomen relating this Story,Sozom. hist. 1. c. . adds, that together with the apparition of the Crosse, there were seen many holy Angells, who to encourage Constantin stupified with the sight, sayd to him, O Constantin, by this thou shalt overcome. And Zonaras affirms that Constantin saw a Horseman armed,Zonar. . 3. who bore in his hands the Sign of the Crosse as an Ensign.
8. This celestiall Vision though it was well understood by the Christians there present, and gave unspeakable comfort to them: Yet the Crosse, being a thing most detestable to the Idolatrous Pagans, was look'd upon by them as a fatall and ominous sign. And hereapon the Oratours of those times, though after the Victory they rightly inter|preted this Vision of heavenly armies seen in the aire,Nazar. Pa|neg. 7. as ranged in order to assist Constantin, Yet they conceale not the effect which they wrought then in the minds of the Pagans, for saith one of them,Incerti Pa|neg. 6. What God was it who when all thy Captains and Nobles did not only silently murmure, but openly declared their fear of that ill-boding Prodigy, yet thou of thine own self against the counsells of thy freinds and warnings of the Sooth sayers, did'st perceive that that apparition signified the time was come of delivering the Citty of Rome from servi|tude?
9. At the first indeed Constantin, not yet a perfect Christian, was astonishd and affrighted at this Vision, as well as the other Pagans: But by what means he arrived at a right understanding of it, is thus from his own relation declar'd by Eusebius:Euseb. l. 3. Vit. Const. c. 23. Constan|tin, saith he was distracted and disquieted with great doubts and feares what this wonderfull Vi|sion should portend. In which solicitude of thoughts the night overtooke him. And when he was asleep our Lord appeard to him bearing the same sign which had been shown him from heaven, and commanded him to cause a draught and Copy representing the same sign which had appeard to him, to be framed: and that he should make use of that as a firm guard and protection whensoever he was to committ battell with his enemies.
10. The Historian adds:Id. ibid. as soon as the day appeared

he rose from his bed, and declared to his freinds this mysterious vision. And afterwards calling together the most cunning artificers, skillfull in gold and precious stones, he placed himself in the mid'st among them, and by words describ'd to them the form and pattern of the Sign which had appeared from heaven: Commanding them to imitate the form therof in gold and precious stones. (And the said Authour giving a des|cription of the Labarum or Banner caried always in Constantins Army, thus proceeds) The Emperour,Ibid. saith he, did always after make use of this Saving Sign of the Crosse as a sure defence against all hostile violence and danger: the expresse representations wherof he comman|ded to be made, and perpetually be caried before his Army.
11. The devotion of this pious Emperour encreasing more and more to the Sacred Crosse, moved him to cause innumerable re|presentations of it to be placed in severall places both publick and private. To this purpose writes the same Eusebius, So great and so divine was that love wherwith the Empe|rour embraced our Lord, that he took care that the Ensign of his saving Passion should in a faire Table, adorned with much gold and precious stones of all kinds, he fixed in the Entrance of his Palace, in the principall room, in the middle of his house and in the guilded roof therof. That seemed to the most holy Emperour to be a firm bullwark of his Empire.
12. No wonder then if the veneration of the Holy Crosse became yet more encreased among Christians. We have shewd in the life of S. Albanus that it was even from the be|ginning practised: Which practise sems now to have been authorised by our Lord him|selfe from heaven; And that the devout Christians of these times understood it so, appears by the generall zeale they shewd in honouring this mark of our Salvation: which that it was acceptable to God was de|monstrated by innumerable Miracles wrought thereby. But to return to Con|stantin.


VI. CH.VI. CHAP.

1.2. Constantius victorious march to Rome.
3.4. He fights with Maxentius, and over|comes him: who is drown'd in the Tiber, to the infinite ioy of the Romans, c.
7.8. c. Constantin venerates the Crosse. D. whittacres mistake.

1. COnstantin being encourag'd with this so glorious a testimony of Divine as|sistance, armed with the Crosse both on his helmet and forehead, and conducting an army, before which was caried the same triumphant Ensign, pursued his expedition into Italy: and approaching to the Alpes subdued the Segusians presuming to resist him: And having pass'd those Mountains, conquered the Taurini, and after them the Citty of Verona, which trusting in the mul|titude of its garrison had the boldnes to shutt the gates against him. Aequileia, Muti|na and all other Citties on this side the P follow'd the fortune of Verona.
2. Thus having cleared all the Provinces behind him of Enemies, he marched cou|rageously to Rome it selfe, where the Tyrant for more then sixe years had exercised all manner of crimes: He had not the courage all that time to issue once out of the Citty, or to oppose Constantins progresse, partly being stupified with his lusts, and affrighted with prodigies and divinations of his Sooth-sayers.
3. But assoon as Constantin approached to the Citty, Maxentius was enforced to draw out his army consisting of one hundred and seaventy thousand foot, and eighteen thou|sand horse: all these numerous forces he raged beyond the Milvian bridge, so that they were shut out of the Citty by the river. To the strength of his army the Tyrant added the subtilty of a stratagem, for he had caused the bridge so to be framed, that at his pleasure he might for his advantage easily dissolve it.
4. On the other side Constantin having ran|ged his army, himself with great courage gave the onset, by which he immediatly broke his enemies ranks, so that little resi|stance was made except by the Pretorian sol|diers, who, expecting no pardon, because they onely had created Maxentius Emperour, covered the ground with their dead bodies.
5. The enemies being thus put to flight, found their flight unsucces'full, because the straitnes of the bridge hindred them: so that the slaughter was excessively great, and there being no other meane to avoyd the sword but by entring the River, great multitudes were swallow'd by it. As for the Tyrant, he to conceale himself had cast off all marks of his authority, and adventured into the Tiber, but not being able to ascend the steep banks, was hurried down the stream and drowned. His body was cast upon the shore below which the Roman people having found, they cut off his head, which fastning on the topp of a speare, they caried it up and down the Citty with great ioy and triumph.
6. Since Rome was built,Nazer. Pa|neg. 7. saith the Panegyrist, never shone a day celebrated with greater and a more universall ioy, or that deserved to be so ce|lebrated, then that of Constantins triumph after this Victory. His triumphall chariot was attended not with conquered Princes or Generalls, but with the Roman Nobility freed from dungeons and chains: Rome did not enrich herselfe with spoyles of enemies, but herselfe ceased to be the Spoyle of an inhuman Tyrant, c.
7. This common ioy, acclamations and ap+plauses the pious Emperour would have to be asscribed, not to himself, but God only  the vertue of his holy Crosse, to whom he gave the

praises and acknowledgment of his Victory, as Eusebius testifies.Euseb. in vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 12. Prudent. l. 1. cont. Sym|d. And Prudentius adds, that Constantin at his triumphall entrance into the Citty commanded the Crosse to be caried before his army, to the end Rome might see by what arms she had been freed from slavery: and mo|reover that he enjoyn'd both the people and Se|nat of Rome to prostrate themselves before the Crosse, and adore the name of Christ.
Whitak. cont. Campian.8. It is a great mistake therfore in som Protestant Writers, by name Whitaker, who affirms that Constantin indeed did use the sign of the Crosse which appeard to him from heaven, for an Ensign: but that no proof can be given that the Crosse was honoured or venerated by him. Wheras the passage now cited out of Prudentius evinces the contrary: and Sozo|men expressly affirms that Constantin gave great honour to the holy Crosse,Sozom. hist. l. 1. c. 2. both for the aid afforded him by its vertue in his warr against his enemies, and likewise for the Divine appari|tion of it to him. Hereto may be added an argument invincible, in that he built a Church dedicated to the honour of the holy Crosse:Prudent in Apotheosi. Yea and Prudensius in another place says,Vexillumque Crucis summus Dominator adorat.
that is,The Supreme Governour of the Empire adores the Ensign of the Crosse.
9. This honour was not onely acknow|ledged by Constantin himself to be due to this Sign of our Salvation, but he signified his will that all the world should doe the same: This he did by raising his Statue in Rome, hol|ding the Crosse in the right hand with this inscription,Euseb in vit. const. l. . c. 5 By this saving sign, the true Emblem of fortitude I deliver'd your Citty from the Yoke of Tyranny: And having given perfect liberty to the Senat and people of Rome, I restored them to their ancient greatnes and splendour.
10. All these things are farther confirm'd by another Inscription which according to a Decree of the Roman Senat was engraven in stone, To the Emperour Flavius Constantinus the great, the Senat and people of Rome. For that by instinct of the Divinity and his own ma|gnanimous courage he at once with his army avenged the commonwealth of the Tyrant and his whole faction, therfore we have dedicated to him this triumphall Arch. In which In|scription the Victory is ascribed, contrary to the Roman custome, to one true God, and not to those many Gods adored there.


XII. CHAP.A. D. 313.
XII. CHA.

1.2 3. Constantin procures from Licinius and Maximinus a cessation of persecu|tion.
4. Three of his Mothers Vncles chosen Se|natours.

1. AFter this so signall a Victory Constan|tin to confirm peace in the Empire sent for Licinius the Emperour to Milan, where he gave him to wife his Sister Constantia,Euseb. hist. l. 10. c. 5. and obtain'd of him to subscribe to an Edict in which free liberty was given to all to make profession of Christian Religion, and moreo|ver all Churches belonging to them, which had been seised on, were restor'd. The form of which Edict is recorded by Eusebius: By which is manifest that even in the times of persecuting Emperours the Christian Churches enjoy'd lands and possessions: So that what hath been formerly written touching the endowing our Brittish Churches by King Lu|cius, c. may more iustly challenge beleife.
2 And to make this grace universall, he persuaded the same Licinius to ioyn with him in a letter to Maximinus Emperour of the Eastern Provinces, to grant the same free|dom to Christians within his dominions: To which request Maximinus, though with great unwillingnes and repugnancy, yeilded. The absence of Diocletian, who, though in|vited, refused to meet Constantin at Milan, was a great cause that these Priviledges were more easily granted to Christians.
3. It is affirmed by Mathew of Westminster,Florileg. ad A. D. 313. who stiles himself Florilegus, that at this time Constantin chose into the Senate, among other strangers, the three Vncles of his Mo|ther Helena, Traherius or Trarnus, Marius and Leolinus. And this perhaps might give occasion to Iulian the Apostat, as Marcelli|nus writeth, to endeavour to blacken the me|mory of Constantin as an innovatour and perver|ter of the ancient Roman Lwes:Ammian. Marcelli. hist. l. 21. for he expressly accuses him for being the first Emperour who adorned barbarous strangers with Senatoriall and Consular robes.



A. D. 314.
VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1. Benediction of Bread, not unleavened, instituted by Pope Silvester.
2. Troubles in Brittany, by Octavius.
3 4. A new frame of Government in the Empire.
6. A Synod assembled at Arles.

A. D. 314.1. IN the beginning of the year of Grace three hundred and fourteen the Holy Pope Silvester succeeded Melchiades: concer|ning whom the ancient Book of Roman Bishops records,A Baron. A. D. 314.   that he ordain'd that of the obla|tions offred by the people in the Church the Bishop or Preist should blesse or consecrate loaves of bread cutt into small particles, and kep'd in a pure and convenient vessel: to the end that after the solemnity of Masse such as had not communicated, should partake of them on all Sundays and Festes. These morsells of bread thus blessed were called Eulogiae, and were intended to be Symbols of Vnity in Faith and Charity among Christians. Which holy custome continues to this day in the Church: notwithstanding some have served and degenerated from the first institution, by giving this Benedi|ction on unleavened bread: wheras in the Constitution of S. Melchiades it is expressly call'd Formentum, or common bread.
2. This year whilst Constantin made an ex|pedition into France where he fought pro|sperously against the Germans, there was rais'd a sedition in the western parts of Brit|tany, where a certain King of the Gevissi call'd Octavius, A. D. 314. made an insurrection against the Pro-Consul entrusted by Constantin with the Govern|ment of the countrey: who having advice therof, sent Traherius or Trarnus, his Mothers Vncle with three Legions: who landing at Karperis or Portcestria, (now called Portsmouth) took the town within two days. Which Octavius hearing, came against him with strong forces, and in a bat|tell putt Trarnus to flight: who retiring into Albania began to wast the Provinces. After which a second battell was fought in Westmerland where Octavius was utterly vanquish'd and de|prived of his crown, being forced to fly into Nor|way to begg aid of King Humbert or Gunbert, as some call him. This relation is given by Flo|rilegas, with whom Simeon of Durham and others agree.
3. That which probably gave an occasion to these troubles in Brittany, was the change in the Government therof now introduced by Constantin,Zosim. hist. l. 2. who is accused by Zosimus, for disordring the former well constituted frame of the Empire; though it cannot be denyed that in the alterations made by him he imitated the ordonnances of the Emperour Hadrian.
4. In this manner rhen was the Empire now administred. He divided it into four Prefectures, governed by so many Praetorian Praefects: The first was call'd the Prefect of the East, to whom was subject all Eastern Pro|vinces as far as Mesopotamia, the Cilicians, Cappadocians, Armenians with many other Provinces in those countreys: and likewise Egypt together with Pentapolis of Lybia. The second was the Pretorian Prefect of Illiricum, who governed that countrey, and with it Macedonia, Thessalia, Epirus, all Greece with the Island of Creta and other Islands adiacent. The third was the Prefect of Italy, to whose iurisdiction was subject Sicily with all the Islands neer, and likewise Africa. The fourth was the Prefect of Gaule and all other Trans|alpin Provinces, as Spain, Germany, Brittany, c.
5. By which new frame of Government Brittany being no longer administred im|mediatly by the Emperours Lievtenant,Vid. Camb|den. Britann. in Roman. but by a Vicar of the Prefect of Gaule, by which means it was esteemed as an accessory Pro|vince of Gaule, no wonder if this new yoke of servitude was displeasing to the Brittains, who upon that occasion might easily be moved to sedition by their Prince Octavius or any other ambitious and discontented persons: the ill successe wherof we have before declared.
6 Concerning which the relation of Scottish writers scarce deserve to be taken into examination. Who tell us that Octavius being vanquish'd by Trarnus fled to Finco|mark King of Scotland, who refused to yeild him up at the request of Trarnus: on the contrary in his quarrell he rais'd an army, fought and vanquish'd Trarnus in the Pro|vince of Westmerland, which, say they, since Carausius his times belonged to Scotland. All which story seems an invention on purpose to illustrate the name of Scotland and its pre|tended Kings: of which no mention as yet can be found in any approved Authours.
7. At this time Constantin made his abode in Gaule, afterward called France: where he was much distracted and disquietted: and more by the factions of Schismaticks among Christians, then any commotions of confi|ning barbarous Nations. Vpon which occa|sion he was compell'd to command a Gene|rall Assembly or Synod of the Western Empire to meet at Arles for composing the sedi|tions rais'd by the Donatists. To which Synod since the Brittish Bishops were by name call'd, it is requisite we should make some stay to declare the proceedings of it.



IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1.2. c. Schism of the Donatists, and its occasion.
3. c The Donatists after severall condem|nations, still appeale.

1. THE Enemy of Truth and Peace having lost the advantage of oppo|sing Christian Religion by the violence and rage of his instruments, the Heathen perse|cuting Emperours, did not for all that cease from his malice, which was heightned by Envy against it, but rather executed ano|ther way with more successe, by suggesting matter of seditions and divisions among Christians themselves. The first publick in|famous Scene of which scandalls was Cartha|ge in Africk: And the occasion, was this.
2. Caecilianus Archdeacon to Mensurius Bi|shop of Carthage had reprehended a Spanish woman call'd Lucilla then living in that Citty, because before receiving the holy Sa|crament she had with veneration kiss'd the head of a certain person esteem'd by her a Martyr, yet not acknowledged for such by the Bishop. Lucilla being a woman of great power and wealth, upon this reprehension concei|ved an implacable rage and fury against Ca|cilianus, earnestly expecting all occasions of revenge.
3. This was afforded her not long after, in the year of Christ three hundred and six, when upon the death of Mensurius, Caecilianus was chosen Bishop of that Citty. For he requi|ring a restitution of certain vessells of silver and gold belonging to his Church, which in the late time of persecution had by his Pre|decessour been recommended to the fidelity of certain Elders of that Citty, they to avoy' the necessity of restoring them, ioyn'd them|selves to the faction of Botrus and Celesius, who had ambitiously sought after the same Bishoprick and were rejected: the resentment of which repulse incited them to question the Election of Caecilianus. Lucilla earnestly ioynd herself to this faction of unjust dis|contented persons, who publickly withdrew themselves from the Communion of their Bi|shop, by which means there was rais'd in Africk a most horrible and irreconcileable Schism the flame wherof could not for many ages be extinguish'd.
4. These factious persons to strengthen their party invited to Carthage a number of African Bishops who formerly in a publick Councill at Cirtha had been convicted Tradi|tores, that is, such as for feare of persecution had deliver'd up to Heathen Magistrats the Holy Vessels and Books belonging to the Church, among whom the principall was Se|cundus Bishop of Tgisis and Primat of Numi|dia. These Bishops, seaventeen in number, kept their Assemblies at Carthage separated from Caecilianus, in opposition to whom they presumed sacrilegiously to ordain another counterfeit Bishop of Carthage calld Maio|rinus, one who had been Lector to Caecilianus when he was Archdeacon, and was now a Domestick of Lucilla.
5. Moreover to iustify their Schism, these Bishops, who were most manifest Traditors themselves, alledged that Caecilianus his Ordi|nation was illegall, because he had received imposition of hands from Felix Bishop of Aptungis and others, whom they falsly ac|cused of their own crime. They likewise wrongfully charged Caecilianus, that he had forbidden necessary provision to be admini|stred to certain Martyrs in prison during the last persecution. All which calumnies they by letters spread through the whole coun|trey of Africa: Caecilianus in the mean time being acknowledged lawfull Bishop by Marcellus Bishop of Rome, and all other Bishops through the Catholick Church, before whom he confidently offred himselfe to a legall tryall. This relation is given by S. Optatus and Saint Augustin.
6. Now though this Schism was cheifly forged by Botrus and Celesius,. l. 1. ct. Para august l. 1 c. Pa. together with the foremention'd Elders and Lucilla, and en|creased by Secundus and other Traditors Bi|shops, yet it first took its name  Title from Donatus Bishop of a place call'd Casae nigrae (or, Black Cottages) in Numidia, who first at the instigation of Lucilla, withdrew himself from the communion of Caecilianus, whilst he was Deacon.Aug. in B. vi. But the Donatists being ashamed to take their appellation from one who had been condemn'd by Pope Melchiades, chose rather to call themselves Donatists from an|other Donatus, who succeeded Majorinus in the Schism, and whom they esteem'd a person of great eminence both for learning and Sanctity.
7. This unhappy Schism received such strength in a short space, that within three years, ioyning themselves with Traditors Bi|shops, and drawing into their sacrilegious Communion all the Numidians,Aug. Ep. 4. ad Vinc. they assembled a Councill of no fewer then two hundred and seaventy Bishops, which continuing together sea|venty five dayes, and repeating all their former Constitutions, made a Decree that all those who were guilty of the horrible crime of Tradition, if they refused to be rebaptised, should notwithstan|ding be admitted into Communion as if they were innocent.
8. When Constantin had overcome Maxen|tius,Aug. Epist. 68 the Donatists obtain'd of Anulinus Go|vernour of Africk to send his letters, full of calumnious accusations against Caecilianus, unto the Emperour who was then in Gaule: and some of the same Schismaticall Bishops made a voyage to him, earnestly requesting him to appoint Iudges of their cause. The Emperour himself, saith Optatus, with great in|dignation answered the~, You require a secular iudgment from mee, who my self expect the iudg|ment

of Christ. Yet with extreme importuni|ty they at last wrested from him for their Iudges, Maternus Bishop of Colonia Agrippina, Rheticius Bishop of Austun, Marius of Arles.
9. But presently after this, Constantin con|idering of what weight and necessity the authority of the Roman Bishop was in such a cause, he commanded the Donatists Bishops, together with Caecilianus, and as many other of his Communion to attend these three Iud|ges at Rome, to debate and conclude the cause before the holy Pope Melchiades in a Roman Synod:Euseb. l. 20. cap. 5. To whom likewise the pious Empe|rour wrote a letter, in which he tells the Pope that he thought fitt to send these conten|ding Bishops, before him, to the end they might receive iudgment from him and the other Iudges, as you know, saith he, the most holy law of God requires.
10. A Synod therfore being assembled at Rome, the result therof after a diligent exa|mination of the parties and witnesses, was a condemnation of Donatus Bishop of Casae|nigrae by the Sentence of all the Iudges, for by his own Confession he had rebaptised some who ioynd in Communion with him, and impos'd his hands on Bishops, who in persecution had renounced the Faith. On the other side, Caecilianus was pronounced innocent, because the witnesses brought to accuse him protested that they could say no crime at all to his charge.
11. But notwithstanding this Iudgment, the Donatists without any consideration of ju|stice or truth most impudently appeald from these Iudges to the Emperour himself:Op l. .who upon the first hearing mention of such an Appeale, cryed out, O the rabide impudence of these mens fury! They have presumed to interpose an Appeale, as the custom is among Heathens in secular causes.
Yet after all this, the Donatists were so shameles as to boast that Constantin had adjuged the cause to Donatus and con|demn'd Caecilianus. And moreover to exte|nuate the iudgme~t of Pope Melchiades against them, they endeavour'd to defame his me|mory by imputing to him that he had been a Traditor.
12. The Donatists still continuing their tu|mults in Africa, and directing their malice principally against Felix Bishop of Aptungis the Ordainer of Caecilianus, whom they accu|sed to have been a Traditor, Constantin gave commission to Aelianus Proconsul of Africa to determin that cause who in the examination detecting many lyes and frauds of the Dona|tists, pronounced in a legall manner the in|nocence of Felix. But once more they appea|led from his iudgment to the Emperour, to whose Court likewise many of their Bishops repaired,Aug. Epist. 162. protesting that many of their alle|gations of greatest weight had not been taken into co~sideration in the former iudg|ments. Whereupon Constantin, not daring (as S. Augustin saith) to become a Iudge of the iudgment given by Bishops at Rome, refer'd the matter to a Synod of all the Western Bishops, appointed to meet in the Citty of Arles, be|cause his abode was then in Gaule. And for that purpose he directed his letters to the Metropolitans to send their Bishops, and to the Proconsull of Africa, Ablavius, and other Ma|gistrats to defray the charges of such Bishops of both parties as took their iourneys to the Councill: Examples of which letters are still extant in Eusebius, c.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. Councill of Arles: condemns the Dona|tists.
3 4.5. Severall Canons there of.
6. The names of Brittish Bishops in it.

1. IN the Councill of Arles there met above two hundred Bishops, from all parts of the Western Provinces as far as Britta|ny: who in the first place examining again the cause of Felix Bishop of Aptungis the Or|dainer of Caecilianus, declared him innocent of the crime of Tradition impos'd on him by the Donatists, so confirming the iudgment formerly given in Africa.
2. This cause being concluded, it seem'd good to the Fathers to frame certain Canons touching Ecclesiasticall Discipline to be uni|formly observed through the whole Church. And first they ordained that the solemn Feast of Easter should be celebrated the same day through all Churches: This they did in opposition to the Quartadecimani, who ob|served it according to the Iewish custom on the fourteenth day of the first Moon in March, which practise began now more and more to prevayl in the East. To this Canon the Brit|tish Bishops in this Councill subscribed, so that the controversy afterward arising about its observation in Brittany, was not whether the Eastern practise should be kept here, but only whether in case the fourteenth day of the first Moon should fall on a Sunday, Easter should then be observed, or no: The Scottish Prelats affirming, and the others denying.
3. Another Canon of this Councill, which is the thirteenth, deserves our particular con|sideration, in which it is ordain'd, that all those should be removed from the Order of the Clergy who in time of persecution had delivered up to Pagans the holy Scriptures, or (Vasa Domi|nica) our Lords Vessells: which Vessells that they were deputed for the Christian Sacrifice ap|pears in the twentieth Canon, which com|mands that a place to offer Sacrifice should be afforded to a stranger Bishop. Restitutus ther|fore our then Brittish Bishop subscribing to this Councill, did offer Sacrifice, and could not be denyed that priviledge in a strange countrey, which now would be refused him in his own, with death if he perform'd it.
4. Some Protestants doe much boast of a pretended Canon in this Councill prescribing, that if Deacons at their Ordination shall pro|test their resolution to marry, it might be lawfull for them to doe so, and yet remain in the Ministery. But Sir Henry Spelman ingenuously observes that in ancient Copies he could not find this Canon among the rest. And however if such a Priviledge had then been allowed to Dea|cons, since Preists are not mention'd, it argues that they were forbidden mariage.
5. At the conclusion of the Synod, Mari|nus Bishop of Arles in the name of the whole Assembly wrote a letter, yet extant, to Pope Silvester, wherto he annexed a Copy of the Canons ordain'd there, desiring that by his care and diligence the said Decrees should be observed in all Churches. Here wee find likewise among the rest our Brittish Bishop Restitutus professing the Vnity of our Holy Mother the Catholik Church with the most Reli|gion Pope Silvester, whom with due reverence they all salute: They iudge likewise all those who reiect Tradition, to be persons of an unbrideled mind, burdensom and pernicius to our Christian Law. Lastly they professe their acknowledg|ment that the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul nt only sate Bishops at Rome, but likewise doe with|out intermission still glorify God by their blood shed there. Such Professions as these made by our Primitive Brittish Bishops doe much vary from the modern stile. Let the Readers conscience iudge to whether party it is most safe to adioyn himselfe.
6. It is observed by persons learned in Ecclesiasticall Antiquities that through the negligence or mistake of Transcribers, the Names of the Bishops present and subscri|bing to this Council are wrongfully transfer'd to the End of the Second Synod assembled some years after at the same Citty of Arles. Among whom those Bishops which came from Brittany, and for whose sake it was our obligation to insist on this Synod, were according to the most corrected Copies these which follow,Vid. Sirmond in Concil. Gllai and according to this Order:
The first among the Brittish Subscribers was Eborius, Bishop of the Citty of York in the Province of Brittany. The Second was Restitutus Bishop of the Citty of London in the same Province. Concerning whom the Protestant Centurists of Magdeburg give this testimony,Magdeb. Cnt. 4. c. 10. that he was a man, considering the age wherin he liv'd, many wayes learned, and most modest in his con|versation: who among other things wrote one Book to his own Countreymen touching this Council of Arles, and severall Epistles to Hilary Bishop of Poitiers. He was famous in the year of Grace three hundred and fifty. The third Brittish Bishop was Adelfius stiled Bishop of the Citty call'd, The Colony of the Londoners: Which no doubt is an Errour, arising from the mistake of ignorant transcribers, who instead of Colon. Camalodun (that is Maldon in Essex, anciently a famous Citty) wrote Colon. Lon|dinens: the Citty of London being better known to them then that of Camalodunum.A. D. 315.
8. Now though the Donatists were utterly condemn'd by this so great a Councill, yet they rested not: but most impudently interiected a third Appeale from the Councill to the Emperour. The successe wherof does not concern our present design to inquire into. Therfore wee remitt the Reader to other Historians who purposely write of such matters.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHA.

1. Disputation at Rome with Iewes.
2. Acts of Pope Silvester depraved.
3. Iewes rebell.
4. Of Helena's piety.

1. THe year following in a Synod assem|bled at Rome by Pope Silvester a publick disputation was held before the Emperour and his Mother Helena between certain Chri|stian Bishops,A. D. 315. of whom the Pope was Cheif, and twelve principall Iewish Scribes, as wee find related by Pope Adrium in an Epistle to Charles the Great, in these words, In the very beginning when Christian Religion was first publickly profess'd,Adrian. P. Epist. 3. ad Carol. M. ap Baron. ad the Emperour Constantin being newly converted, his Mother Helena came to him to Rome accompanied with twelve Scribes and Pharisees, who were principall Masters among the Iewes. And she together with her Son Con|stantin the Emperour thought sit that an assembly and meeting should be appointed between the Iewes and Christians: In which the holy Pope Sil|vester presiding, with many holy Bishops did much enlarge the authority of the Christian Faith, as well by Scripture as miracles, and so by Gods pro|tection obtained the Victory. Thus wrote Pope Adrian out of the ancient Acts of Pope Silvester.
2. Which Acts being much depraved, gave occasion to severall Writers to impute to S. Helena that she was an Enemy to the Chri|stian Faith, from which she would have averted her Son, that she was a Iew, or as others say, a Pagan. Wheras if the sayd Acts were truly restored, it would appear that she incited her Son to represse the insolency and malice of the Iewes: Which this very years the Emperour did,vid. Baron. ibid. as hath been declared, by a most severe Edict sent to his Prefect Euagrius against then.
3. S. Chrysostom likewise testifies that the Iewes seeing the favour born by ConstantinChrysost. Oral. 2. cont. Iudaeos. to Christians, rebell'd against him: and being suppress'd, the Emperour caus'd their ears to be cutt off, and a mark of their rebellion to be imprin|ted on their bodies, and thus caried them up and down like stigmatiz'd slaves and fugitives, with their members maimed, that all men every where might be witnesses of their crime, and to deterr the rest from like attempts afterward.
A. D. 318.4. Eusebius indeed relates, that wheras He|lena before Constantins conversion was little imbued with piety,Euseb. in Vit. Const. lib. 3. c. 4.6. her Son by his example and exhortations rendred her so pious, as if from her infancy she had been instructed and directed by the mouth of our Saviour himself. From which some collect, that Helena was not a Christian till after her Sons Conversion: Not obser|ving, that Eusebius speaks not of the Faith of Helena, but her piety: which upon occa|sion of the apparition of the holy Crosse to her son, was kindled into a great flame, as she shewed by her following actions.


XII. CHA.XII. CHAP.

1.2. Liciius warrs, and is overcome.
3.4. Constantius severall Laws for Chri|stians.
7.8. He prescribes a Form of Prayer. c.
1.11.12. His faut in conssulting Augrs, and the consequents of it.

A. D. 317.1. IN the year three hundred and seaventeen Licinius forgetfull of his Covenant with Constantin, began a perse|cution against Christians, and a war against Constantin himself: to strengthen himself wherin he had recourse to his Augurs and lying Oracles: but Constantin with the Sign of the Crosse alone overthrew him in two battles.Euseb. l. 2. c. . And the protection afforded by this sacred Ensign was so notorious, that Lici|nius himself gave command to his soldiers not to goe against it,id. ib. c. 9. yea not so much as to look towards it; saith Eusebius: For it was observed that whosoever bore that Ensign could never be wounded, for the darts cast by the Enemy mett continually and remaind fixed in the staffe that supported the Crosse: this the same Authour relates from Constantins own mouth.
2. Constantins moderation was such after his double Victory,A. D. 328. that he was contented to renew a league with Licinius, assigning him all the Eastern Provinces together with Thrace. But Licinius renewing the warr, was slain the year following: Wherby a firm peace was given to the Christian Churches all the world over.
3. Then began Constantins to employ himself in enriching and adorning the Church, and granting great immanities to Ecclesiasticall persons:Cod. Theodo. lib. 2. de Episc.  Cler. for which purpose he published this Law, Let all those who employ their Ministery in the Divine Worship, that is, all who are called Clarks, or Clergymen, be entire|ly excused from all manner of Civill offices or duties: to the end that they be not by the envious malice of any withdrawn from the Servi|ce of God.Sozom. lib. 1. c. 9. Sozomen adds that he decreed, that if any Clergy men were call'd into iudgment by Civill Magistrates, they might appeale from them to the iudgment of Bishops,A. D. 312. whose Sen|tence was to be ratified, as if it had been pronounced by the Emperour himselfe. To which effect there is still extant a kescript of his directed to Ablavius one of his Preto|rian Prefects.
4. Moreover whereas the ancient Roman Lawes were extremely severe against Celibacy,Euseb. in vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 26. insomuch as unmarried persons were excluded from succession in inheritances: Constantin consi|dering how preiudiciall this was to Chri|stian Religion, in which many professed Virginity and single lives, not out of an unwillingnes to leave an offspring behind them, but because as Eusebius saith, they preferred the love of Christian Philosophy and perfection before the sensuall pleasures of Matrimony, and therfore consecrated themselves entirely both soules and bodies to the Service of God in a pure chast life: For this reason he utterly abolished the foresaid Roman Lawes: shewing withall great honour and admiration to Convents of Consecrated Virgins Yea this extraordinary Priviledge he granted to them, saith Sozomen,Sozom. l. 1. c. 9. that all persons male or female consecrating themselves to Virginity, though they were under age should have the power of disposing their estates by will, contrary to the custom prevayling among the Romans.Theodoret. l. 1. c 11. More|over, saith Theodoret, he ordained that a certain measure of wheat should yearly be given to all Widows and those who observed a Virgin life. Of which proportion the impious Apostat Iulian took away two third parts, the third remaining to the times of the Historian.
5. To these pious Lawes wee will add some few others of the like Nature,A. D 321. Cod. Theod l. 1. de Feriis. to the end we may shew the state of Christian Religion in those dayes: For it is not to be doubted but what was practised in other parts of the Empire, was observed likewise in Bitta|ny.
6. This devout Emperour therfore institu|ted a Law, That all Iudges, and all people living in Citties, together with all trades should rest on the Venerable day of our Lord. But as for those (Pagans) who lived in the Countrey free license was given them to employ themselves in culti|vating the grounds: Because it often happens that no other day is more commodious for plowing or digging the Vines. Care therfore ought to be taken that an opportunity of a common good granted by divine Providence should not be lost.
7. Yea so admirable was Constantins piety, that he thought fitt to prescribe a Form of Prayer to be recited on all Sundays both by Christians in Citties,Euseb in vit. Const. l. 4. c. 19 20. and Pagans in Villages, and specially by Soldiers, in these words, Wee acknowledge thee the only God: wee professe thee our Soveraign King: Wee invoke thee our Helper: By thee wee obtain Victories: by thee wee have vanquished our Enemies: Wee acknowledge that from thee wee have obtained present felicity, and hope wee shall obtain future also. Wee are all of us thy Suppliants: Wee beseech to preserve

many years safe and victorious Constantin our Emperour,A. D. 324. together with his pious children.
Sozom. l. 1. c. 8.8. Yea moreover as Sozomen relates, in honour of our Saviours Crosse and Pas|sion he ordained a vacancy of judgments and Trades likewise on Fridayes and that some time should be spent then in Prayers and supplications to God.
9. Lastly he not only by his own ma|gnificence enriched the Church, but by a Law opened as it were the purses of all men to endow it: For he gave a generall licence to all persons without exceptions to bequeath what proportion of their goods they thought fit to the most holy Congregation of the Catholick (Church.Ap. Cuspi|nian. de oss. A. D. 322.)
10. Yet one action this time Constantin did by which he stained the purity of his Faith. Being at Sardica he was inform'd from Rome that his Palace had been struck with lightning: Which was an ominous sign to the Pagan Romans, and according to their ancient Laws to be averted by many superstitious lustrations and purga|tions. Wherupon in condescendence to their request, he gave order to the Magi|strats to consult the Sooth sayers, what was portended therby: onely he commanded them to abstain from domesticall Sacri|fices.
11. But this unlawfull condescendence of the Emperour wrought an effect to the preju|dice of Christians which he did not expect: For upon this occasion the Heathen Roman Magistrats, at the instigation of the Aru|spices, or Soothsayers would compell the Christians to ioyn in the publick expiato|ry Sacrifices. But they refusing to doe it, chose rather to leave the Citty: Which doubtlesse was the cause of the voluntary Exile of the Holy Pope Silvester.
A. D. 323.12. Hereupon Constantin being informed of this was forced to publish a Severe Law commanding, That if any one should en|deavour to compell any Ecclesiasticall persons, or any other professing the most holy Law of the Catholick Sect, to celebrate the Rites of Heathenish lustrations, if he were a mean per|son he should be publickly beaten with clubs: if otherwise, he should have a greivous fine imposed on him.


XIII. HAP.XIII. CH.

1.2 Constantin baptised at Rome: and the occasion of it. Errour of Eusebius.
6.7. c. His Great acts of Piety after his Baptism.

1. HItherto Constantin had deferd his Baptism according to the Custome of many in that Age,A. D. 324. who being taught that that Holy Sacrament is a certain purga|tion of all Sins, and gives to the persons an immediate and undoubted right to heaven, frequently delayed the receiving it till their declining age, or when death was ready to seise on them. But in this year many sad misfortunes proceeding from heynous sins enforced Constantin now to have recourse to that saving remedy.
2. True it is that Eusebius and other Greek Authours mislead by him, affirm that he was not baptised till near his death, and then received that Sacrament from the Sacri|legious hands of Eusebius Bishop of Ni|comediae, a principall pillar of the Arian Heresy. Thus wrote the other Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea of the same faction, to please Constantius, his Son, seduced by them. But the constant Tradition of the Western Church, confirm'd by many proofs, as the authentick Acts of Artemius c. doth positively inform us that this year being the three hundred twenty fourth after the Incarnation of our Saviour, Constantin received Baptism at Rome by the hands of Pope Silvester, upon this occasion:
3. The younger Licinius his Sisters Son was falsely accused to him of a design to rebell against him, wherupon Constantin commanded him to be slain. Immediatly after this he putt to death his own eldest Son Crispus born to him by Minervina, a young Prince already famous for many Victories, and adorned with many vertues, and prin|cipally with chastity: The crime layd to his charge was an attempt to violate his Mother in Law Fausta, Constantins wife. In conclu|sion it being too late discovered that this accusation was falsely invented by Fausta, because the young man would not yeild to her lust, Constantin caused his wife to be stifled in a hot bath.
4. After these calamities and crimes, as we read in the Acts of Pope Silvester, and find asserted by Pope Hadrian and the Fathers of the Second General Council of Nicaea c. Almighty God struck Constantin with a Le|prosy: who being anxious to find a remedy, he was inform'd by the Soothsayers that the only way to restore him was by a bath of infants blood: Which detestable Medecin

being abhorr'd by Constantin, God was pleas'd by a Vision in Sleep, wherin the Apostles S. Peter and Paul appear'd to him, to instruct him that the only certain Remedy would be to receive Baptism at the hands of the Holy Pope Silvester. Which was accordingly with great solemnity perform'd.
5. Hereof an evident and Visible proof to this day is the magnificent Chappell built by Constantin himself in the same place where he was baptised:Anastas. Bibl. in 2. Tom Concil. in Silvestr. in which according to the description eight hundred years agoe taken by Anastasius Bibliothecarius out of a most ancient Manuscript, there was a font (Bapti|sterium) built of Porphyry, and covered within and without with three thousand pound weight of pure silver: and over it hung a Phiale weighing fifty pounds, of pure gold, in which yearly two hundred pounds of Balsom did burn. On the brink of the Font was placed a Lamb of pure gold which powred forth water, and weighed thirty pounds. At the right hand of the Lamb stood the Statue of our Saviour of pure Silver weighing one hundred and seaventy pounds. And n the left hand was placed S. Iohn Baptist of silver weighing one hundred pounds, holding a scroll wherin was written, Behold the Lamb of God: Behold him wh takes away the sins of the world, c.
6. After his Baptism, the Emperour according to the Churches Custom being for seaven days cloath'd in White; consecrated every day with some signall act of Piety: In the first he published as a Law, that Christ is the true Lord who cleansed him from his Leprosy: and whom he commanded to be adored through the whole Empire. On the Second he decreed severe punishments on those who by word or deed should dishonour him. On the third he decreed like penalties against those who should persecute or molest any Chri|stians. Afterward he conferr'd on the Roman Churches Imperiall Priviledges. On the fifth day he granted immunities to all other Churches. On the Sixth and seaventh dayes he added many other Gifts to Ecclesiasticall persons: And on the Octave, as wee read in the Acts of S. Silvester, Constantin appear'd in publick perfectly cleansed both from his sins and Leprosy: And coming to the Confession of S. Pe|ter, he took the Diadem from his head, and putting off his Imperiall robes, he taking a spade in his hands opened the earth for a foundation of a New Church, and in honour of the twelve Apostles he carried out on his shoulder twelve baskets full of Earth: and then with great ioy receiving the Bishop into his Chariot, be return'd to his Palace.
Euseb. de vit. Const. l. 2. c. 44 45.3. After this the Pious Emperour extended his munificence to Gods Church all the Empire over: For as Eusebius testifies, he sent letters to all the Eastern Bishops encouraging them to build Churches, for which he supplied them out of his publick Treasure. Many of which Churches (both at Rome aud elsewhere) were consecrated to the honour of the Apostles and Martyrs,A. D. 325. as Laurentius, Hippolitus c. Whose solemn Feasts he commanded to be observed even by the Pagans with honour ad Ve|neration.id. ibid. l. 4. c. 2.
4. To these Churches devout Christians repaired with great zeale, and as suppliants here demanded their intercession. This was the practise, not of the meaner sort only, but persons of the highest rank:Chrysost. hom. 86. ad Pop. Antioch. For thus S. Chry|sostom instructs his people of Antioch, He who wears the Imperiall Purple, saith he, comes hither: he embraces the Sepulchers of Martyrs, and laying aside all haughtines and Pride, he stands before them in the posture of a suppliant, beseeching them to intercede unto God in his behalf.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. CHA

1.2. Constantin goes into the East: and why
3.4. First Council of Nica against Arians.
5.6. Its Decree about Easter.
7.8. c. Errour of the Brittains about it, whence derived.

1. THIS so publick and zealous Profes|sion of a New Religion rendred Con|stantin odious to the Roman Senate, who could not with patience support the decay of their ancient Superstition. Which was the cause that he grew weary of Rome, and made a pro|gresse into the Eastern Provinces: where he intended to establish a new seat of the Empire: which he afterward executed at Bi|zantium, call'd from his own name Constan|tinople.
2. Another cause there was obliging him to repaire into the East, which was to com|pose the Seditions and tumults caused by the blasphemous Heresy of Arius: Who denied the Divinity of the Son of God, affirming that time was when he was not, though he was the first of all Creatures. In which Heresy not a few Bishops ioynd with him, which occasion'd great disputes and divisions in the Church to the scandall of Christianity.
3. Constantin therfore being much dis|quietted with these tumults, endeavoured first by his own exhortations and letters written to Arius himself, and to Alexander Bishop of Alexandriae who first reprehended Arius for his Heresy, and upon his obstinacy excommunicated him c. to compose their differences: But finding that meanes ineffe|ctuall,A. D. 325. caused a Councill of the whole Church to be assembled at Nicaea in Bithinia consisting of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, who decided that Controversy, determining from Scripture and Tradition, That the Son was Con|substantiall () to the Father.
4. The Acts and Decrees of which Councill not being our present busines, and being

at large declared by ancient and modern Ecclesiasticall Writers, we will here omitt. There also wee may read with what meek|nes, respectfulnes  Charity the pious Em|perour behavd himself to the Bishops, how he refused to be a Iudge of the criminations and mutuall accusations of one another; How he fortified the determination of the Synod by his Imperiall authority, commanding all to submitt unto it; how he banish'd the Arch|heretick Arius c.
5. Onely one particular Decision must not be omitted, because our ancient Brittish Church was particularly concern'd in it, and that was the order made for the universall observation of Easter, or Feast of the Resurre|ction, in opposition to the Eastern Iewish custom of the Quartodecimani. This Feast ther|fore was indispensably to be observed on the first Sunday (or Lords day) following the fourteenth day of the first moon after the Vernall Equinoxe: accordingly as the late Synod of Arles and severall Popes had before ordained.
6. Now because some skill in Astronomy was requisite to find out exactly the time of the Vernall Equinoxe and age of the Moon, therfore the Councill thought fit to recom|mend this care to the Patriark of Alexandria, because in Aegypt by reason of the evennesse of the region and purity of the aire this skill most flourished. The said Patriark therfore, as S. Leo saith,Leo Epist. 64. was obliged every year to give notice to the Bishop of Rome of the day wheron Easter was to be observed, to the end that by his letters information should be given to all other remoter Churches. By this means a perfect knowledge of the Feast being communica|ted to all Provinces, the order was, that during Masse on the Epiphany or Twelfth day after the Nativity a Deacon with a clear loud voice enun|ciated to the Congregation the day of Easter following: by which was regulated the begin|ning of Lent and all other Feasts called Moveable.
7. Hence it is apparent that all Western Churches, and particularly Brittany, observed Easter conformably to the Determination of this holy Councill, as Paschall Letters could safely and conveniently be sent into Britta|ny.
8. The said custom of requiring notice of the time of Easter from the Church of Ale|xandria continued as long as that Church remained in Communion with the Roman. But a breach being made between them upon occasion of the Eutychian Heresy prevayling in Egypt, the following Popes would no longer admitt such Letters, but undertook themselves the same care: for which purpose they consulted the iudgment of other Bishops, as S. Ambrose testifies touching himself,Ambros. Epist. 83. that his advice was expected about that matter.
9. An uniformity therfore was still ob|served through the Catholick Church in the Observation of Easter. But terrible warrs and tumults hapning in Brittany not long after, by which a free commerce with the Roman Church was interrupted, especially after the Infidell Saxons had possess'd them|selves of the Sea-coasts, and driven the poore Brittains into the inward mountainous Pro|vinces, no wonder if they, wanting infor|mation from Rome, began to vary in that observation and Rite.
10. It is therfore a great mistake of seve|rall of the more learned among Protestant Writers, who grounding their suspicion on a sharp Controversy not long after ensuing in Brittany about the Observation of Easter betwen the Northern and Southern Inhabitants, doe affirm that the ancient Brittains follow'd the Eastern Rite of the Quartodecimani: from whence they inferr that the Gospell was not communicated to this Island from Rome, but certain Eastern Apostolicall Missioners.
11. But the contrary is most evident. For First it is certain that they received the order about Easter, from Pope Eleutherius: Again as certain it is that Restitutus Bishop of London caried into Brittany the Decrees of the Coun|cill of Arles. Thirdly wee find expressly in the Letter written by Constantin to all Churches,Euseb. l. 3. c. 14. that among other Provinces which observed the order prescribed by the Councill of Nica after that of Arles, Brittany was one.
12. The Errour therfore which in suc|ceeding times crept among the Baittains was not the Orientall Iewish way of observing Easter (as in the Law of the Passeover) exactly on the fourteenth day of the Moon, as the Quatodecimani did, whether that day were Sunday, or not: But only this, that when it fell upon a Sunday, they did not, as all other Catholick Churches did, delay the celebra|tion of it till the Sunday following, on purpose to declare their opposition to the Iewes: but they kepd it on that day in which the Iews kepd it. So that once in seaven years, they varied from other Christian Churches. The only cause of which Errour doubtlesse was the calamity of those times when all commerce between the Brittains and Rome was intercluded.



A. D. 326.
XV. CHAP.XV. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Helenas iourney of Devotion to Ierusalem: and Churches built by her.
4.5. c. The Invention of the Holy Crosse.

1. PResently after the dissolution of this famous Councill, Helena the Mother of Constantin, being near fourscore years old, had the courage and fervour to undertake a pilgrimage to Ierusalem, there to visit the holy places sanctified by our Lords actions and suffrings, and to adore his footsteps, For Surely,Hieron. Ep. 154. saith S. Hierom, to adore the place where our Lords feet stood, is a part of Faith. So that it was not Superstition,Magdeb. Cen|tur. 4 f. 457. Euseb. l. 3. c. 41. Socrat. l. 1. c. 13. as the Lutheran Centuriators calumniously impute to her, but an act of singular counsell and wisedome, as Euse|bius, yea by divine admonition received in her sleep, as Socrates saith, that she was incited to this iourney.
2. The place which she most ardently desi|red to visit and adorn was the Sepulcher of our Lord,Euseb. 16. c. 4. which the flagitious impiety of former Pagans had endeavoured to blott out of the me|mory of man kind, foolishly thinking hereby to hide and make divine Truth undiscoverable, saith Eusebius. So that it cost incredible labour to remove that vast heap of earth with which it had been covered, on the top of which had been raised a Temple to Venus, solemnised with all manner of impurity.
Id. ib. c 39.3. The place being cleansed, there was by Constantins order erected upon it a most magnificent Temple, the structure and orna|ments wherof are particularly described by the same Historian. And besides this, the same devout Empresse began the building of two other sumptuous Churches, the one at Beth|lehem where our Lord was born, and the other on Mount Olivet, whence our Lord as|cended into heaven: Which after her death, shortly succeeding, were finish'd by her Son.Id. ib. c. 41. In this last place was yet extant the im|pression of our Lords feet, which she honoured with due veneration: Concerning which the Pro|phet Zacharias long before prophecied saying:Zachar 1.4. And in that day his feet shall stand upon the Mount Olivet, over against Ierusalem to the East.Hieron. de lo|cu Heb. Act. Apost. S. Hierom testifies that the same footsteps of our Lord imprinted on the ground, were shewd in his time: And though the Earth was continually taken away by the devotion of Chri|stians, yet those holy footsteps did immediatly receive their former state.
4. Hereto we may not omitt to adioyn a stupendious Miracle related by Sulpitius Se|verus in these words,Sulpit. Sever. hist. Sact. l. 2. That was a wonderfull thing, saith he, that place on which at his Ascen|sion our Lords feet last stood, could not be continued to the rest of the pavement about. For whensoever marble was layd on it, the earth refused to re|ceive it, casting the stones ofte~times upward to the faces of those who applied them: And moreover the footsteps of our Lord there seen are a lasting Monument that the dust there had been trod on by our Saviour S. Bede adds another Miracle,Bed. de locis Sanct c. 7. that wheras the Temple built over the place consisted of three stories or concamerations, the two uppermost wherof were vaulted with Arches, that which was the lowest and most inward could by no art or labour be closed with a vault.
5. But whilst these magnificent structures were preparing, there yet wanted that which the devout Empresse most of all desired to find, which was the Holy Crosse on which our Lord perfected the Redemption of mankind, and by the apparition of which her Son had lately been drawn to Faith and Baptism. A rumour there was that it was still extant, hid in some of those holy places: but where to find it, was the difficulty. Cammand therfore was given that all places there about should be digg'd,Ruffin. Eccl. Hist. l. 10. c. 7.8. but in vain. At last, saith Ruffinus, the Religious Lady was by a celestiall admonition informed where it lay. Wherupon causing all the rubbish to be removed, she found deep under ground three Crosses in a confus'd order. So that her ioy was much diminish'd by the uncertainty which of them was the true one. There was found likewise with them the Title which had been written by Pilat in Greek Latin and Hebrew let|ters: But yet that being separated, did not give any signs wherby to discern which was our Lord Crosse. In this uncertainty the onely remedy was to begg by Prayer a Divine testimony It hapne that at the same time there was in the Citty a certain woman of quality who lay sick of a greivous disease, ready to expire. Macarius therfore who was then Bishop of Ierusalem seeing the Empresse and all about her solicitous to discover the  Crosse, commanded saying, Let all three be brought, and God will be pleased to shew us that which bore our Lord. Entring therfore together with the Empresse and many of the people into the sick womans house, he kneeled on the ground, and in this man|ner prayed, O Lord, who by thy onely begotten Son hast vouchsafed to bring salvation to mankind through his suffring on the Crosse, and hast lately inspired into the heart of thy Hand-maid here present a desire to find the Crosse on which our salvation did hang, Be pleased to shew unto us evi|dently which of these three Crosses was employed to glorify our Lord, and which for the servile pu|nishment of malefactours: and let this be the mark: that this woman who lies here half dead, assoon as she touches the saving Crosse of thy Son, may be recalled to life from the gates of death. Having said this, he applied first one of the Crosses, which availed nothing: then the second, yet without any effect. But assoon as he had applied the third Crosse unto her, immediatly the woman opened her eyes, rose up in perfect health, and with greater alacrity then ever before, she went up and down her house glorifying the Power of God. Thus was the Empresse satisfied in that which she so earnestly desired.
6. The substance of this relation given by Ruffinus,Vid. Zose. l. 2. c. 1. Socrat. l. 1. c. 13. Ambr. de obit. Theodos. Theodort. l. 1. c. 18. Sulpit. Sever. Hist. l. 2. Ni|ciph. l. 8 c. 29. Euseb. de lau|dib. Censtan|tni. is attested by the consent of severall other ancient Ecclesiasticall writers, so that to doubt of it, or impudently to deny the truth of it, as the Lutheran Centuriators doe, can be no other but an undeniable effect of malice against the Truth, testified hereby to their confusion.
7. The Pious Lady to declare her thank|fullnes to God for so signall a favour, was not content to build a magnificent Church to the Memory of our Saviours Passion, but added another which was dedicated to the saving sign of the Crosse, as Eusebius writes.
Theodoret. hist. l. 1. c. 18.8. And as touching the Crosse it self, she took care that part of it should be sent to the Emperour, and honourably layd up in his Palace: the remainder she enclosed in a Boxe of silver, and gave it to the Bishop of Ierusalem, exhorting him that it might be there reserved as a Monument of our Salvation: Thus Theodoret: To which S. Paulinus adds,Paulin. Ep. 11 That every year on the day of our Lords Resurrection it is produced by the Bishop, and exposed to the peoples vene|ration: the Bishop himself first performing that honour to it.
9. Socrates further relates that Constan|tin, assoon as he had received part of the Crosse, beleiving that the Citty in which it was kept, should be preserved in safety from all danger, inclos'd it in a statue of his own, which was placed in the Market place of Constantinople on a mighty Pillar of Porphyry. This, saith Eusebius, seem'd to the most holy Emperour a firm bulwark of his Kingdom.
10. Besides the Crosse there were found other Ensigns of our Saviours Passion, which were not neglected by Helena: to witt, the Nailes which had not only touched our Lords Body, as the Crosse did, but peirced into his sacred flesh and sinews, being bathed in his blood. Part of which nayles,Theodoret. l. . c. 18. Ambros. de obit. Theod. saith Theodoret and S. Ambrose, she took care should be artificially enclos'd within the Emperours helmet, that therby his head might be preserved safe from his enemies weapons: and part she mingled with the Iron of his horses bitt: therby both to give a safe protection to him, and likewise to fullfill an ancient Prophecy of Zacha|rias saying,Zachar. 14. 20 That which is on the horses bitt, shall be holy to the Lord Omnipotent. And a third nayle she cast into the Adriatick Sea,Gregor. Tu|ron. de glor. Martyr. l. 1. c. 6. during a horrible tempest: by which meanes she saved her self and company from shipwrack: Thus writes Gregory Bishop of Tours.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1.2. Of S. Helenas piety to Religious Virgins.
3. c. To Martyrs, S. Lucianus, the Magi, c.
7.8. c. Place of her death, Rome: where a Church is built to the H. Crosse.
12.13. c. Constantins piety to his Mother, Augusta.
15.16. c. Her Memory celebrated in se|verall places. Churches built to her honour in England.

1. WITH such Acts of Piety, devotion and liberality did Helena adorn her latter dayes: a particular account of which belongs to the design of this History, she being a Brittish Princesse. For which reason we will prosecute the course of her life which seems to have ended the same year, or in the beginning of the following.
2. An example of her humility and devout respect to Virgins consecrated to Gods service by a profession of Chastity,Ruffin. hist. l. 10. c. 8. is related by Ruf|finus in this manner. The holy Virgins, saith he, which she found at Ierusalem, she invited to dinner and entertain'd them with so great devo|tion and respect, that she thought it a misbeco|ming thing that her Maids should attend on the~. Therfore she herself, being girt after the manner of a wayting maid, sett meat on the Table, gave them cupps to drink, and powred water on their hands. Thus she who was Empresse of the world, and Mother of the Emperour esteem'd her self no better then a servant of the hand maids of Christ.
3. Eusebius likewise celebrates her wonder|full manificence shew'd through all her progresse in the Eastern Provinces: For whither so ever she came she gave innumerable gifts both to whole citties and particular persons of all pro|fessions. The poor she munificently supplied with all necessaries: those who were condemn'd to wor|king in mines, or perpetuall imprisonment she sett at liberty; the oppress'd she delivered from fraud and iniury; and those which were banish'd she restored to their own countrey.
4. At her return out of Palestina into Greece,Vid. Act. S. Luciani ap. Surium 7. Ian. she passed by Drepanum a Town of Bithynia, where reposed the Body of the glorious Mar|tyr S. Lucianus: Assoon as shee saw these holy Relicks lying so neglected, without any mark of honour or reverence, she in zeale to the honour of God and his Martyr caused a sumptuous Church to be built over them,  moreover enlarged the same place into a Citty, which she compass'd with walls and bullwarks. Which Citty her Son afterward call'd by his Mothers name Helenopolis: and to make her name yet more celebrated by posterity, the Sea there adioyning was called Helenopontus: not because she was born there,

but because by her care and liberality the region there about formerly obscure, became illustrious.
5. We read moreover in severall ancient, Monuments how this holy Empresse in her progresse through the East having been in|formed of the place where the Bodies of the three Magi or Wisemen which came to Beth|lehem to adore our Saviour new born, repo|sed, brought them with her to her Son Con|stantin, who reverently layd them in a Church of his new Citty, from whence they were ranslated to Milan, and afterward to Colen, where now they are with great veneration celebrated.
6. A more particular relation hereof we read in the Supplement of the Gallican Marty|rologe made by Andrew de Saussay, in these words,Vid. Sup|plem. Marty|rol. Gallican. 6. Ian. At Colonia Agrippina in the Gallick Soyle is celebrated the Memory of the three holy Kings, who on this day (the Sixth of Ianuary) adored our Lord in his cradle at Bethlehem. The Bodies of these Saints were by the care and devo|tion of the Holy Empresse Helena brought out of the East to Constantinople, where in the Temple of S. Sophia (afterward more magnificently repaired by Iustinian) they remained to the times of the Emperour Emanul: who bearing a great affection to Eustorgius Bishop of Milan, by birth a Grecian, at his earnest prayers bestowd on him those Sacred pledges. Eustorgius presently conveyed them to Milan, placing them in a Church of Religious Virgins. But in the yeare eleaven hundred Sixty and fwer the Emperour Frederick having by force reduced Milan to his obedience, granted to his Chancellour Reynaldus Archbishop of Colen, at his most earnest suit, the same three Sacred Bodies, which he transfer'd to Colen, were he reposed them in the principall Church: in which place they are to this day celebrated with great veneration.
7. In such pious works did the Holy Empresse conclude her worldly pilgrimage The place of her death is thus obscurely described by Eusebius:Euseb. l. 3. c. 46. The Tabernacle of her Body, saith he, was honourd with splendid funeralls: For it was conducted with a great train of Guards to the principall place of the Empire: and there buried in a Royall Sepulcher. From which expression some collect that she was entomb'd at Con|stantinople.Socret. l. 1. c. 13. Niceph. l. 8. c. 13. Thus writes Socrates. But Nicepho|rus better understood the sence of Eusebius, writing thus, when the end of Helenas life approached, she deceased at Rome, being fourscore years old, wanting one: where her Memory is most celebrious.
8. Most probable therfore it is that after her Eastern pilgrimage she stayd not in Greece, but with her Son, or before him, took her iourney to Rome, to visit the Sepulchers of the two Cheif Apostles: a devout practise fre|quented by former Christians, but much more afterward, and particularly by many of our Princes, as will hereafter appeare.
9. In which last voyage of hers, that seems to have hapned which was related out of Gregory of Tours concerning her casting away into the Sea one of the Sacred Nayles belonging to the Holy Crosse, by which means she was delivered from imminent danger of Shipwrack by a Tempest.
10. We read in her life anciently written and conserved by Capgrave,Capgrav. in Helen. that she brought with her to Rome a part of the Holy Crosse, which with great honour and veneration was placed in a Church, at her request built by her Son, and dedicated to the honour, and called by the Title of the Holy Crosse.
11. There likewise is related with what fer|vour and devotion she spent her last dayes:Ibid. and how approaching to her death, after receiving the Sacraments of the Church, she was comforted with a vision of our Lord Iesus encompassed with a multitude of Angells, and holding his Crosse, shining with inexpressible brightnes.
12. Eusebius moreover testifies how her Son Constantin was present at her death,Euseb. l. 3. c. 45. and with a diligent and humble respect attended and ministred to her in her sicknes: in whose presence accompanied with his Sons and Grandchildren she declared her last will.Theodoret. l. 1. c. 18. And Theodoret adds, That she gave him many exhortations to Piety, and bestowing on him such Benedictions as Pa|rents usually at their death give to their children, she departed this world to eternall Happines.
13. The same Eusebius worthily extolls Constantin for his wonderfull piety and res|pect to his Holy Mother: which was so great that he made her partner of the Empire, giving her the Title of Empresse or Augusta, and causing golden Coyns to be made and stamped with her Image: An Example of one such is afforded by Baronius, and another by Camden, in one side of which is written Fl. Helena Augusta: and on the other Securitas Provinciae. S.T.R. Whereby it appears that she was transferred by Adoption into the Flavian family. And hence we find that Sulpitius Se|verus wrote with truth, that Helena Mother of the Emperour Constantin raign'd as Empresse together with her Son.
14. After her death Constantin, as Anastasius relates, built unto her honour a magnificent Sepulcher (Mausolaeum,) where in a Tomb of Porphyry he layd the Body of the most bles|sed Empresse his Mother. Which Mausolaeum was situated in the High Way called Lavi|cana between the two Laurell trees. Nicephorus affirms that after two years he caried her Body to Constantinople: But constant Tradition assures us that, at least the greatest part of it, remai|ned in the west: Concerning the translation and veneraion of which, together with a breif recapitulation of her whole story we read thus in the Gallican Martyrologe.
15. At Rhemes and Orleans this day the eighteenth of August is celebrated the Memory of Saint Helena Empresse,Martyrolog. Gallican. 18. August. Mother of Constantin, who having been confirm'd in the Faith by the Holy Pope Silvester, enioyed so great a happines, that by a singular Grace of God she saw her Son

enlightned with true Piety to become the first Emperour who openly profess'd and courageously maintain'd our most Holy Religion.A. D. 321. By his assistance and wonderfull munificence she per|formed illustrious works to promote the Wor|ship of Christ. For incited by piety she took a journey to Ierusalem, where miraculously she found the Crosse of our Lord together with the nayles: She cleansed the sacred places from the filth of Heathenish and Iewish superstitions, and adorn'd them with splendid buildings and Gifts. Moreover out of a zeale to emulate the vertue of Humility so acceptable to Christ, she would needs her self attend, serve and minister to the Sacred Virgins whom she intertain'd at a Feast. After|wards at Rome she built the Church of the Holy Crosse, which she enrich'd with a portion of the said saving Crosse. And out of the same religious propension to adorn Gaule also, she built at Orleans the principall Church, in ve|neration of Christ crucified. Whose seamlesse Garment likewise, together with many other mo|numents of our Redemption she sent to Triers, there to be devoutly venerated. At last after so many illustrious works of Piety perform'd all the world over, she quietly slep'd in Christ whose glory she had with such fervent zeale exalted, and was buried in a sepulcher of Porphyry at Rome, under the patronage of S. Peter and S. Marcellinus. In after times being illustrious by many Miracles, and some of which she had per|formed in her life time, her Sacred Body was translated into France by Theogisus a Monk and placed in the Monastery call'd Hauteville, where it has been illustrated by great numbers of Mira|cles: and there it still continues in great vene|ration: Excepting some particles therof which were sent to the principall Church at Orleans, a great ornament and safeguard thereto: where they are kep'd with becoming honour.
16. There is extant at Rome, in the Church of the Holy Crosse which was anciently call'd also the Church of S. Helena,Inscriptions. an illustrious Memoriall of her: For at the Basis of her statue there is this Inscription: To our Lady Flavia Iulia Helena, the most pious Empresse, Mother of our Lord Constantin the Great, most clement Victor and always Augustus, and Grand-mother of Constantin and Constans most blessed and flourishing Caesars: Iulius Maximia|nus Count and Senatour always most devoted to her Piety, hath made this monument. And another Inscription almost paralell is to be seen at Naples, erected anciently by the Se|nate and people there.
17. It is not to be doubted but that our Island of Brittany was at least as much devoted to her honour and memory as any other coun|treys. But all Monuments rais'd in the times of the ancient Brittains have been consumed by age, and miserable vicissitudes succee|ding. However in following ages the Sa|xons, assoon as they became Converts to Christianity, in severall places express'd their devotion to this most Pious Empresse. For both among the Trinobantes and in the North, and likewise in Berkshire there is a Town call'd Helenstow from a Church there dedica|ted to her Memory.A. D. 324. And at Bedford an illu|strious Lady call'd Iudith built a Monastery for Religious Virgins, which she consecrated to S. Helena. One William Basing likewise is sayd to have built a Church consecrated to S. Helena at London.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

1.2. Constantins zeale against Paganism and Heresy.
3. c. He is seduced by his Sister to favour Arius, c. but repents.
5.6. He adorns his New Citty Constantino+ple.
7.8. Miracles by the Holy Crosse.
9. Other acts of Constantins piety.

1. AFter S. Helena's death Constantin re|turned into the East,Eap. de vit. Philsopb. i Ae. sim Col.  he. l. 2. de Pagan. where he ex|press'd his zeale against Pagan Idolatry: For Eunapius a Pagan writer complains, Through the whole world the most celebrated Temples were overthrown by Constantin. He made se|vere Lawes against Heathenish Sacrifices, men|tion'd in Theodosius his Code.
2. Neither was he wanting to establish the Churches Peace and Vnity by publishing rigorous Edicts against Hereticks,Eusb. l.  62. Novatians, Valentinians, Marcionists, Paulians, Montanists, c. forbidding all Assemblies among them, both publick and private: and withall exhorting them to return to the Communion of the Catho|lick Church, that so they might be rendred par|takers of its Sanctity: and so attain to Truth. Thus writes Eusebius, adding that hereupon many of them did acknowledge their errours, and at last joyn'd themselfves to the Chur|ches Communion.
3. Notwithstanding being seduced by the Craft of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia the Pillar of the Arian faction,A. D. 327. he began a perse|cution against S. Athanasius, then Bishop of Alexandria. This Eusebius had cunningly insinuated himself into the affections of Constantiae the Emperours Sister, by whom at her death he was recommended to Constan|tin, in whose mind a scruple likewise was injected by certain speeches of hers, threat|ning a severe punishment to him after death for his severity against so many innocents, so she called the Arians. Wherupon he commanded that Arius himself should re|turn and be received at Alexandria: For which purpose he wrote threatning letters to S. Athanasius, that he should be deposed in case he refused him. Notwithstanding being inform'd by Athanasius, that Arius did not repent of his Heresy, but was still a

profess'd Enemy of the Councill of Nicaea,A. D. 330. Consta~tin desisted from urging his reception.
A. D. 329. Athnas. Apo|log. 2.4. Afterward the Meletians accused Saint Athanasius of many crimes: but Constantin upon examination finding his innocence, quickly absolved and dimiss'd him. Yea moreover the pious Emperour turn'd his anger against him who was the cheif Ar|chitect of all machinations against S. Atha|nasius, to witt, Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, as appears by his letters written to the people of that Citty and recited by Theodo|ret,Theodor. l. i. c. 20. in which he complains how himself had been deluded by his forgeries and lyes. And on that occasion he proceeds to pronounce Sentence against the whole faction of the Arians, banishing Eusebius and severall other Bishops from their Sees.
A. D. 330.5. But the year following, by occasion of the inauguration of his New Citty Constanti|nople, among other Examples of his Clemen|cy, he restored them.Niceph. l. 8. c. 26. Nicephorus writes that the Citty was consecrated to our Lord and his immaculate Mother with offring the unbloody Sacrifice and prayers. Adding that Constantins Statue was erected in a publick place upon a pillar of Porphyry having in his right hand a golden Apple, on which was placed the Holy Crosse, with this Inscription, To thee, O Christ our God, I com|mend this Citty.
Euseb. l. 4. c. 47.6. Eusebius describing the Magnificence of Constantin in adorning this Citty with many Churches consecrated to the Holy Martyrs, saith, The Emperour intending to illustrate after an extraordinary manner the Citty called by his own name, adorn'd it with many magnificent Churches, partly in the Suburbs, and partly in the Citty it self: by which he both celebrated the Me|mories of the Holy Martyrs, and consecrated the Citty it self to the God of Martyrs. The princi|pall of those Martyrs are recorded to have been S. Mocius, S. Agathonicus, S. Mennas and S. Acacius.
Sozom. l. 2. c. 2.7. Sozomen likewise, an eye witnes, espe|cially celebrats a Church built in a place for|merly dedicated to Vesta, which was after|ward named Michaelium, from an apparition of that Holy Archangell. In which many Mi|racles had been wrought by vertue of the Holy Crosse there erected: of which vertue the Authour acknowledges that himself had been partaker. Among which one speciall Miracle must not be omitted; which he re|lates after this manner:Id. ibid.8. I have been informed, saith he, that a Soldier of the Emperours Guards called Probianus being afflicted with greivous torments in his feet, not only received ease in that place, but was also ho|noured with a wonderfull  divine vision. For he having been formerly a Pagan and converted to Christianity, though he were satisfied of the truth of all other instituts of our Religion, yet he would never be perswaded that the Holy Crosse could be the cause of mankinds salvation. Being thus affe|cted there was offred to him a Divine Vision, which set before his eyes the Image of the Crosse, which usually was sett on the Altar of that Church: and the same Vision declared to him ma|nifestly that whatsoever thngs had been perfor|med either by Angells or Holy men for the publick or privat proffit of men since the time that Christ was crucified, were not rightly performed but by the vertue of the saving Crosse.
9. Besides these sacred Ornaments,Euseb. l. 4. c. 36. Constantin added much wealth to endow the holy Chur|ches built by him: He likewise caused a world of Copies of the Holy Scriptures to be curious|ly written in parchments richly adorned, which he dispersed through severall Chur|ches in the Citty.Cod. Theodos. de Medicis  Profess. He gave likewise great pri|viledges to Physicions, Grammarians and Pro|fessours of other Arts, by which means lear|ning much flourish'd there. In a word he endeavour'd to make it equall in all res|pects to Old Rome, placing there a Senat with the same honours and authority: into which many Christians were elected, as Baronius de|clareth.


XVIII. CHAP.XVIII. CH

1.2. S. Athanasius persecuted by Arians.
3.4.5. He is banish'd into the west: for his safety.
6.7. Arius conven'd before Constantin.
8.9. c. His fearfull death.
10. Pope Iulius.

1. BVT the restlesse malice of the Arians against S. Athanasius,A. D. 355. the principall defender of the Faith declared by the Nicene Councill, urged them to invent and forge new accusations against him, of breaking a Cha|lice, of murdering a man and using enchant|ments with his dead hand, of committing adultery by violence, c. With these crimes they charged him before the Emperour im|portuning him that he might be condemned and deposed.
2. Hereupon a Synod of Bishops being as|sembled at Tyre, Athanasius his cause was there examined, and though in all particu|lars his innocence was evidently declared, ye he was condemned by them. Which ma|nifest injustice astonish'd Constantin, as appears by a Letter of his recorded by Saint Athanasius in his Apology.Athanas. Apol. 2. A. D. 3 6.
3. Notwithstanding these impious Bishps after they had consecrated at Ierusalem a ma|gnificent Church built by Constantin, repai|ring to Constantinople there renew'd their ac|cusations, and probably by the favour of the Emperours Son Constantius infected with their Heresy, did so beseige Constantins eares, that S. Athanasius could scarce gett accesse to prove his own innocence. Insomuch as by their importunity the Emperour was even inforc'd to banish him into the West.
4. This certainly unjust Sentence Saint Athanasius himself excuses in a letter writ|ten by him to the Egyptian Hermits, where we

read this passage, Constantin upon the calum|nious accusation of the Eusebians removed for a time Athanasius into Gaule,Athanas. Ep. ad solitar. that so he might be deliver'd from their cruelty who sought all opportunities treacherously to destroy him. For thus wrote his Son Constans of blessed Memory, as appears by his letters yet extant.
5. And the same charitable interpretation did his other Son Constantin who succeeded him in the western Empire, make of his Fathers action: For writing to the people of Alexandria,Ap. Tod. l. 2 c. 2. he saith: To elude the Savage cruelty of the Arians, whose iawes were opened to swallow him, Athanasius was ordered to withdraw himself: being commanded to live under my government. Thus he made his abode in this Citty of Triers, where nothing necessary is wanting to him. So that no just suspicion can be imputed to the Emperour, as if he wavered, or had deserted the Orthodoxe Faith.
6. This was further confirmed by a me|morable accident hapning this year at Con|stantinople. For the Emperour perceiving that Arius, though avoyded by all Catholicks, was defended as Orthodoxe by many others, com|manded him to repair to his presence in that Citty:Socrat. l.  c. 5. Whither being arrived, Constantin himself ask'd him, whether he did approve the Decrees of the Nicen Councill? He presently with a chearfull countenance answered, That he appro|ved them. The Emperour not content with his affirmation and subscription, urged him to confirm this by oath: in which likewise he com|plied. But all this was meere craft and impious subtilty. For whilst be made this Profession and oath, he held in his bosome a Paper containing his heresy, and swore that from his heart he belei|ved as he had written Notwithstanding the Em|perour being ignorant of his fallacy, beleived him Orthodoxe: and thereupon commanded Alexan|der then Bishop of Constantinople to receive him into Communion.
Athn. ad Se|rapio .7. S. Athanasius to this relation adds, That Constantin having heard what Arius professed and swore, said thus to him, If thy Faith be true and Orthodoxe, thou hast sworn well: But if it be impious, and yet thou hast thus sworn, may God condemne thee for thy perjury. Which imprecation wanted nor an effect, for presently God miraculously shew'd the impiety of Arius, and true Faith of Constan|tin, in this manner:Socrat. l. . c. 5.8. Alexander Bishop of Constantinople being unwilling to admitt the Arch-heretick into his Communion, was threatned by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia that if he refused, he would present|ly cause him to be deposed. But Alexander being much more solicitous for the true Faith, then his Bishoprick, had his recourse to Gods onely assi|stance, and severall dayes and nights lying pro|strate before his Altar in presence of his Sacra|ments, pray'd in this manner, O God, I beseech thee to grant that if the opinion of Arius be true I may dye before the day of disputation come: But if the Faith which I professe be true, Let Arius the Authour of all these calamities, suffer just punishment for his impiety.
9. What was the fearfull successe of these fervent prayers,Athan. ad. Srapu. is thus related by S. Atha|nasius: When the Bishop had thus ended his Prayers, he went away full of anxious cogitations: and presently a wonderfull and incredible thing hapned. The Eusebians threaten, the good Bishop prayes. As for Arius confiding in the power of the Eusebians, in his way to the Church he used many vain and boasting bablings: when on a sudden he was forced to retire into a common privy to exonerate nature: where suddenly, as it was written of Iudas, he ell on his face to the ground and burst asunder in the middle: Thus was he deprived both of life and Communion.
10. The consequents of this fearfull iudg|ment Socrates thus further prosecutes, This being done, saith he, the Eusebian faction was struck with a wonderfull errour and consterna|tion: and the fame therof was spread not through the Citty only, but the whole world almost. By this mean the Emperour likewise adhered still more firmly to the Catholick Faith: affirming that the Nicene Faith was now also visibly confirmed by Divine authority: and for this reason he much reioyced at the end of the Heretick Arius.
11. This same year dyed the Holy Pope Marcus the Successour of S. Silvester, after he had sate onely one year: in whose place suc|ceeded Pope Iulius: whose first year is accoun|ted the last of the Emperour Constantin: the circumstances of whose death are now to be related.


XIX. CHAP.XIX. CH.

1.2.3 c. Constantins pious preparation to death.
6. Whether he was baptiz'd by Eusebius the Arian.
7. c. Manner of his death: And prayers for him after.
10. His Memory celebrated among Saints.

1. ONE of the last Acts of Constantins zeale and devotion was, the building at Constantinople a most magnificent Temple, dedicated to the honour of all the Apostles. The sumptuousnes of its structure is parti|cularly described by Eusebius, who adds That all these things the Emperour dedicated,Euseb. l. 4. c. 29. to the end he might eternise the Memory of our Saviours Apostles among all nations.
2. In this Temple, saith he, he placed twelve () honorary repositories,Id. ibid. c. 60. which should be as twelve Pillars for the honour and Memory of the twelve Apostles: And in the midst of them he caused his own Tomb to be placed, enclosed on each side by six of them: Wisely forethinking that the Tabernacle of his dead body would decently and worthily rest there. And having long before framed in his mind this cogitation, he dedicated the Church to the Apostles, having an opinion and beleif, that their Memory would procure

very much proffit to his soule.A. D. 337.
3. Now wherin this proffit did consist, the same Authour thus further explains:Id. ibid. He by a provident dispensation design'd this place opportunely for the day of his death approaching: by an incredible propension of his Faith foreseeing that when his Body after death should participate with the Apostles the same common appellation, that then he being dead, should also be made partaker of the Prayers which there should be offred in honour of the Apostles. And with this mind did many of our Brittish and Saxon Kings and Nobles erect so many magnificent Churches and Monasteries, for a remedy and redemption of their soules, as they frequently expresse in their Charters of Founda|tions.
4. Other more immediate preparations to a happy death made by the same pious Emperour are thus related by the same Writer:Id. ibid. c. 5. The Emperour, saith he, enioyd his faculties and strength of reason in such a perfection that till the extremity of his age he continued to write Orations, to make discourses with his freinds, and to minister to his hearers advices well be|seeming a good Christian. He likewise diligently published Laws, both touching Civill and Mili|tary affaires: for he had an understanding so dilated, that he could comprehend what soever was necessary or expedient for humane life Now this one particular is worthy of eternall memory, that immediatly before his last day he recited a fu|nerall Oration in the place accustomed, wherin by a continued discourse he spoke of the immor|tality of soules, of the rewards which God had prepared for those who lived piously in this world and on the contrary of the miserable end of those who lead ungodly lives. Which discour|ses pronounced with gravity and constancy ad so affect some of his domesticall servants, that one of them (a Pagan Idolater,) who pretended to wise|dom, being ask'd What his opinion was of the Emperours Oration, answered though with some unwillingnes, that the things spoken by him seem'd to him to be true: and particularly that he could not but highly commend his discourse against a multitude of Gods. Such entertain|ments as those the pious Emperour had among his familiar freinds a little before his death by which he seem'd to make the way to a better life more easy and eaven.
5. Eutropius relates that there appeared in heaven at that time a Comet of an unusuall biggnes, portending his death. After which he fell into some distemper: which encrea|sing, forced him to make use of hott bathes in the Citty:Id. ib. c. 61. From whence, saith Eusebius, he was removed to his Mothers Citty, Helenopolis in Bithynia, where for a long time continuing in the Church consecrated to the Holy Martyr S. Lu|cianus he offred his Prayers and publick vowes to God.
6. The same Authour in another place pretends that Constantin was at this time baptis'd by the Arian Bishop of Nicome|dia, neer that Citty. But the generall Tra|dition of the Western Church refutes him, as hath been shew'd. Therfore what was done by Constantin, was not receiving Baptism, but Pennance,Id. ib. which, the same Eusebius relating it, calls an imitation of saving Bap|tism. For thus he writes, when the con|sideration, of his last day came into Constan|tins mind, he iudging this an opportune time for him to be cleansed of his sins which as a mortall man, he had committed, and belei|ving that by the efficacy of Divine Mysteries and an imitation of the saving laver of Bap|tism, his soule would be purged, he, I say, considering these things, fell humbly on his knees in the Church of Martyrs at Heleno|polis, and there confessing his sins, he offred himself a suppliant to God for the pardon of them. And then it was that he first be|came worthy to receive absolution by imposition of hands and prayer.
7. In the last place touching his death, the same Authour thus prosecutes his Nar|ration:Id. ib. 62. Assoon as all holy Mysteries were per|form'd, he was cloathed with Kingly robes shining brighter then light, and was layd in a bed of a most pure whitenesse: for his Imperiall Purple he rejected, and would never make use of it afterward Then with a clear distinct voyce he prayd and gave thanks to God, adding words to this purpose, Now I am assured of happines, and immortall life, now I am made partaker of Divine light. Withall he with detestation bewayld the state of miserable Pagans, whom be affirm'd most unhappy in that they were deprived of such divine blessings.
8. And when the Centurions and other Su|periour Officers were admitted, and deplored with mournfull voyces their unhappines in the losse of such an Emperour, wishing him a longer life: To these he answered, that now he had attain'd true life indeed; and that himself only understood his own happines; for which reason his desire was to hasten his departure to God. After this he disposed his will in which he gave honourable pensions to such Romans as inhabited the Royall Citty new built by him. As for his Empire he left it as a Patrimony to his children. Thus dyed Constantin during the solemnity of Pentecost.
9. As for the Vniversall mourning, the clamours of the people,Vid. Euseb. l. 4. c. 71. the tearing of garments and prostration of bodies on the ground practised by the Soldiers to testify their inconsolable sorrow for so great a losse, together with the glorious solemni|zation of his funeralls, at which was only of all his Sons Constantius, present; all these things may be read at large in the same Authour. This one passage in him must not be omitted, where he writes thus,Id. ib. Great multitudes of people together with the Preists did not cease with teares and much groaning to powre forth Prayers unto God for the soule of the Emperour. wherin they performed an Office very acceptable and desired by the pious Prince

himself: And likewise God therby shew'd his singular goodnes to his servant, both in that after his death his Empire descended to his own dear children, and that himself obtain'd repose in the place, so affected by him, wherin the Me|mory of the Apostles was ioytly celebrated.
10. That the Church did not doubt of the happines and glory of this pious Em|perour after his death,Martyrol. Gall c. 22. May. the Martyrologes of the Greek, the Gallican and Brittish Chur|ches are assured testimonies: in which on the one and twentieth of May his Memo|ry is anniversarily solemnised. And par|ticularly in Brittany Temples were built and dedicated to his honour. One of which still remaines in the Province of the Ordovices, or Northwales, call'd at this day by his name, which was erected by the Brittains when they Were driven by the Saxons into those quarters.




THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAP.

1.2. Constantin divides the Empire among his three Sons.
3. Brittany under Constantin the younger.
4. His kindnes to S. Athanasius.
5. He is slain by his Brothers soldiers.

A. D. 337.1._THE Emperour Constantin at his death divided the Roman Empire among his three Sons, so as that his eldest Son Constan|tin enioy'd for his portion the Provinces of Gaule, Spain, Brittany and all other con|quer'd countreyes on this side the Alpes: Constantius the Second Son, being only pre|sent at his Fathers death, took possession of the Eastern Regions, together with Egypt, and the youngest son Constans had the go|vernment of Italy and Africk.
2. Now the Gests of these and severall suc|ceeding Emperours we will leave to such Hi|storians as have written of the generall af|faires of the Church and Empire. For having confin'd our selves to matters which con|cern the Ecclesiasticall state of Brittany, our purpose is to treat no further of such Em|perours, then as they are necessary for Chro|nology, or shall concern our own countrey.
3. As touching therfore the Second Con|stantin, within whose Iurisdiction Brittany was comprised, his Raign was short, not lasting entirely four years. And all that we can record of him is, that he was constant in the Profession of the Catholick Faith esta|blish'd in the Great Council of Nicaea: wherin he was imitated likewise by his Youngest Brother Constans: So that by these two Em|perours means all the Western Churches were secured from the infection of Heresy, which miserably defaced the Eastern parts, by reason that Constantius raigning there suffred him|self to be perverted by Eusebius Bishop of Ni|comedia and other Arian Hereticks.
4. Now an illustrious proof which the younger Constantin gave of his zeale to the Orthodox Faith,A. D. 338. was his restoring S. Atha|nasius to his See of Alexandria after his two years and four months banishment, during which time he abode at Triers in Germany, where he was entertain'd with all honour  liberality by Constantin. This restitution of S. Athanasius was perform'd in co~sequence to the last Will of his Father the late Em|perour Constantin,Theodores, h. l. 2. c. 1. as appears by his Sons let|ter to the Church of Alexandria recited by S. Athanasius in his second Apology: Wherin he further writes, that it was not out of disaffection, but rather a tendernes of S. Athanasius his safety that Constantin sent him into the West to his son, that so he might elude the treacherous malice of his Enemies the Arian Bishops, who left no means unat|tempted to destroy him.
A. D. 3405. It does not appear that this younger Constantin ever came into Brittany, which he governed by a Deputy, himself making his residence in Gaule. But in the fourth year of his raign he passed over into Italy, with what design it is uncertain, whether out of ambition to invade the portion of his Bro|ther Constans, or for some other intention. However he was there traiterously slain at Aquileia, by his Brothers soldiers, and as Zosimus sayes, by his order. By his death the whole Western Empire became the Dominion of Constans: Who placed in Brittany, as his Lievtenant Vetranio, one who a few years after usurped the Title of Emperour.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1 2.3 Of S. Gudwal: His Gests.
4 The place where he lived.
5.6. c. Of Mevorus a Prince: and his Son S. Simeon.

1. ABout this time in Brittany there flou|rished a famous holy Bishop call'd S. Gudwal, commemorated by severall Mar|tyrologes and Ecclesiasticall Writers,. 6. Iunij Haraeus. 16 Malbranc. in Chron. Mart. Angl. 2. Feb Cap grav. in Gvvalo. the summe of whose Gests is as followeth.
2. He was born in Brittany of Noble parents: and assoon as his age rendred him capable, he was made Deacon, and afterwards a Preist. At which time he largely communicated to others those treasures of spirituall Wisdom which he had been gathering from his youth. Insomuch as by his instructions many were so enlightned that they were enabled to inflame others with divine Love. After this beeing exalted to the Supreme degree of Episcopacy, he so much the more dilated the odour of his holy conversation, Gods Spirit de|claring in him the operations of divine Grace, to the great ioy of all, both Clergy and people. He received by Succession from his Parents a very ample patrimony: but despising worldly riches and having lost the tast of fading pleasures, he freely gave all his possessions to the Church.
3. Moreover seing that his Pastorall Office obliged him to worldly cares and solicitudes, he used his utmost diligence to disburden and un|chain himselfe from it. Therfore recommen|ding his Church to a worthy Successour, he retired himself into a certain Monastery in his own Dio|cese, where he led a perfect Monasticall, or rather Angelicall life. Now this Monastery was placed neer the Sea, in a bay wherof the holy man obser|ving a certain vast rock or Promontory shooting forth, he retir'd himself thither to the end he might without interruption attend to God only: in which place he gathered to him the number of one hundred and eighty disciples. But the place being too strait for so great a multitude, the blessed man having recourse to God alone, in whose Power and goodnes he placed his only confidence, when the Sea at low Ebbe had left dry a great space of the shore, he with a rd which he car|ried in his hands made impressions in severall places of the Sand, and commanded the waves in the Name of Christ, that they should not passe those bounds. At which command pronounced by the holy man one might observe the Sea naturally raging to restrain its violence and swelling: and effectually to this very day it never presum'd to transgresse the limits prescrib'd unto it. Thus this holy man bid adieu to the world, to to all his freinds in it, all things which it could deprive him of, to all which vanities he was cru|cified, perfectly hating his own soule and sensuall desires. And yet contented not himself with this, but continually meditated how to aspire to more sublime perfection. In order wherto, having communicated his resolution to his Disciples, he determined utterly to quitt his native countrey, and to passe over into forrain parts. For which purpose having provided seaven ships, he, ac|companied with his Brethren, entred into them and began his voyage, and with a prosperous gale this little army of Saints took land in a strange countrey.
4. Now though in the ancient Monuments relating his life and Gests, the land where he aborded be not named, notwithstanding there being mention made in them of a cer|tain Prince called Mevorus who enioy'd pos|sessions in that place, anciently belonging to his Ancestors: Which Mevorus professing Christianity, and for that cause receiving great vexations from the inhabitants who were Infidels, he transfer'd his dwelling to a place call'd Corminia, and at this day Cor|mon, neer a town in Gaule called Monstrueil: we may upon the authority of Malbranc a learned French Antiquary conclude that S. Gudwal took land in the Province of Belgick Gaule inhabited by a People called Morini, among whom he preach'd the Christian Faith, and instructed many in the perfection of a more holy life. For thus we read in the an|cient narration of his life:5. Mevorus as soon as he had notice that the Holy Father S. Gudwal was entred into his con|fines,Cap-grav. c. gave great thanks to God for it: and out of his Treasury richly endowed a Church which this famous Bishop, devout Hermit and worthy Superiour of Monks founded in a strange coun|trey: where he gave illustrious examples of all Christian vertues to the present age, and left a fragrant odour of his fame to posterity.
6. But before the said Church and Mona|stery were perfectly endowed, we find a rela|tion of a wonderfull fact of S. Gudwal. For Mevorus together with his wife being much stricken in years, had no children at all: When behold about midnight S. Gudwal ap|peared in a dream to the Matron, promising her that she should have a Son, which himself, as another parent to him in regard of education, would call by the name of Si|meon. And Mevorus being inform'd of this made a promise, that the said son who was to be born, should both in his own person

and with all his hereditary possessions be transcrib'd to the Monastery.A. D. 347. The event suc|ceeded answerably to all their desires: for a son is born to Mevorus, he is called Simeon, brought up in learning, and made a Monk: And then it was that the Princes possessions were confered on the Monastery. It is very probable that this Monastery was seated in a confining part of Flanders neer Ipre, where his memory to this day is with great devo|tion celebrated, and where a village called Ghelwelt seems to afford marks of S. Gudwal's name.
7. How long the Holy man liv'd there, is not express'd by the Writers of his life. Yet our Martyrologe relates on the sixth of Iune,Martyr. An|gli. 6. Iunij. that he rested in our Lord with great Sancti|ty about the year of Christ four hundred and three: and the visions and wonders prece|ding his death are thus related by those who have written his life:8. An Angel of our Lord from heaven ap|pear'd to him with a pleasant countenance, saying, O worthy soldier of God, may the joy of our Lord always encrease in thee, and his peace conti|nually remain with thee. Be ready prepar'd, for e're long God will call thee out of this world, and thou shalt meet thy heavenly King with a palm of Victory. This celestiall Messenger of God stay'd with him a good space, and fill'd his soule with a spirituall sweetnes known only to God. A second time another Angell appear'd unto him, and sayd, I am Michael the Archangel, sent to thee from our Lord, by whose command I am to ac|quaint thee with what shall shortly befall. Behold I declare unto thee the hour of thy departure: for after ten dayes thou shalt ioyfully issue out of thy prison of flesh, and escape out of the dungeon of this world. With inestimable gladnes thou shalt meet thy heavenly King into whose presence we will beare thee, and he will receive thee with glory, enrolling thee among the Cittizens and Courtiers of his kingdom.
9. It is said that his Mother and sisters were present and assisting at his death, being invited thither by the fame of his miracles: And after his departure, it seems they caried his body back with them into Brittany. But afterward when the Pagan Saxons demolish'd the Christian Sepulchers in our Island, it was transported again into Flanders: for thus we read in his life:10. The Holy man dyed the eighth day be|fore the Ides of Iune: and his Body was buried in the Isle of Plet, or Plecit: where it remained many years, illustrious by many miracles: But barbarous people afterwards invading the Coun|trey forced the Brittains to fly into forrain re|gions, at which time the Brethren of the foresaid Monastery took up the sacred Body, and carried it with them over the Sea which divides Britta|ny from Gaule; And travelling with this sa|cred pledge, at last they arrived at his own Mo|nastery, where they repos'd it. Where because it was not entertained with due honour, a certain Noble Marques call'd Arnulphus appointed by God to be the instrument of the safety of many men,A. D. 346. removed it to the Monastery of Blandi|nium in Gaunt, together with the precious Re|licks of the famous Confessour Bertulpus, Which Translation was made on the third day before the Nones of December, when Clotharius raigned in France. On which day yearly to this time the sacred Body is caried in a solemne Procession. And what miracles were wrought severall times during such Processions Cap-grave relates.


III. CHAP.III. CHA.

1. Constans quiets Gaule and comes into Brittany.
2 3. A Synod at Sardica: where Brittish Bishops come.
4. Gests of the Synod.
5.6. c. Of Appeales to Rome, c.
12.13. c. S. Athanasius restor'd: and again banish'd.
15.16. Constans his death.

1. IN the yeare three hundred forty two, as Paulus Diaconus writes,A. D. 342. P. Dac. l. 11. c. 18. great commo|tions began in the Roman Empire. For the Na|tion of the Franks setling themselves in Gaule used all hostility against the Romans. But this trouble was quickly appeas'd by the Emperour Constans, who coming out of Illyricum ought with and subdued them. After which he pass'd over into Brittany, which usually follow'd the motions of Gaule. This appears from Iulius Firmicus, who in a Book dedicated to the same Emperour recounts this journey per|formed during the tempestuous season of Winter,Iul. Firmic. de Errr profan. Relig. c. 29. telling him that the Brittains at the unlook'd for sight of him were affrighted into obedience.
2. Four yearts after this, upon occasion of great combustions especially in the Ea|stern Empire,A. D. 346. the two Emperours ioyn'd to call a Council intended to be Oecumenicall. For the Eastern Bishops of the faction of Eu|sebius Bishop of Nicomedia Cheif-Pillar of the Arians, had condemned S. Athanasius in two Synods, at Tyre and Antioch. On the contrary Iulius Bishop of Rome in a Synod of Italian Bishops received him into his Commu|nion, notwithstanding the intercession of the Orientals, who sent to Rome their Decree of the condemnation of S. Athanasius. Wherupon a Schism between the Eastern and Western Churches being likely to break forth,heodret. h. l. 2. c. 5. to prevent it the Orthodox Emperour Constans earnestly solicited his brother Constantius ro joyn with him in calling a Generall Councill, therby to preserve inviolate the he|ritage of their Fathers piety, by which he had establish'd the Empire, destroyed Tyrants, and re|duced to his obedience many barbarous Nations.
A. D. 347.3. Hereupon a Synod was assembled the year following at Sardica in Illyrium;Sozom. l. b. 3. c. 11. to which there came out of the Western Empire about three hundred Bishops: and out of the East onely seaventy sixe. Now among the Western Bishops some there were who came out of Brittany,Athanas. Apol 2. as S. Athanasius, in whose cause especially the Synod met, expressly affirms, naming one of them, to wit, Restitu|tus Bishop of London, who twenty years before had been at the Councill of Nicea to establish the Faith of the Consubstantiality of the Son of God. In which regard to treat more particu|larly of this Synods affairs appertains to our present History, for therby will appeare the conformity of the Brittish Churches in those dayes to the Faith and Discipline of the Ca|tholick Church.
Vid. Epist. Syn. Sardic. op. Athanas. Apol. 2.4. For as much therfore as concerns the Acts of this Synod, the principall was a con|firmation of Faith establish'd in the Council of Nica: Next the declaring the innocence of S. Athanasius, Marcellus, Asclepas and other Orthodox Bishops persecuted and chased from their Sees by the Arian faction, toge|ther with the deposition and excommuni|cation of their adversaries. Then succeeded a condemnation of those Eastern Bishops which deserted the Synod, and made a Schis|maticall Assembly at Philippopolis neer Sar|dica, where they likewise publish'd Decrees and Canons in contradiction to the lawfull Synod.
5. Then touching matters of Disciplin establish'd in this holy Synod, the most con|siderable was the confirming by an expresse Canon the lawfullnes of Appeales, that is, Petitions for Revisions of Episcopall causes From all other Churches both Eastern and Western to the See Apostolick of Rome. The form of which Canon is as followeth:6. Osius Bishop said: This must likewise neces|sarily be added,Cnc. Sardic. Can. 3. That it may not be lawfull for Bishops to passe out of their own Province into another Province in which there are Bishops, un|lesse peradventure they be invited by their Bre|thren, least they should seem to shut the dore of Charity. But if it happen that in any Province a Bishop have a contention against his Brother Bi|shop, one of the two may call out of another Pro|vince a Bishop to judge the cause. But if any Bi|shop shall be judged (and condemned) in any cause, yet thinks his cause to be good: In this case to the end the Councill may again be re|newed, if you please let us honour the memory of S. Peter the Apostle, that those who have exa|mined the cause may write to Iulius Bishop of Rome, and if his sentence be that judgment ought to be renew'd, let it be renew'd, and let him appoint Iudges. But if he shall approve the cause to be such as that those things which have been acted in it shall not be again reiterated, what he decrees herin shall be confirmed, if such be all your pleasures. The Synod answered, This pleases us.
Ib. Can. 4.7. In pursuance of which, there was added this following Canon: Gaudentius Bishop said: If you please, let this be added to this De|cree which thou hast pronounced full of Sanctity: That when any Bishop shall be deposed by the judgment of neighbouring Bishops, and shall pu|blickly declare that his intention is to plead his cause in the Citty of Rome: after such an Ap|peale of a Bishop who seems to be deposed, let not another Bishop be ordain'd in his chaire, till his cause be determin'd in the judgment of the Bi|shop of Rome.
8. Moreover to provide against tedious delays of causes,Ib. Can. 7. and incommodities of transporting witnesses to Rome with exces|sive charges, c. the Holy Synod thought fit to adjoyn another Decree in this form: Osius Bishop said, It is the pleasure (of the Synod) that if a Bishop be accused, and that the Bishops of that Region assembled together shall give judgment against him, and depose him from his Degree; in case he who is depos'd shall appeale, and have recourse to the Bishop of the Roman Church, with a desire to be heard before him: if the said Roman Bishop shall think it just to have the examination of the cause renew'd, let him be pleased to write to those Bishops which are in a neighbour and confining Province, signi|fying that they should diligently examin the matter, and determin the cause according to truth and justice. But if the Bishop who desires his cause may again be heard, shall by Petition move the Roman Bishop, to send from his own presence ( latere suo) a Preist to heare and iudge the cause, it shall be in the power and liberty of the Roman Bishop to doe as he pleases and thinks most convenient. And if he shall resolve to send persons, having his authority from whom they are sent, to be present in judgment with other Bi|shops, this shall be left to his own pleasure. But if he think sufficient that the Bishops (of the said Provinces) put an end to the controversy, let him doe what in his most wise counsell he shall judge most expedient.
9. Thus was the matter of Appeales or Revisions regulated in this holy Synod: at which were present no fewer then thirty African Bishops, named by S. Athanasius in his Apology. So that it may seem wonder|full how the same cause of Appeales could afterward in the next age be question'd by their successours. But the true ground hereof was, that the Donatists had by their subtilty and malicious diligence abolished all the Copies and true Acts of the Councill of Sardica through Africk, in the place of them substituting the Acts of the Anti-Synod celebrated by a few Eastern Bishop at Philippopolis, under the title of the Synod of Sardica: And their motive was, because in the Epistle of that false Council the Arian Bishops made mention of Donatus the Dona|tist Bishop of Carthage. This appears by com|paring severall testimonies of S. Augustin,August. Epist. 163. as where in a certain Epistle he sayes, Fortu|nius the Donatist shew'd mee a certain Book, out of which he pretended to demonstrate that

the Councill of Sardica had written to the Bishops of Africa of the Communion of Donatus.A. D. 353. And  little afterward he saith;Ibid. Then having taken the Book, and considering the Decrees of the said Councill, I found that S. Athanasius and other Catholick Bishops, yea and Iulius Bishop of Rome no lesse Catholick then they, had been condem|ned by that Councill of Sardica: hereby I was assured that it was a Councill of Arians.
10. These Decrees touching the Superemi|nent authority of the Bishop of Rome, though they were not presently received in the East, by reason of the discession of the Eastern Arian Bishops, yet afterwards in the Councill of Consta~tinople in Trullo, call'd Quino-Sextum, they were expressly admitted. And no shew of doubt can be made but that the Brittish Bishops caried back with them these Decrees into Brittany: by which their subor|dination to the Roman See was evidently de|clared.
11. A furth Canon was likewise there established to restrain the frequent repair of Deacons sent by their Bishops to the Empe|rours Court (ad ComitatumConciae. Sardi|cius can. 10.) in the regula|ting whereof a particular honour was attri|buted to the Bishop of Rome: for thus runs the Canon, If any such come to Rome, as hath been said, Let them present their Petitions to our most holy Brother and fellow-bishop of the Roman Church, that he may first examine whether they be honest and just, and consequently afford his diligence and care that they may be caried to Court. All the Bishops said, that this pleased them well, and that the counsell was honest Then Alypius Bishop sayd, If such men undertake the incommodities of a long voyage for the causes of pupills, widdows and such as are unjustly oppres|sed, they will have just reason to doe so: But now they repair thither to make Requests for things which without casting an odious envy on us, and which deserve reprehension, can not be granted, therfore there is no reason that such should be permitted to goe to the Court.
A. D. 34.12. The Synod being dissolved, the Emperour Constans employ'd his utmost diligence and authority in the execution of its Decrees. And wheras the cheifest difficulty was con|cerning the restitution of S. Athanasius to his See, for the Eastern factious Bishops who had made a discession from the Councill, had used means to obstruct his return: Here|upon Constans wrote to his Brother for his restitution,Socrat. ist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 18. adding withall by way of mena|cing, that if he should refuse to effect it, he must know for certain, that himself would come thither, and in despight of him, restore the Banish'd Bi|shops to their Sees. Thus writes Socrates out of the Emperours letter.
13. Now what effect this intercession of the Emperour Constans had, the same Historian thus continues to relate:Id. ibid. Assoon as the Eastern Em|perour understood these things he conceiv'd in his mind no small greif. Whereupon assembling many Eastern Bishops he declared to them how difficult a choice was offred to him: and ask'd their counsell what he should doe. Their answer was, That it was much better to allow Athanasius the administra|tion of his Church, then to hazzard a Civill warr. Hence it came to passe that the Emperour con|strained by mere necessity sent for Athanasius to come to him.
14. The year following therefore Athanasius return'd into the East,A. D. 349. being recommended to the Emperour by letters written in his behalf by Pope Iulius. He was at first receiv'd with some kindnes by the Emperour Constan|tius: and at last permitted to return to his See at Alexandria.
15. But his abode there was very short:A. D. 350. for the next year he was again expell'd by the practises of his implacable enemies the Arian Bishops, whose power became in a manner boundles by the death of the Ortho|dox Emperour Constans: Who by the conspiracy of Magnentius, Chrestius and Marcellinus, prin|cipall Officers of his,Aur. Victor. was slain at Helena a town of France neer the Pyrenean mountains, whither he fled having been informed that Magnentius had taken on him the Imperiall Purple. There was a common report that Constans had receiv'd a Prediction, that he should dye in his Grand-mothers bosom: which was fuffill'd by his murder in a town call'd by her name
6. His death was deservedly much bewayld by S. Athanasius,Athanas. Apolog. not so much for the Prote|ction, and favours shew'd to himself, as for the greivous calamity which by his losse befell the Orthodox Faith, in danger to be op|pressed by the Arian Emperour Constantius, who remain'd sole Governour of the Roman Empire: though before he could quietly enjoy it two Tyrants were to be oppress'd. The one was Vetrannio, who had formerly go|vern'd Brittany and afterwards Illyricum, where being Prefect he was proclaimed Em|perour by his soldiers: but within a few days was deposed by Constantius, who not only spared his life, but allow'd him in his old age a retreat full of abundance ad pleasure. The other was Magnentius, who took the Title of Emperour at Austun (Augustodu|num) in France,A. D. 355. and held it three years, till by the losse of a battell he was forced to kill himself.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1. Constantius his Pride: he persecutes the Faith. A false Councill at Arles.
2.3. Pope Liberius his constancy.
4.5. His fall: and rising. Of Felix an Antipope.

1. COnstantius after this Victory would be call'd Emperour of the whole world,  as if he had bee~ exalted to a degree above human mortality, he assumed the impious title of his eternity: And which was yet worse,

all this Pride  power he exte~ded to the op|pression of the Catholick Faith,A. D. 355  establishing of the Arian Heresy. For which purpose he used his utmost endeavour to pollute there|with the Western Churches also. For comman|ding a Councill to be assembled at Arles in France,A. D. 353. he by violence extorted the suffrages of the Bishops to favour his Heresy and con|demne S. Athanasius, drawing into the same impiety also the Legats of Pope Liberius, who newly had succeeded Iulius. So that unlesse Liberius had expressly protested against their Sentence, he would deservedly have incur|red the same suspicion.
A. D. 3542. On the contrary whilst Constantius remai|ned in France, Liberius more then once soli|cited him by Legats and Epistles in the behalf of S. Athanasius, complaining that the suffra|ges of Bishops were mercinarily sold accor|ding to the Princes inclination. He wrote likewise to S. Eusebius the famous Bishop of Vercelles, exhorting him to courage in main|taining the Catholick Faith, and opposing himself to the violence of adversaries.
A. D. 355.3. Whereupon Constantius, perceiving that Pope Liberius his defending of S. Athanasius rendred unproffitable the Sentences of his Synods pack'd against him, used all possible endeavours to win him by promises and favours to his party.Athanas. ad solitar. But these allurements proving uneffectuall, he sent for him: and Liberius being come to his presence, used great liberty of speech to him, as S. Athanasius relates: protesting his readines to suffer all things, rather then from being a Christian to become an Arian. At which the Emperour being highly offended, sent him into banishment to Beraea a Citty of Thrace.Theodoret. hist. l. 2. c 16 Whereto he chearfully sub|mitted, and would not accept five hundred crowns, which the Emperour sent for his maintenance. Into whose place was substi|tuted a certain Roman Preist called Felix, one who though in iudgment a Catholick, yet condescended to communicate with the Arians.
A. D. 357.4. Liberius continued in his exile little above two years, but returned with as much infamy as he had submitted to it with glory. For wanting constancy to support the tedious delay of his banishment, he yeilded at last to the condemnation of S. Athanasius, and subscrib'd likewise to a Confession of Faith fram'd in a Synod at Sirmium, in which though there was nothing hereticall, yet the word of Consubstantiality not being express'd in it, his subscription was scndalous, arguing an unlawfull compliance with the Arians.
5. But being return'd to Rome, he broke off all commerce with the Arians, rejoyn'd him|self to S. Athanasius his Communion, and to demonstrate the Orthodoxnes of his Faith, in an Epistle to him recorded by S. Athanasius himself,p. Athanas. post epist. ad pictet. he wrote thus, Our Confession, most beloved Athanasius, is that the Word is the Son of God, being according to his Nature begotten of God his Father, not created, he is God his Fathers collegue in his Empire, and obtains an endles kingdome for infinite ages. Amen.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1. Gratian Propretor of Brittany: deprived.
2.3 c. His Successour Martinus, a just man: Cruelty of Paul the Notary. Martinus kills himself.

1. WHilst Constantius in the west thus afflicted the Catholick Church and Faith,A. D. 355. the Propretor of Brittany was Gratian, Father of Valentinian who was afterward Emperour. He was rais'd from a vile ori|ginal to that high degree for his courage and vertue. He was call'd by a mock-name Funarius the Rope-man: because in his younger age having been a seller of ropes,Aur. Victor. in Valenti|nian. he was of such strength that five soldiers could not with their ioynt forces wrest a rope out of his hands. This Gratian having incurr'd Constantius his displeasure by fa|vouring the faction of Magnentius, was de|priv'd of his Office and Estate.
2. There succeeded him in the Government of Brittany Martinus: a Propretor who gover|ned this Island with great justice and kind|nes to the Brittains. But his Government and life lasted not long, being interrupted upon this occasion.
3. The Emperour Constantius being a Prince extremely suspicious,Am. Ma|cellin. l. 14. c. 12. employed severall Officers to search out all such as were guil|ty of any practises against him. Among these there was one call'd Paul a Notary, very acceptable to him for his malicious diligence and sagacity in exploring such matters: who was therfore sent into Britta|ny to bring over in chains such soldiers as had intermedled in the conspiracy of Ma|gnentius. This employment the Notary exe|cuted, with such horrible cruelty and inju|stice, that the Pretor Martinus not able to continue a spectatour of it, first by way of entreaty endeavoured to avert the miseries of a world of innocents: and this being unsuccessfull, he protested he would leave the Province. Paul being extremly incens'd hereat, out of a feare least if he should surcease his cruelty, the Emperour would impute it to want of zeale in him, he by his subtilty (for which he had the Sirname of Catena, or a Chain, given him) involv'd the Pretor himself also in a suspicion of the same guilt and treason. And being very ear|nest to seise upon him and putt him in fet|ters with the rest, Martinus in his own defence sett upon Paul with his sword, and wounded him, yet with so remisse a blow, that the wound did not prove mortall: whereupon he turn'd his sword upon his

own breast:A. D. 359. and thus dyed this most just and mercifull Pretor for endavouring to divert the calamities of a multitude of mise|rable innocent persons.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2.3.4. Councill of Ariminum. Wherin were Brittish Bishops: poor but gene|rous.
5 6 c. The Councill at first constant and Orthodox.
10. It is tyrannised over.

A. D. 359.1. THE year of our Lord three hun|dred fifty nine was blackned with a publick scandall, the greatest that ever ex|posed the Church both to danger and infamy: and that was the great Councill of Ariminum, assembled by the authority of the Arian Emperour Constantius, with design to abolish the Faith of the Consubstantia|lity of the Son of God. Concerning which Councill, Sulpitius Severus gives this rela|tion:Slp. Sever. Hist. lib. 2.2. Constantius, saith he, commanded a Councill to be assembled at Ariminum a Citty of Italy: and withall layd this injunction on the Prefect Taurus, that when the Bishops were mett together, he should not permitt them to depart till they had all consented in one Faith: promising him the Consulship if he effected this. Sending therfore his Officers through Illyricum, Italy, Africk, Spain and the Gaules (under which was comprehended, Brittany, as being governed by the same Prefect:) they summoned and drew together out of the Western Empire to Ariminum more then four hundred Bishops.
3. To all these the Emperour commanded that allowance for provisions and lodging should be given. But that seem'd an unseemly thing to our Bishops of Aquitain, Gaule and Brittany: and therfore refusing the publick allowance they chose rather to maintain themselves at their own costs. Onely three Bishops which came out of Brittany, being destitute of subsistence from their own Sees, were content to make use of the Emperours liberality, for they refused the contribution which the rest of the Bishops offred to them, esteeming it more becoming their dignity and Sanctity to be a charge to the publick Treasure, then to particular persons.
4. This passage (saith the Authour) I my self heard related by our Bishop Gavidius and he told it by way of reprehension and diminution of them. But I am quite of another opinion, and esteem those British Bishops to deserve great com|mendation, first for that they had devested themselves of all propriety: and next that they chose rather to be obliged to the Empe|rours Exchequour, then their Brethren for their maintenance: In both which regards they left an example worthy to be praised and imi|tated.
5. When the Bishops were assembled, the Emperours letters were in the first place publickly read, by which he took on him to prescribe Laws unto the Synod what they should doe, and what they should forbeare.Ap. Hilar. in fragm. lib. 2. For, saith Saint Hilary, he severely enjoyn'd them to determin nothing which might touch the Eastern Bishops, but only themselves: And in case they should transgresse this his order, he declared a Nulli|lity in their proceedings. He commanded them withall that having finished their Decrees they should send them to Court by ten Bi|shops chsen by common consent. In the In|scription of which Letter it is observable that he writes himself by the Name of Constantin, not Constantius.
6. But notwithstanding these threats the Holy Bishops courageously performed their Duty. For, as the same Holy Father relates,Id ibid. they confirmed the Nicene Creed, for|bidding any addition or diminution thereof: Protesting that they would never depart from the Faith which they had received from God the Father by the Prophets, and our Lord Iesus Christ, which the Holy Spirit taught in the Gospells and writings of the Apostles, according as was delivered by Tradition of the Fathers succeeding the Apostles to the times wherin the Controversy was debated at Nicea against a Heresy which then arose. To this Definition all the Catholick ishops in the Synod unanimously agreed.
7. In which Definition it is observable, that though it was grounded on the Holy Scriptures, yet those Scriptures are inter|preted by the successive Tradition of the Church. Whereas on the contrary the fa|ction of a few Arian Bishops separatedly framed a Decree, which according to the almost vniform practise of Hereticks, was pretended to agree with the simple words of Scripture, interpreted by themselves. For thus writes Saint Athanasius:Athanas l d Synod. In a Creed made by them they professed the Son of God to be like to the Father who begott him: whose generation according to the Scrip+tures no man knows but the Father only. As for the word Substance, it being simply sett down by the Fathers, not understood by the people, and occasioning great scandall, in a much as it is not expressly contained in Scrip|tures, they decreed that it should be quit abolished, and that for the future no mention should be made of the Substance of God, because the Holy Scriptures have never mention'd the Substance of the Father and the Son. But we say that the Son is in all things like to the Father, as the Holy Scriptures doe say and teach.
8. The same Father adds, that when these Arian Bishops, of which Valens and Vrsacius were cheif, saw that they could not im|pose upon the Western Bishops, they then

said, We came to this Meeting, not because we stand in need of a Faith: For we have a faith sound and orthodoxId. ibid. but that we might con|found those who contradict the Truth, and would introduce Novelties into the Church. And there|upon they seperated themselves from the rest of the Council: which with unanimous suffrages pro|nounced Valens, Vrsacius, Germinius, Auxen|tius, Caius and Demophilus to be Hereticks, and excluded from the Communion of the Church.
Id. ib.9. Which done, the Council by a common Letter informed the Emperour of all these things: In which Letter there is this me|morable passage: that whereas the Arian Bishops, to induce the Catholicks to comply with them, used this argument, That Vnity and peace would be restored to the Church, in case they would relinquish that one word, Substance: the Catholick Bishops there wrote, It is not, as Vrsacius and Valens affirm, that peace will ollow by the Subversion of things which are just and true. For how can those men behave themselves peaceably, who quite take away peace? On the contrary more contentions and disturbances will spring up both in other Cit|ties, and particularly at Rome. And in conclu|sion they begg'd leave of the Emperour that the Council might be dissolved, considering the poverty, age and infirmity of many of the Bishops in it.
10. Constantius perceiving how unsuc|cess'full his Design was of introducing his Arian Misbeleif into the Western Churches, broke forth into open tyranny: some of the Catholick Bishops he caused to be shut up in prison, others he afflicted with famin and all manner of opprobrious usage, not suffring any to depart, till he had compell'd them to subscribe to a Form of Belief, wherin though nothing Hereticall was express'd, yet the true Faith was at least dissembled, and consequently the Arian faction pre|vail'd in power through the whole Empire.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1. Iulian made Caesar.
2.3. Lupicinus Governour of Brittany re|call'd Gumoharius succeeds him.
4 The Scotts invade Brittany: Now first named.

1. COnstantius to disburden himself of some part of the cares of the Empire did in the year of Christ three hundred fifty one create Gallus the Son of his Vncle An|nilalianus Caesar,  gave him to wife his sister Constantina, sending him into the Eastern parts to govern there: But three years after, for his cruelty and other enormous crimes he cau|sed him to be emprison'd, and his head to be cut off. And the year following he assum'd into the same dignity of Caesar and Successour in the Empire Iulian younger Brother to Gal|lus,D. A. 361. afterward called the Apostat, whom he sent with an army into Gaule, to represse the irruptions of the Franks and other German Nations.
2. In the fourth year of his Government troubles arising in Brittany,A. D. 360. he sent over Lupicinus to compose them. These troubles were caused by the excursions of the barba|rous Nations,Am. Mar|cellin. l. 20 c 1. the Picts and Scotts, saith Mar|cellinus, which wasted with all cruelty the Northern Provinces bordring on them. Lupi|cinus therfore strengthning his Army with auxiliary companies of the Heruli, Batavians and Maesians, in the midst of Winter took shipping at Bulloign (Bononia) in Gaule, and landed at Richborow (Rutupiae) a Sea-town on the other side: from whence he mar|ched to London, there intending to advise how to proceed.
3. But he was not permitted to perform any considerable exploit against the ene|mies, by reason that Iulian proclam'd Em|perour by his Army was iealous of him, least if he shoud be inform'd of his rebellion against Constantius, he should practise his Army against him. Whereupon stopping all passages from Gaule into Brittany, he recal|led Lupicinus and in his place sent for Gene|rall of the Brittish Army, Gumoharius.
4. But neither did he doe any thing wor|thy of memory, for notwithstanding any opposition of his the Scots, a people which came out of Ireland, rooted themselves so firmly in the Northern parts of this Isle, that dayly encreasing, they in after ages esta|blish'd a Kidom there to them selves and posterity to this day. Hereto pertains that passage of Giraldus Cambrensis,Giral. Cambr. Topgr. H. b. dist. 8. c 6. It must be ob|serv'd, saith he, that when Nele obtain'd the Monarchy of Ireland, the six sons of Mured King of Vlster passing over in a considerable fleet, pos|ses'd themselves of the Northern parts of Britta|ny. Whence a people descending from them, called by a peculiar name, Scotts, doe inhabite that coer to these times. Now this Prince called Nele, the Monark of Ireland, raigned in the dayes of the Emperour Constantius, as Bishop Vsher collects from the nameles Au|thour of the Life of S. Patrick. Which if it be true, then it is probable that the irruption of the Scotts and Picts mention'd by Marcel|linus, was the same which Giraldus speaks of. And it is very likely that among the six sons of Mured, the eldest was that Reuda of whom S. Beda writes, saying, In processe of time Brittany, after the Brittains and Picts, received a third Nation of Scotts,Bed. hist. l. i. c. 1. who seated themselves in the countrey of the Picts. These coming out of Ireland under the command of their Captain Reuda, partly by freindship, and partly by the sword possess'd themselves of those seats, which they hold to this day. And from this their Ca|ptain Reuda, they are called Dalreudini.
5. This is the first time that mention is

made of the Nation of the Scotts by any ancient Authour: Which argues that in this age they first came into Brittany. Yet, saith Camden,Camden. in Scotis. it was a good space of time before they enlarged their Seats beyond the corner of which they first, took possession. But afterwards they invaded the Picts, and in many battells almost wholly consumed them, about the time that the Kingdom of Northumberland, by the incursions of the Danes, and civill contentions was in a manner utterly ruind. And after that time, all the Northern part of Brittany took the name of Scotland.


VII. CHA.VII. CHAP.

1.2. Brittish Bishops Orthodox: S. Hilaries Epistle to them.
3.4. Of Restitutus Bishop of London.

Gld in Excid. Brit. Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 8.1. THough our ancient Historian Gildas, and after him S. Beda doe relate that Catholik peace and Vnity remained in the Brit|tish Churches from the time of Diocletians per|secution till the age in which the Arian impiety raged, wherby it may seem that they began to be infected not long after the Councill of Ariminum: Yet that this infection did not spread much in this Isle in those dayes, appears by a Letter of S. Hilary about the year of Christ three hundred sixty one to the German,A. D. 361. Gallick and Brittish Bishops in answer to one sent from them to him during his tedious Exile caused by the Arian Bishop of Arles, Saturninus, who circumvented the Emperour Constantius by false suggestions against this holy Bishop, and induced him to banish him out of Gaule into Phrigia and other Eastern countreys.
2. In which letter he congratulats with this Island for its freedom from the poyson of Arianism,Hilar. in frgm. for their refusing to accept an Hereticall Profession sent from the Council of Sirmium, which they moreover coura|geously condemn'd, notwithstanding all the practises and threatnings of their neighbour Saturninus to intimidate them. Which constancy of theirs was so famous almost all the Empire over, that their example induced some even of the Eastern Bishops to be ashamed of their Heresy. Moreover in the same letter he satisfies their enquiry touching the opposition of the Arians against the Catholick Faith, de|claring the principall grounds and argu|ments on which they built their impiety: and testifies his great ioy for that they profess'd their Communion with him though a banish'd man, which they refused to the Arian Bishops of Gaule.
3. Among these Orthodox Brittish Bishops to whom S. Hilary wrote, severall Authours mention the name of the old Bishop Resti|tutus, Bishop of London, who about forty six years before had been present at the first Council of Arles. Neither is it at all incredi|ble that he should be alive at this time: Since we find Osius of Corduba who presided in the Council of Nica, Sardica, and Sirmium, to have liv'd above a hundred years, though Spain his countrey generally produces not so long-liv'd persons as Brittany. To this Re|stitutus the Centuriators of Magdeburg from Bale attribute the Writing of Severall Epistles to S. Hilary: and Pitsaeus reckons him among the Illustriou Brittish Writers, affirming that he left behind him one Book of Epistles to the same Father.
4. It was about this time that the said Re|stitutus dyed:Magdeb. Centr. 4. f. 1294. whose Successour in the Bishop|rick of London was Theodowin, renound in History by his name onely, and See.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. Of S. Kebius taught by S. Hilary.
3.4. Made Bishop of Anglesey c.
5.6. Goes into Ireland: baptizes S. Albeus c. and returns.

1. ANother illustrious proof of the purity of the Faith of the Brittish Church was S. Kebius,A. D. 361. sirnamd Cornius, Son of Salomon Duke of Cornwal: who is reported to have undertaken a iourney into Gaule to S. Hilary newly return'd from Exile, to be more perfectly instructed by him in the Ca|tholick Faith: Which iourney Pitseus says was occasion'd by the unhappy springing upp of the Arian Heresy in Brittany.
2. Capgrave in the Life of S. Kebius says, that he abode severall years with S. Hilary,apgrav. in Kebio. improving himself in learning and Sanctity: whereto God gave testimony by conferring on him the Grace of Miracles, so that he gave sight to the blind, cleansed the Leprous, and healed those who were dumb, sick of the palsey and possess'd with Devills.
3. The same Authour, together with our other Historians Leland, Pitsaeus, Spelman c. affirm that after some years the Holy man was admonish'd by an Angell to return into his own countrey whereupon being co~secrated a Bishop by S. Hilary, he placed his See in the Isle of Anglesey (or Mona:) and by his holy example and sound Doctrin instructed the Venedotae and Monudes, northern people of Wales. It is said likewise that being arriv'd in Brittany, he was requested to come and undertake the Principality of Cornwall: but utterly refused to accept any worldly au|thority or power.
4. After these things, saith Capgrave, Kebius with ten of his Disciples,Ap. Capgrav. ibid. who were Monks, descen|ded into the meadow of King Ethelic, pitching his

tent there. Whereupon the King sent to enquire who they were that durst presume to enter into his meadow. The Messenger returning told him that they were Monks. Wherupon the King presently arose with all his family, intending to cast those Monks out of his countrey: but in the way he fell from his horse which dyed, and the King with all his followers were struck with blindnes. Then did the King prostrate himself on his face before S. Kebius, devoting himself entirely to God and his servant Kebius: and immediatly by the holy mans prayer they were all healed. After this the King gave to the man of God two Churches: who having given the King his benediction retired to Menevia (afterward calld S. Davids:) from whence he sailed over into Ireland, where having built a Church in a certain Island, he remained there four years.
In vit. S. Albei ap. Vsserium in Primord. 81.5. Very probable it is that this S. Kebius was the fame Brittish Preist who baptis'd the Irish S. Albeus: For in the Life of that Saint recorded by Bishop Vsher we read this passage; Lachanus gave the Holy Child to certain Brit|tains, who brought him upp with great cure, giving him the Name of Albeus, because he was found alive under a rock, and the Grace of God was with him. After these things there came thither a certain Brittish Preist, sent by the See Apostolick into Ireland, many years before S. Patrick, to sow the Faith of Christ there. But the Irishmen being Pagans, would not receive him, nor beleive his Doctrin, except a very few. He came then to the Inhabitants of Mun|ster, where he found the Holy child Albeus praying in the open aire with his eyes rais'd up to heaven, that the true Faith might be reveal'd to him, and saying, My desire is to know the Creatour of all things, and to beleive in him who made heaven and earth and all creatures in them: For I know that the Elements were not made without a skillfull Workman, neither could any man produce these things. When the holy child had thus prayd, the said Preist who over|heard him, saluted him and according to his hearts desire instructed him in all things: which having done he baptis'd him, continuing the same name of Albeus to him.
6. Besides S. Albeus, the Ecclesiasticall Mo|numents of Ireland record severall other per|sons converted and baptis'd by the same Holy Brittish Preist, as Meclarus and Kiaxanus, persons eminent in Sanctity, and illustrious for the number of their Disciples: All which moreover were exalted to Episcopall dignity before S. Patricks arrivall there. Which they esteeme no disparagement to his Apostleship, which began in the year four hundred and thirty.
7. After some years abode in Ireland, the Holy Bishop Kebius returned to his See in Anglesey, where he dyed in the year of Grace three hundred and seaventy. The place of his buriall seems to have been among the Ordovices, in Denbighshire. For in the Story of S. Winefred written by Robert Abbot of Shrewsbury we read that the Holy Virgin was buried neer to the Sepulchers of Chebaeus and Senanus at a place call'd Gwethern (Witheria|cum) in the western part of Denbigh-shire. Which S. Chebaus, was no doubt the same with this our S. Kebius, An illustrious Mo|nument of whose Memory is still remaning in Anglesey, where, saith Camden, the Holy Pro|montory looking towards Ireland,Camden. Mon insol Vulgarly call'd Holy-head, is by the Natives nam'd Car-Gubi, from Kebius  Holy man and Disciple of S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers. Neither is S. Hilary himself forgotten there, his memory being preser|ved by another Promontory call'd Hilary-point.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHA.

1.2. c. Of S. Patrick: the place and time of his Birth: His Parents c.

1. THE same year in which S. Hylary retun'd into Gaule from banishment (at which time S. Kebius repair'd to him) was illustrious likewise for the Birth of the great Apostle of Ireland S. Patrick.A. D. 361. True it is that among our Ecclesiasticall Historians there is great Variety as in the number of the years of his life, so consequently in fixing the year of his Nativity. But the series of his Life and Gests seems to be more exactly com|puted by William of Malmsbury, Adam of Domerham and Iohn a Monk,Gul. Mal|mesbur Adam . who have written his life more accuratly then any, out of the Ancient Records of Glastenbury, and Probus who wrote the same presently after his death. And by their account, ascribing to S. Patricks life one hundred and eleaven years, and fixing his death in the year of our Lord four hundred seaventy two, his birth must fall on this year three hundred sixty one.
2. Now though some Historians, and among the rest Mathew of Westminster, and Baronius likewise, doe affirm that he was born in Ireland, yet the greater number, and those externs also, doe acknowledge him a Brit|tain: neither is this denyed even by the Irish Writers themselves.
3. But there seems some difficulty in assigning the particular Province in Brittany where he was born Bishop Vsher is of opinion that the place of his Nativity was a Town call'd Kirck-patrick situated between the Castle of Dunbritton and Glasco,Vsser. in Primord. f. 8.9. where the Romans anciently cast up a rampire to exclu|de the barbarous Caledonians and Picts. And hereto he adds this observation, At this day (saith he) the ancient limits of the Provinces being chang'd, so as that the Castle of Dunbritton does not now, as formerly, belong to the region of the Brittains, but Scotts: hence probably it has hapned that some have affirm'd S. Patrick to have been a Scott.
4. This conjecture of so learned a Writer, though it confirms our position that S. Pa|trick was by birth a Brittain, yet mistakes in the particular Province. For it was not in the Northern parts of Brittany that he was born, but in the South-west coast among the Dime|tae dwelling in the Province call'd Penbrock|shire, as besides Stanihurst a learned Irish An|tiquary, it is asserted by our Learned Camden. The words of Stanihurst are these,Stanihurst. ap. Harae. 17. Mart. In the year of our Redemption three hundred sixty one a certain honourable and vertuous person call'd Calphurnius, or Calphurinus had by his equally vertuous wife, whose name was Conchessa, a Son, who at his Baptism was call'd Suchar or Socher; which name afterward was by S. German Bishop changed into Magonius: and in conclusion by Pope Celestin he was named Patrick. Now Patrick was born in a territory of Brittany lying by the Sea, which anciently was named Triburnia, or Ei|burnia. This is a place of the Dimetae in Penbrockshire, called by Ptolomy the Promon|tory of the Octopitae, and at this day S. Davids or Menevia (Menew.Girald. tin. mbr. l. 2. c. 1.) A countrey this is stony and barren (saith Giraldus Cambrensis) neither cloath'd with woods, nor divided with rivers, nor adorn'd with meadows: but n all sides ex|pos'd to winds and tempests. Notwithstanding this rude unfruitfull place,Camden in Dimetis, or Penbrokshire as Camden relates, was the etreat and dwelling of persons eminent in sanctity. For Calphurnius a Brittish Preist, as we find in our Ecclesiasticall Records, in a valley of this countrey call'd Rosina had by his Wife Con|cha the Sister of S. Martin Bishop of Tours a Son call'd Patrick the Apostle of Ireland: And also David a most Religious Bishop removed his Archiepiscopall See from Caer-leon (Isca Legio|num) in Monmouthshire to Menew, which is the remotest corner of this Region.
5. In these testimonies we find not only the place of S. Patricks birth, but the names of his parents also. All which though with some variety is confirm'd by S. Beda,Bed. 3 tom. in vit. S. Pa|ticij. who writes thus: S. Patrick, who was also called So|chet, was by Nation a Brittain: Where after great tribulations suffred in his youth, he became an instrument of salvation to his nation and coun|trey. He was begotten in Brittany by his Father Calphurnius a Deaton, who was the Son of Po|titus a Preist: and his Mothers name was Con|cha. The place of his birth was a village call'd Bannava in the Region of Triburnia, not far di|stant from the Western Sea. Which village we find was unquestionably situated in the Province of Neustria, where anciently Gyants are said to have dwelt. Thus writes S. Beda from Probus the first Describer of S. Patrick Gests.
6. Now wheras Calphurnius the Father of S. Patrick is said by some to have been a Preist, or more truly by S. Beda, a Deacon: we are to understand that according to the Ec|clesiasticall Laws and custom of that age, his Father after receiving holy Orders profess'd continency, as S. Hilary of Poictiers and S. Re|stitutus Bishop of London likewise did.
7. And as for S. Patricks Mother, called Conches or Conchessa, she was Sister, or rather, as Bishop Vsher iudges, daughter to the Sister of the famous S. Martin Bishop of Tours,Vsser. in Primord. fol. 82. who flourish'd gloriously in this age; and who according to Sulpitius Severus his computa|tion was at this time in the forty fifth year of his age.Sulp. Sever. in vit. S. Marti|ni c. 1. He came out of Pannonia (Hun|gary:) descended from parents, saith the same Authour, according to worldly dignity of no mean degree. Thus much of the Birth, coun|trey and Parents of this glorious S. Patrick: of whose wonderfull Gests we shall in pro|secution of this History have frequent occa|sion to treat.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2.3.4. c. Iulian succeeds Constantius: Becomes an Apostate and Persecutour.
7. c. Is slain: to whom Iovian succeeds: and restores Christianity.
10. Iovian dying, Valentinian is chosen Em|perour.

1. COnstantius in the five and twentieth year after his Father Constantins death, and in the eleaventh after the death of his Brother Constans, dyed of a feaver at Mopsuestia in Cilicia, to whom Iulian for|merly created Caesar by him, succeeded in the Empire, which he polluted by his infa|mous Apostacy.
2. He had from his infancy not only been bred in the Profession of Christianity, but was likewise inscrib'd in an inferiour Eccle|siasticall Degree of Lector: but being of an in|constant curious disposition, and unfortu|natly falling into the acquaintance and freindship of certain Pagan Philosophers and Magicians, he was perverted by them: And though during Constantius his life he dissem|bled his change, yet being possess'd of the Empire he publickly profess'd not only a defection from the Christian Faith, but an implacable hatred of it, and resolution to employ all the power of Earth and Hell to destroy it.
3. The first proof hereof he gave, as S. Gregory Nazianzen witnesses,Greg. Naz. in Orat. 1. cont. Iulian. in taking away that famous Labarum, or Imperiall Ensign of the Crosse, which in Constantins and Constan|tius his times leading their Armies had gi|ven them assured victories: in place whereof he restor'd the Images of the Heathen Gods and Devills, together with the representa|tions of Eagles, Dragons, Wolves, Minotaurs, c. which the soldiers were commanded to adore.
4. Moreover,Suid verb. . saith Suidas, he endeavou|red to abolish all other monuments of the Holy Crosse: insomuch as he caused to be

digg'd out of the-Earth a representation of the Citty of Constantinople on the top wherof Constantin had caused the Crosse to be fixed,A. D. 364. to denote the felicity of that New Citty. And his custome was both in words and Writing to object to Christians, by way of ignominy, their Veneration of the Holy Crosse. For this speech of his is quoted by S. Cyrill of Ale|xandria, O wretched Christians,Cyrill. Alex. l. 6. cnt. Iulian. said he, you have left off to adore and worship those sheilds (Ancilia) which the great God Iupiter Father of Mars lett fall from heaven, to be a reall, not verball pledge of his perpetuall protection to our Citty, and which are still kepd in it: Instead of which you adore the wood of the Crosse, painting images of it on your foreheads and before your dores. Thus Iulian censures the Rite of the Ancient Church, and of all the faithfull in his time, who on all occasions express'd their Veneration of that blessed sign and instru|ment of our Redemption.
5. With the same malignity he sought to abolish all other Sacred images and Statues erected in severall places to preserve the memory of past Divine benefits, as likewise the Relicks of former Saints and Martyrs.Thus Sozomen relates how he caused to be thrown down the miraculous Statue of our Saviour,Sozom. hist. l. 5. c. 10. which the devout woman, who had been curd by him of an issue of blood, had rais'd at Caesara Philippi: in the place wherof the impious Apostat erected his own. But immediatly fire from heaven divided his Satue in the mid'st, throwing to the ground the upper half, which re|main'd till the Historians days all black, as things strook with lightning use to be.
Id. l. 5. c. 12.5. The same Authour likewise recounts how the same Impious Emperour consulting a certain Oracle at Daphne neer Antioch, and the Devill which used to speak in it remai|ning mute, only being able to signify that the Body of the holy Martyr Babylas hindred his speech: Iulian caused the Sacred body to be removed from thence into the Citty: which the Christians perform'd with great solemnity, singing Psalms all the way, spe|cially those wherin Idolatry is derided, to the infinit indignation of the Emperour, who thereupon caused many of them to be tortu|red, but by the intercession of the Holy Martyr their torments were miraculously converted into pleasure.Chrysost. orat. 5 ont. Gentils. The same Story is confirm'd likewise by S. Chrysostom.
7. But a war against the Persians interrupted his rage against Christians,A. D. 363. who at his first setting forth threatned that when that Expe|dition was finish'd, he would destroy all who profess'd the name of Christi: A threatning very acceptable to the Pagans, but greivous to the afflicted Christians. Whilst he was busy in the prosecution of this war, Li|banius a Heathen Sophister, in derision of Christ ask'd a certain Christian, What the Car|penters Son was then doing? Who answerd, He is preparing a Coffin for Iulian. And the event made these words propheticall,A. D. 365. for the wicked Emperour receiv'd from an unknown hand a wound mortall to him self,Gr. Naz. Orat. 2. in Iulian. but healthfull to all the world beside.
8. In his place the Army chose Iovian Em|perour,Theodoret. hist. Eccl l. 4. c. 1. though he refus'd that honour, pro|fessing that being a Christian he neither would nor could govern an Army poysond with heathenish Idolatry. Whereupon all the soldiers cryed out that they also were Chri|stians: those who were ancient among them having been train'd up in the piety of Con|stantin, and the younger imbued with the precepts of Constantius. So that the two years raign of Iulian could not extirpate the good seeds sown in their hearts.
9. Iovian thus chosen, restored the Christian Faith,heodoret. b l. 4. c. 4. reducing the Church to its former splendour. He also publish'd a Law by which in all Citties a certain proportion of Wheat was contributed to Sacred Virgins by vow consecrated to God:Lib. Cod. de Epist.  Cle+ricis. And another which inflicted death on any who should ravish, or but attempt their Chastity. He likewise ordain'd that all Catholick Bishops who had been formerly banish'd should re|turn to their Sees. There is extant an Epistle of S. Athanasius in answer to one from the Emperour, who had desir'd to be inform'd by him who among the divided Sects of Chri|stians, retain'd the Orthodox Faith. Which Epistle challenges a mention in this History, because among the severall Nations con|stantly persevering in the Faith of our Saviours Divinity, establish'd in the Councill of Nica, he expressly names Brittany. Whence appears that hitherto the Brittish Churches were pure in their Faith, however some par|ticular persons there might have been infe|cted.
10. This pious Emperour lived but one year:A. D. 364. to whom succeeded Valentinian a Prince equally Orthodox: But who unhappily made partner in his Empire his Brother Valens, infe|cted with the Arian Heresy, and impiously zealous in the promoting of it.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2.3. Picts, Scotts and Attacotti infest the Brittains. Who these last were.
4.5. c. Theodosius Governour of Brittany: His Victories there.
8. Brittany divided into five Provinces.
9. Theodosius recall'd.

1. IN Brittany during Iulians raign the Pre|fect was Alipius, the Successour of Gumo|harius. Where quietnes continuing, the Picts and Scotts securely multiplied, both in num|bers and strength: Of which presently after they showd terrible proofs. For as Marcelli|nus relates,A. D. 364. Am. Marcell. hist. l. 26. c. 10. in the first year of Valentinians raign the barbarous Nations on all sides of the Ro|man Empire, as if universally excited by a trum|pet,

broke their limits,  made furious incursions into the Roman Provinces. The Alamanni wasted Gaule and Rhetia: The Sarmatians and Quadi made irruptions into Pannonia, and the Picts, Saxons, Scotts and Attacotti vexed the Brittains with incessant calamities.
2. By which appears that the Enemies of Brit|tany were multiplied. For to the Picts Scotts, here is an addition of the Saxons and the At|tacotti, never mention'd before in Story with relation to Brittany. As for the Saxons a Germa~ Nation who now first made the~selves known by their cruelty to the Brittains, within a few years they will be too well known, not by their piracies on the Seacoasts, as at this time; but by an invasion of the whole Island, so successfull to them, that they gott almost an entire possession of it, leaving only a bar|ren mountainous corner to the fearfull Brittains.
3. But who were the Attacotti S. Hierom will tell us.Hier. lib. 2. cont. Iovi|nian. What shall I say of the immanity of other Nations? I my selfe in my youth saw in Gaule the Attacotti, a Brittish Nation who nourish'd themselves with human flesh: These men in the forrests meeting with heards of beeves sheep and swine, neglected them, and cutt off the hanches of the Pastours,  breasts of the woemen, and fed upon them, accounting these to be their principall delicacies. It seems therefore that these Attacotti were a Savage people in the Northern mountains of Scottland, living without all Law or Government, who like|wise had promiscuous wives,Id. Epist. 83. ad common chil|dren. This rude multitude were invited by the Picts Scotts ioyn with them in the invasion of the Civill Brittains.
A. D. 365.4. Vpon this occasion the Emperour Valenti|nian leaving his Brother Valens to govern the East, made an expedition into Gaule, where he compos'd the troubles rais'd by the Ala|manni:Amm. Mar|cellin. hist. 27. c. 17. This being done as he was in a hasty march from the Province of the Ambiani (or Amiens) toward Triers, he was stopp'd by an astoni|shing message out of Brittany, which infor|med him how by a conspiracy of severall barba|rous Nations the Brittains were reduc'd to the utmost extremity: How Nectaridius Admirall (Comes) of the Sea coasts had been slain by the Enemies, and Bulchobaudes the General circum|vented by their ambushes. Vpon which horrible reports the Emperour dispatch'd into Brittany Se|verus one of his cheif Officers, to remedy those dis|orders. But shortly after recalling him, he sent Iovinus thither, making a suddain provision of ammunition and store,  preparing strong armies to assist him, according to the instant urgent ne|cessities. In conclusion fresher and more horrible rumours encreasing, he made choice of Theodosius to goe General thither, a man famous for many martiall exploits happily atchiev'd: who being attended with courageous Legions and cohorts, made up of lusty youth, prosecuted the expedition with a noble confidence.
5. At the same time the Franks and Saxons had infested the coasts both of Gaule and Britta|ny: and into this latter they had made an im|pression as far as London,A. D. 367. where they drove all the countrey about. To remedy which inju|ries the vigilant Generall Theodosius took ship|ping at Boloyn in Gaule,Id ib. c. 18. and passing the Sea landed at Rutupiae (Richborough in Kent neer Sandwich.) Which is a secure Station for ships. Whither as Soon as his Cohorts call'd Herculij, Iovij, Victores, Fidentes, c. aborded, he mar|ched from thence streight to London, an ancient town, afterward call'd Augusta: and dividing his Army into severall squadrons, he set on the stragling Enemies loaden with spoiles: and dispersing them he quickly rescued the prisoners, together with the cattle and other prey: Which he restor'd to the miserable natives, excepting a small part bestow'd on his weary Soldiers: And so entred into the Citty in triumph, ioyfully received by the people lately plunged in extreme misery, and in a moment recovered by his va|lour. There he made some stay, with an inten|tion to attempt greater matters, yet without putting the army to hazard. For by captives and spies he was inform'd that the sudden excur|sions of so many feirce nations could no other way be repress'd, but by subtilty. Hereupon to divide them he publish'd Edicts promising im|punity to all who would submitt. And those which came in he dispers'd into other quarters severally, allowing them provisions: Which gave an invitation to many more to submitt likewise. After this he desir'd the Emperour to send over to him as his Deputy Governour in Brittany Civilis, a man of a more then ordinarily sharp iudgment in such affairs, and withall of great integrity: At likewise for his Lievtenant in martiall affaires, Dulcitius, very skillfull therin. And thus pass'd the affaires in Brittany that year.
6. Two years after he march'd with his army from London northward,A. D. 367. where he putt to flight severall Nations, which for|merly had the insolence to invade the Ro|man provinces. Thus he restor'd to their former security and plenty many Citties and castles, which had been vex'd with many calamities. But whilst he was busy in these matters, he had like to have been circum|vented by the treason of one Valentinus a Pannonian, who for some great crimes had been banish'd into Brittany. For this man being of an ambitious turbulent Spirit, had solicited many of the Soldiers to conspire with him against Theodosius: But the design being discovered, he contented himself with the execution of Valentinus and a few of his nearest associats: for he would not by tortures search further into the conspiracy, least by dispersing a fear among his soldiers, he should incite them to pursue the like attempts.
7. Having escap'd this danger he successfully prosecuted the warr, putting strong garrisons into Citties and limitany castles, and in a short time recover'd the Province from the Enemies, in which he placed a Governour.
7. So that now that part of Brittany which

was vnder the Romans dominion was divi|ded into five Provinces.A. D. 372. The first call'd Bri|tannia prima contain'd all the southern parts between the Sea and the Rivers of Thames and Severn. The second call'd Britannia Se|cunda comprehended the Silures, Dimetae and Ordovices, that is, all Wales. The third call'd Flavia Caesariensis (probably from this Theodosius his Son afterward Emperour of the Flavian family) embraced all the Re|gions between Thames and Humber. The fourth call'd Maxima Caesariensis reach'd from Humber to the River Tine. And lastly Theo|dosius having expell'd the Picts and Scotts out of all the Province beyond Tine as far as between Dunbritton and Edinborough, call'd this fifth Province Valentia: In which was the wintring camp of a Roman Legion, to represse the incursions of the Scotts.
A. D. 370.9. Theodosius having thus happily settled Brittany, was two years after call'd by the Emperour to Court, where he was made Ge|nerall of the Horse in Iovinus his place,  by the Senat honour'd with a Statue of brasse. But the most illustrious effect of his martiall exploits was the recommending of his Son by the brightnes of them to the Empire.


XII. CHA.XII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of S. Ninianus Birth and education
3. Of S. Moyses Apostle of the Saracens: said to have been a Brittain.

A. D. 372.1. THE year after Theodosius his depar|ture out of Brittany, our Ecclesiasti|call Monuments commemorate S. Ninianus (call'd by S. Beda, S. Ninias) his iourney to Rome, to be there instructed in the true Ortho|dox Faith, which he afterward with great efficacy communicated to his own coun|trey. So that it is probable he attended Theo|dosius in that voyage.
Capgrav.2. Concerning whose birth we read thus in his life. He was born in great Brittany, of a Princely Stock in that Region where the Western Ocean as it were stretching forth its arm, and on each side making two angles, divides the Provin|ces of the Scots and English, as at this day they are separated. Which countrey even to the times of the Saxons enjoy'd their own King, as we are assured not only from the credit of History, but even the memory of some yet alive. His Father was Prince of that countrey (Cumberland,) by Religion a Christian, and truly happy in the bles|sing of such a Son. Whilst Ninian was yet a child he shew'd great devotion to Churches, and won|derfull love to his associats. He was sober in his diet, sparing of his tongue, diligent in reading, grave in conversation, averse from lightnes, and always carefull to subject the flesh to the spirit.
3. At last by a forcible instinct of Gods holy spirit the Noble youth undertook a pilgrimage, despising wordly riches and carnall affections. Therfore passing over Sea into Gaule, and taking his way through the Alpes he entred Italy, and with a prosperous iourney came to Rome. Where being arrived, he went to the Cheif Bishop (Pope Damasus,) to whom he declared the cause of his iourney. Whereupon the Holy Bishop commending his devotion, receiv'd him with the tendernes of a Father, and appointed him Teachers to instruct him in the Disciplines of Truth and Orthodox Faith, as likewise in the wholesome sence of Scriptures.
4. By this relation it appears that S. Ninian was of the Nation of the Southern Picts. And whereas he is call'd Son of a King: that Title in the liberal stile of our ancient Le|gendaries signifies no more then a person of Power and riches in his countrey. Though as Bishop Vsher observes,Vsser. i Primord. f 64. in the ancient En|glish Annalls there is frequent mention of the Kingdom of the Cumbri (Cumberland) whereto the Southern Picts belong. The Au|thour of his life thus proceeds.
5. Young Ninianus therfore with wonderfull avidity studying Gods word,Capgrav. like a diligent Bee composed for his own use as from many flowers out of severall Sentences of holy Doctours, honey-combs of spirituall wisedom: which being layd upp in the hive of his bosome: he preserv'd them for his own interiour refection, in due time likewise to be poured forth for the consolation of many others Thus being chast in body, prudent in mind, provi|dent in counsels, circumspect both in actions and words, he was commended by all, and every day more favour'd by the supreme Bishop.
6. Now it is no wonder that this holy Young man should make choice of Rome for education, considering what speciall care the Emperour Valentinian took for the pro|moting of learning there, and the priviled|ges co~fer'd by him on strangers which came thither to perfect themselves in Studies of literature,L. 1. de Stud. lib. Vb. Ro. in od. he+dos. as appears by his Law still extant in the Theodosian Code. And Pope Damasus like|wise being himself learned, was a great fa|vourer therof.
7. Now how S. Ninianus after little more then twenty years was consecrated Bishop by S. Siri|cius Successour to Pope Damasus,  sent back into his own countrey to preach the Gospell to the Picts, shall be shew'd in due place.
8. There are not wanting besides our own, some forraign Authours also, who affirm that the famous Bishop Moyses, the Apostle of the Saracens was born in Brittany: by name Notgerus Bishop of Liege, Henry Fitz-Simon a learned Irish Iesuit. Certain it is that he was in a speciall manner commemorated,  his Festivall observ'd in the Brittish Martyrologe compos'd by S. Beda, where we read these words:Martyrolog. Bed. 7. Febr. In Brittany in the Citty Augusta (London) is on the seaventh of February celebrated the me|mory of S. Augulus Bishop and Martyr. Likewise of the Venerable Bishop S. Moyses: Who first of all leading a solitary life in the desart, be|came famous for many miracles. He was after|ward by his illustrious merits, vertues and glorious miracles made Bishop of the Sara|cens, at the request of Mauvia their Queen. He

preserv'd the Communion of the Catholick Faith without blemish:A. D. 376 and after he had converted to the Faith of Christ the greatest part of that Nation, he rested in peace. A larger narration of his Gests may be read in Theodoret,Theodoret. l. 4. c. 21. Socr. l. 4 c. 29. Ruffin. l. 2 c. 6. Socrates and Ruffinus: which are omitted by reason of the uncertainty whether they pertain to our present History.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1. Fraomarius a Tribune in Brittany.
2. Gratianus succeeds Valentinian.

A. D. 379. Amm. Mar|cell. l. 29. c. 211. VAlentinian the year before his death sent over into Brittany a certain German King of the Bucinonantes call'd Frao|marius, to exercise the Office of Tribune over the Alemanni, a powerfull sqadron of the Brittish army. And the reason was because the little territory (pagus) of which he was King, lying neer to Mogun|tiacum (Mentz) had been wasted and im|poverish'd by occasion of his Predecessour Macrianu his rebellion, saith Marcellinus. Where we may observe how in those times the Title of King was attributed to such as govern'd a very small Territory. So that our Legendaries are not much to be blam'd, when they so frequently bestow that Title on petty Princes.A. D. 375.
2. To Valentinian succeeded his Son Gra|tianus, who nine years before had been na|med Augustus, or Emperour by his Father. And six dayes after, his younger Brother Valentinian also was saluted Emperour by the Soldiers, which election Gratianus meekly approv'd.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Patrick in his childhood made a Captive. His wonderfull piety, c.
5. He is freed.

A. D. 376.1. THE Picts, Scots and other Enemies of the Brittains, though they had been repress'd by Theodosius the Emperour Va|lentinians Generall, yet were not so enfee|bled but that they made frequent incursion into the Roman Provinces there: And parti|cularly in one of them they led captive with them the child of Calphurnius, Socher, call'd afterward Patrick,Antiq. Gla|stonin Pa|tricio. Hrvas in Patricio. in the sixteenth year of his age, whom they sold to a Noble man in the Northern parts of Ireland, call'd by Florilegus, Nulcu, by Capgrave Miluch, or rather as Malmsburiensis reads the name, Milchu, who employ'd the holy youth in keeping his swine.
Iocelin. in vit. S. Patri|cij c. 13.2. Iocelinus the most exact writer of his life thus relates the matter: Inasmuch, saith he, as according to Scripture, gold is tryed in the furnace, and a just man by tribulation: S. Patrick that he might be better fitted to receive a crown of glory, was first exercis'd with tentations. For the illustrious child entring into his sixteenth year was snatch'd away captive by Pirats which wasted that countrey, and was caried by the~ into Ireland. There he was sold a slave to a certain Pagan Prince called Milcho whose territory lay in the Northern parts. And herein his condition was parallell to that of the Holy Patriark Ioseph, who at the same age was sold into Egypt. And as Ioseph after his humiliation was exalted to the Government of all Egypt; so likewise did S. Patrick after his capti|vity obtain a spirituall principality over Ireland. Again as Ioseph by his providence nourish'd the Egyptians with corn during a long famine; so S. Patrick in processe of time fed the Irishmen ready to perish by their Idolatry, with the saving nou|rishment of Christian Faith. So that on both of them affliction was brought for the advancement of their soules in piety: for affliction had the same effect on them that the flaile has on corn, the fur|nace on Gold, the file on iron, the wine-presse on grapes, and the Olive-presse on Olives. Now Saint Patrick by the command of the foresaid Prince was deputed to the keeping his hoggs.
3. Six whole years the devout youth spent in this slavery: during which time what wonderfull miracles God wrought by him, are at large recited by the same Authour, as likewise by Capgrave, Bishop sher, c. to whom I refer the curious reader for as much as a particular account of all the Gests or Saints would swell enormously our present History. And in selecting their principall actions, it seems more proffitable to recount their ver|tues, which may and ought to be imitated by all, then their Miracles, which exceed the power of nature, and some times of beleif.
4. S. Patricks employmens therefore with|drawing him from the conversation of men, afforded him space enough to attend to God, Insomuch as Iocelinus testifieth that a hundred times a day,Iocelin. ib. and as oft in the night he address'd his prayers to God. And to Prayer he added Fasting for the mortification of his Sences: So that with these two Wings he mounted to such perfection, as he enjoy'd a frequent conversation with Angells. And particularly in Capgrave we read how an Angel calle Victor frequently visited him,apgrav. ib. and said to him, Thou doest very well to fast: Ere long tho shalt return to thy countrey. Now the Reader needs not wonder at the unusuall Name of this Angel:Gregor. M. hom 4. in Evangel. For as S. Gregory observes, Angels are therfore design'd by particular names, that they may signify their speciall vertues and opera|tions. Therfore S. Patrick who was to conquer first his own tribulations, and afterward the power of the Devill in that Idolatrous Nation, was properly visited by an Angel named Victor, or Conquerour.
5. The Piety, devotion, Fasting, patience in la|bours  other heavenly vertues of this holy young man at last moved the divine Goodnes miraculously to free him, as he had the Isralites, out of his captivity: For as Malmsbu|riensis

relates,A. D. 379. after six years slavery S. Patrick by the admonition of an Angel found under a cer|tain urf a Summe of Gold,In Antiquit. Glaston. in Patricio. which he gave to his Lord, and so was deliver'd from captivity, and returned to his parents and countrey, which he gloriously illustrated with the admirable sanctity of his life. The prosecution of his Gests we remit to the following age.


XV. CHA.XV. CHAP.

1 Valens the Emp. burnt.
2 Theodosius made partner of the Empire.
3 4. c. Maximus Governour of Brittany: Caries all the forces out: whence came the Destruction of the Island.
10. Mistake of those who place the Mar|tyrdom of S. Vrsula, c. here.

A. D. 38.1. ABout this time the Arian Emperour Valens suffred a severe but just pu|nishment for his persecution of the Profes|sours of the Orthodox Faith. For the Gothes together with the Hunns and Alans, feirce northern Nations entring in a hostile ma~ner into Thrace, put the Eastern Empire in great danger. wherupon Valens sent to Gratian for assistance: Which he with great care prepa|red: whose army, saith S. Ambrose, was conducted not by profane military Eagles, but the name and worship of the true God, meaning the Holy Crosse the principall Ensign of his forces. But Valens not expecting his coming, and out of envy least he should partake the glory of the Victory which he foolishly promis'd himselfe, would needs hazard battle alone with the Barbarians: by whom his army was discomfited, and himself being wounded with a dart among the mul|titude, with many of his cheif Officers flying into a certain house, the rude enemies not willing to loose time in forcing an entrance, set it on fire, with which the Emperour and all his company were consumed.
2. In his place the Emperours Gratian and Valentinian,A. D. 379. unwilling to leave the West, assumed Theodosius (a worthy son of that Fa|mous Theodosius who had settled Brittany and repress'd its Enemies) into a part of the Em|pire, committing to him the care of defen|ding the Eastern Regions against the insulting Goths.
3. At this time, and probably upon this occasion of the Election of Theodosius, one mans envy brought irreparable misery upon Brittany. That was Flavius Clemens Maximus Governour of the Island.Sigebert. in Chron. A. D. 383. Sigebertus says he was descended of the Imperiall family of Constan|tin, upon which Title he challenged part in the Empire. And that making himself King of Brit|tany, he then began to exercise Tyranny against the Roman Empire. And indeed that he was so descended his name Flavius may probably argue.
4. Zosimus affirms that he was a Spaniard. But other ancient Authours Greeks too,Socr. l. 5. c. 11. po|sitively say he was a Brittain, born in Britta|ny. Whereto no doubt Ausonius had re|gard, when in hatred to Maximus who slew the Emperour Gratian his schollar,Auson. de clar. Vrb. b. he calls him (Rhuupinum Latronem) the Rutupian pyrat or robber. And our Gildas names him a sprigg of the Brittish plantation.
5. From what stock or countrey soever he came, he was a Prince of admirable valour and conduit: which gave occasion to the ancient Brittains to forge a Roman of his story:M. West. A. D. 75. From whom our Mathew of Westminster relates, how there was a certain King of the Brittains call'd Octavius who dying left behind him an onely daughter. Which caused great dissen|sions among the Nobles, who could not agree on the person to whom they should give the Princesse with the Kingdom in mariage. At last they thought fit to send Embassadours to Rome to in|vite a Senatour call'd Maximian (so they nam'd Maximus) to espouse the Lady. For this Maximians Father was a Brittain, the Son of Leolinus Vnckle of Constantin: but his Mother was a Roman. Maximian having been acquain|ted with the cause of their journey, consented to their proposall, the rather because he was disfa|voured by the Emperours Gratianus and Valen|tinian. He therfore undertook a journey into Brit|tany, and in the way overthrew the Citties of the Franks, where he heap'd a vast treasure of Gold and Silver. But as soon as he was landed in the haven of Hamon, there met him Conanus a Brittish Prince with all the youth of the King|dome, with an intention to combat him, for he was earnestly ambitious of the Crown. But the Brittains generally favouring Maximian, Cona|nus was expell'd, and the Princesse maried to Maximian. But Conanus conceiving great indi|gnation, fled into Scotland, where he gathered another army. And then with all his forces pas|sing over the Trent, he began to wast the Pro|vinces. But Maximian coming upon him, over|came him again in a battle: Yet at last by the mediation of freinds an agreement was made between them.
6. But the more sober authentick Writers of these times take no notice of Octavius or any other King of the Brittains: and it is without question certain that Maximus was at this time Governour of the Island under the Emperour.A. D. 39. Frdon. ap. Vsser. in Prid. fol. 592. And even the Scotch Historians acknowledge that he fought successfully against the Scotts, slew their King Eugenius and expell'd the whole Nation out of the Island: That their Kings Brother Ethach, with his Son Erth and many others retir'd into Ireland: Some went into Norway: and a few lurk'd in the small Islands neer Brittany. They adde that the Iish also were not exempted from Maximus his power: but were compell'd humbly to begg for a peace,Id. ibid. which was hardly granted them,

and with this expostulation,A. D. 383. That they had sent auxiliary forces to the Enemies of the Ro|mans and their confederats: an injury the lesse pardonable, because Ireland alone of all other Kingdoms had never been attempted by Roman armies.
A. D. 32. Zosim. l. 4.7. The same Maximus likewise subdued entirely the nation of the Picts: by which victories having receiv'd great glory: and being vexed at the promotion of the younger Theo|dosius to the Empire, under whose Father Maxi|mus had been a Soldier in Brittany, as Zosimus re|lates, whereas himself had not by the Emperour been promoted to any great honour, he began to incense the Soldiers against the Emperour: and in fine had the confidence not to refuse the Imperiall Purple offred him by his soldiers. Concerning whom Orosius thus writes:P. Oros. l. 7. c 34. Maximus was a courageous and just Prince, and worthy to have been Emperour, if he had not against his Oath and fidelity attain'd that Title. He was almost against his Will procla|med Emperour by his army in Brittany: from whence he pass'd over into Gaule.
4. The passage of Maximus out of Brittany into Gaule was the principall,A. D. 28. if not only cause of the destruction of this Island: be|cause to strengthen himself against the Em|perours, he transported out of Brittany all the forces of the kingdom, and not only the Roma narmy which guarded it, but the flower also of the Brittish youth, which never return'd again. This calamity our Historian Gildas thus bewayles,Gildas in Excidi. From that time Brittany being despoyld of all military forces, Governour however cruell yet necessary, and a vast multitude of its youth, which accompanied the Tyrant in that unhappy expedition and never saw their countrey again: the Island it selfe being utterly unacquainted with martiall affairs, was expo'd to be trodden underfoot by those fierce Northern transmarin Nations, the Scotts and the Picts, which misery she suffred and bewayld many years.
9. Maximus being attended with so great a force quickly subdued Gaule and Spain likewise: and by a treasonable stratagem flew the Emperour Gratian at Lyons in Gaule. Which having done, his next design was to march into Italy against the Emperour Valentinian.
10. Many learn'd Historians refer to this time the Erection of the Kingdom of Ar|morica, or Little Brittany in Gaule, suppos'd to have been possess'd by Maximus his Brit|tish soldiers. And consequently they place here likewise the Story of the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the eleaven thousand Virgins her companions, sent out of Brittany to be married to these New conquerours of Ar|morica. But besides the improbability that Maximus would deprive himself of so great forces, necessary to the prosecution of his vast designs, we shall hereafter demonstrate that these two Stories belong to a later age: and that the mistake of those Writers which referr them to this time, is grounded on an erroneous confusion of the names of Va|lentinian the Emperour and Maximus the Ge|nerall: For it was in the dayes of Valentinian the third, and by the conduct of another Maximus that the foresaid New Brittish King|dom was erected in Gaule, and then it was that the Martyrdom of those Virgins hapned.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1.2.3. c. Of the Heresy of Priscillian: examin'd before the Emp. and Priscillian put to death.
5. Brittany infected: how.

1. IT seems that now was the time when Brittany became infected with Heresy, when, as Gildas saith, all manner of beasts fixing their venemous teeth on this poore coun|trey delighting in novelties and constant to no doctrines, instill'd she deadly poison of every kind of Heresy into it.
2. The occasion hereof was probably from the severe proceedings of Maximus in Gaule against the Arch heretick Priscillian and his companions Instantius and Tiberia|nus, c.Vid. Sulp. Svr hist. l. 2. ad finem.This Priscillian had compos'd a New Heresy out of the impure dreggs of the ancient Gnosticks and Manichees: into which as into a sink the filth of severall other Heresies also did flow. With this Heresy he had infected Spain, and endea|vouring the like in Italy, he was rejected by Pope Damasus at Rome, and by Saint Ambrose at Milan. From thence therefore he descended into Gaule: the Bishops wherof having notice that the infection began to spread, petition'd Maximus to use his authority to prevent so mortall a disease. There were also two Spanish Bishops, Idacius and Ithacius, who with great zeale pursued the Hereticks: These coming to Maximus whose abode was at Triers in Germany, vehemently accused Priscillian and Instantius, charging them with many heynous crimes. Whereupon the Emperour commanded the Prefect of Gaule and Vicar of Spain to cause all who were infected with that Heresy to be brought before a Synod assembled at Bourdeaux There Instantius a Bishop infe|cted by Priscillian, not being able to say anything in his own defence, was iudged unworthy of his Bishoprick.
3. But Priscillian unwilling to plead his cause before the Bishops, appeald to the Emperour, which was permitted him through the timide inconstancy of the Catholick Bishops Thus all parties involv'd in the cause, were brought to Triers, and were attended by their too zealous accu|sers Idacius and Ithacius Bishops of Spain. But S. Martin, who then was at Triers

earnestly urged Ithacius to desist from his accusation before a Secular Tribunal:A. D. 386. and humbly requested the Emperour to abstain from shedding the blood of those wretched Hereticks, saying it would be sufficient if by a sentence of Bishops they were expell'd the Churches. This holy Bishop thus, inter|posing, the hearing of the cause was de|ferr'd: and being afterward to depart, he gott a promise from Maximus, that their punishment should not extend to blood.
4. But he being gone, the Emperour was drawn from this mild intention by two Bishops, Magnus and Rufus. Wherupon he committed the hearing and iudging of the cause to his Prefect Euodius, a stern severe man. Before whom Priscillian being con|victed of magick and many filthy doctrins and practises, as praying naked in a meeting of women by night c. he was by him pronounc'd guilty, imprisond and and for farther punishment reserv'd to the Emperours iudgment. Who appointed that Priscillian and his associats Felicissimus and Armentius Ecclesiasticall persons should loose their heads, their cause having been once more heard by Patricius the Empe|rours treasurer. The same punishment was also inflicted on Latronianus and Euthro|cia, Asarinus and Aurelius a Deacon. As for Instantius formerly condemn'd by the Bishops, he was banish'd into the Isle of Silly (Silina) neer Brittany, together with Tiberianus.
5. By this means that impure Heresy being made publick, and the principall Teachers of it brought so neer Brittany, no wonder if Doctrins favouring the vile inclinations of corrupt nature, did quickly insinuate them|selves into unwary minds, affected withall to Novelties. For the scandalously severe iudgment, hitherto unpractis'd in the Church, against Priscillian and his compa|nions, was so far from cutting off the Heresy,Sulp. Sever. 16. that it receiv'd strength from thence: for his followers which before honour'd him as a holy man, afterward began to worship him as a Martyr.


XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Maximus and his wife honour S. Martin.
5.6. Theodosius overcomes Maximus.

1. THE Emperour Maximus, for that Title Theodosius allow'd him after the death of Gratianus,A. D. 386. Id. 16. was zealous in defence of the Catholick Faith. Insomuch as he wrote an efficacious letter in behalf of S. Ambrose Bishop of Milan to the Emperour Valentinian, who instigated by his Mother Iustina an Arian,Theodoret. l. . c. 14. persecuted him. In which Letter likewise, saith Theodoret, he denounc'd warre against him in case he would not desist from his iniustice against the holy Bishop.A. D. 388.
2.Sulp. sever. l. 2. Sulpitius Severus likewise at large declares what great honour and respect the same Maximus shewd to the Blessed Bishop S. Mar|tin of Tours; And particularly the Emperours Wife did most officiously reverence him. For having with great earnestnes obtain'd his presence at a privat Feast prepared for him in her own chamber, she would not permitt any servants to attend, but she her self with all humility ministred to him, and with great devotion layd up the fragments, which she valewd above all her Imperiall delicacies
3. Who this Lady was, and from what coun|trey or family, it does not appear in ancient Story. The same Authour comparing her with the Queen of Saba, and saying that she also came from the ends of the earth to heare the wisedom of another Salo|mon, argues her very probably to have been a Brittish Lady: though we can scarce allow her to have been the daughter and heyr of an unheard of King of Brittany call'd Octavius.
4. Maximus after this,A. D. 3  5. c. 14. not content with so large a portion of the Empire as Gaule, Spain, and Brittany, march'd with his Army into Italy. At whose approach the Emperour Valen|tinian fled into Illyricum, having now learnt by experience, saith Theodoret, how unhappy he had been in following his Mothers counsels against the Holy Bishop S. Ambrose.
5. There is extant a Letter which Maximus wrote in answer to Pope Siricius, who lately had succeeded S. Damasus: in which he pro|fesses the Orthodox Faith, which he learnt in Brittany: where likewise he was baptis'd, and immediatly after his baptism was proclam'd Emperour. In the same letter he likewise gives him account of the abominable doctrines and crimes of the Priscillianists, which he calls Manichees, known not by uncertain suspicions, but their own publick confes|sions in iudgment. Crimes so enormous and obscene, that out of modesty he could not relate them, and therfore sent him a Coppy of the Processe.
6. Now the Emperour Theodosius solicited by Valentiniam,A. D. 388. whose Sister Galla he had ma|ried, came with an Army into the West. To which warr he prepared himself by earnest prayer and fasting.August. de Civit. . lib. 5. c. 26. And having understood, saith S. Augustin, that in the Desart of Egypt there was a certain Monk, a great servant of God who had the Spirit of prophecy, Theodosius sent to him, and receiv'd a most certain message of Victory.
7. Thus arm'd he readily and quickly ob|tain'd a Victory against Maximus, who only wanted a good cause. After the discomfiture of his Army, Maximus being taken prisoner was brought before Theodosius, who was in|clin'd to take pitty of him. At which his soldiers conceiving great indignation, re|mov'd him from his presence and kill'd him. Our Historian Gildas mentions both

his death, and the place of it, saying, At Aquileia a Citty of Italy that abominable head was cutt off,Gildas de Excidio. Which had almost cast out of the throne the most illustrious heads of the world. And thus was the blood of the innocent Em|perour Gratian expiated. After his death followd likewise that of his Son Victor, who saith Zosimus, had been made Caesar, or rather Emperour, as Paulus Diaconus, and some ancient coynes declare.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Relicks of S. Gervasius c. miraculously discover'd to S. Ambrose. The miracles wrought by them: The Ve|neration of them attested.

1. IT will not be amisse though it per|tain not to our History of Brittany, yet because it will afford us a prospect of the iudgment and practise of the ancient Church, to declare the almost visible assistance which Almighty God afforded to his servant S. Am|brose at the time when the Arian Empresse Iustina used her son Valentinians power to persecute him.August. Con|fess. l. 9. c. 7. For then it was (to use the words of S. Augustin directed to God in a prayer) that by a vision thou, O God, didst discover to thy Bishop Ambrose the place wherin the Bodies of thy Martyrs Protasius and Gervasius reposed, which thou for so many years hadst pre|served incorrupt in thy secret treasure, from whence thy intention was to bring them forth for the restraining the rage of a woman, yet no ordi|nary woman, being an Empresse. For when being discovered and digg'd up, they were translated with due honour to the Ambrosian Church, not only those who were vexed with unclean Spirits, the same Devills confessing, were healed: but a certain Cittizen of Milan who had been blind many years, well known in the town, when he had enquir'd and was inform'd of the occasion of so great a noyse and assembly of the people, he leap'd up, and desir'd one present to guide him to the said Church: Whither being come he obtain'd leave with his hand kercheif to touch the Coffin of those Martyrs whose death was pretious in thy sight. Which having done, and applying it to his eyes, they were immediatly opened, so that he saw clearly. The fame hereof presently was spread abroad, and praises given to thee with great fer|vour: insomuch as the mind of thy Enemy, the Empresse Iustina, though it was not heald of her Spirituall blindnes, yet it was repress'd from the fury of persecuting the Holy Bishop.
2. The same holy Father repeats the sub|stance of the same narration in severall other places,Id. de Civit. D. l. 22. c. 8. Et serm. 39. in one wherof he professes himself to have been an eye-witnes of these Miracles, saying, my self was a witnes of the great glory of these Martyrs: for being then at Milan,A. D. 389. I had certain knowledge of the miracles wrought c. This hapned two years before S. Augustin having been converted and ba|ptis'd by S. Ambrose, return'd from thence towards his own countrey Africk, and by the way at Ostia lost his Blessed Mother Mo|nica, concerning whom in his Confessions he thus Writes:A. D. 389. Id. Confss. l. 9.c. 10. When the day of her dissolution was at hand, she did not busy her thoughts about a Sumptuous buriall c. but made this her only request, that a commemoration of her should be made at thy Altar, at which every day she had not failed to attend, and from whence she knew that holy Sacrifice and Victime was dispensed, by which the Handwriting which was contrary to u was blotted out, by which our Enemy the Devill was triumphed over c.
3. So authentick a Testimony of the Vene|ration of the Relicks of holy Martyrs perfor|med by the ancient Church of God, approv'd by unquestion'd divine Miracles, as likewise of Prayers for the Dead at the most holy Sa|crifice, needs not be further confirm'd.Ambros. pist. 85. There|fore we will omitt the transcribing a large Narration of the foresaid Miracles compos'd by S. Ambrose himself, and sent in an Epistle to his devout sister, wherin he repeats the mi|racle of the blind man restor'd to sight, and how very many had been dispossess'd of Devills, and by only touching with their hands the Vestment of the Saints many others were healed of diverse in|firmities: How many hand kercheifs, saith he, were cast, how many garments sent to be layd on the most holy Relicks, to the end that by touching of them they might receive a medici|nall vertue?
4. There were notwithstanding in those times some who denyed that those were bodies of Martyrs, that they could torment the Devill, or free any one possess'd by him. But these,Id. Epist. 91. saith S. Ambrose, were the blas|phemies of Arian Hereticks: refuted by the confessions of the Devills themselves who with loud clamours acknowledg'd their torments: and the great benefitts proceeding from the Martyrs intercession were publickly testified by the blind and other sick people cured of their infirmities. The blind mans name was Severus, by trade a butcher, well known to all the Citty, who was forc'd to give over his profession, assoon as that incommodity of blindnes befell him. This man saies he, calls for witnesses of the miracle all his former customers, by whom he had been maintain'd in his trade: He is desirous those should now testify the recovery of his sight, who formerly had seen that he was blind.



A. D. 390.
XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1. Valentinian the second, Emperour.
2.3. c. The Heresy of Iovinian against Virginity c. Condemn'd by Pope Siri|cius and the H. Fathers.

A. D. 39.1. AFter Maximus his death Theodosius left Valentinian Emperour of the West, adding to his Government Gaule Brittany and Spain, possess'd by the Tyrant. But before he was entrusted with this great charge,id. in Verb. Valentinia  Iunior. the pious Emperour Theodosius in|structed him in the Orthodox Faith, earnestly exhorting him to persevere in it. These In|structions wanted not a good effect, the rather because his Mother Iustina, the great Patronesse of Artanism; was lately dead.
A. D. 390.2. The year following broke forth a Heresy, which in our last age taught Luther to renounce his Monasticall Profession, to allow scope to his carnall appetites, and to draw out of her Cloyster a Consecrated Nunne to his incestuous embraces. The Authour of it was Iovinianus formerly a Monk, but weary of his vowd austerities: who this year was publickly declared a Heretick by Pope Siricius. Whereupon most of the learned Fathers of those times earnestly wrote against him, particularly S. Hierom, S. Ambrose and S. Augustin.
Hirom. cont. Iovin. l. 2.3. Concerning his speciall Hereticall Do|ctrines S. Hierosme thus declares them. I will breifly sett down, saith he, our Adversaries opinions, and out of his obscure bookes, as out of dark denns draw out the Serpents, neither will I suffer him to cover his venemous head with the foldings of his spotted body. Let his poysonnous doctrines be brought to light, that so we may see to tread and bruise them under our feet. He affirms that Virgins, Widows and maried women, being once baptiz'd, are of the same merit, in case they differ not in other works. Again he undertakes to prove that those who with a com|pleat Faith have been regenerated by Baptism, cannot afterward be subverted by the Devill. And in the third place he professes that there is no difference, in regard of merit, between fasting from meats, and the receiving of them with thanksgiving.
Siric. P. Ep. ad Eccles. Mediolan.4. Pope Siricius likewise in his Epistle con|cerning him to the Church of Milan, gives this character of Iovinian, that he was an imita|tour of the Devill, being an Enemy of Chastity, a Teacher of luxury, nourish'd with gluttonous crudities, punish'd by abstinence; he hates fasting, telling his Ministers that such things are superfluous c. In opposition whereto a Sy|nod assembled by the same Holy Pope ca|tholickly professes, Wee doe not undervalew or disparage the Vowes of mariage, at which we oftimes are present:D. A. 392. but we attribute greater ho|nour to the spirituall mariage of Virgins. Calling therfore a Synod, it appeard that Iovinians asser|tions are contrary to our doctrin, that is, to the Christian Law. Therfore since these men teach contrary to what wee have learnt by Tradition, We the whole Clergy of Rome, with the Preists  Deacons, following the Precept of the Apostle, doe unanimously pronounce this sentente, That Iovinian, Auxentius, Genialis, Germinator, Felix, Frontinus, Martianus, Ianuarius and Ingeniosus who have been found zealous teachers of this New Heresy and blasphemy, be by Divine sentence and our iudgment condemn'd and cast out of the Church. Which sentence our hope is that your Holines will likewise confirm.
5. Conformably hereto the Church of Milan in a Synodicall answer penn'd by S. Ambrose,Ambros. Epist. 81. after high commendation of the Popes zeale, tells him,That the said Here|ticks therfore fled to Milan, that they might find no place in which they should not be condemn'd. All that saw them avoy|ded them, as if they had been infected with the plague: and that being condemn'd with an universall execration, they were thrust our of the Citty of Milan, like vaga|bonds.
6. To conclude, S. Augustin reciting the Positions of his Heresy, concludes with these words,August. Re|ruct. l. 2. c. 11 Id. de He|reseb. c. 82. The Holy Church did most fruitfully and most courageously resist this Monster. And in another place, This Heresy, saith he, was quickly extinguished, neither could it ever make such progresse as to seduce any Preists: though some ancient Virgins at Rome being perswaded by lovi|nian, were reported thereupon to have taken husbands. No sign appears that it ever entred into Brittany in those times, so precious and venerable was Virginity then, so great a Mul|titude of Seminaries there of Chastity, and such frequency of abstinence and fasting. So that it seems a more powerfull Devill atten|ded Luther and Calvin, then Iovinian.


XX. CHAP.XX. CHAP.

1. Valentinian murdred.
2. Eugenius a Tyrant: Slain by Theo|dosius.
3. A Roman Legion left in Brittany.

1. AFter four years raign, the young Em|perour Valentinian who with great bloodshed had recovered his Empire,A. D. 392. Hieron. Epist. 3. from which he had been forced to fly into banishment, was slain neer the same Citty of Lyons which had been a witnes of his Brothers murder: and his dead body was dishonour'd with hanging, saith S. Hierom. This was done by the treason of his Count Arbogastes. He had desir'd Baptism from S. Ambrose, but was slain before it could be administred.
A. D. 394.2. In his place the Tyrant Eugenius invaded the Empire of the West, in shew a Christian, but indeed addicted to Heathenish supersti|tion. Who was the next year slain by Theodo|sius,Ruffin. l. 2. c. 3. who, saith Ruffinus, prepared himself to the warr, not so much with help of arms as fasting and prayer: He fortified himself with night-wat|chings rather in Churches then camps, and made Processions through all places devoted to Prayer, being accompanied with the Preists and people: He lay prostrate before the Monuments of the Apostles and Martyrs, coverd with sack-cloath, and begg'd divine assistance by a confident hope of the inter|cession of Gods Saints.
A. D. 394.3. The Generall employ'd Theodosius in this warr was Stilico, call'd out of Brittany for that purpose: Where he had settled the coun|trey by repressing the incursions of the Picts and Scotts, whom he overcame in severall incounters: and when he left the Island, he placed for its defence against those restlesse enemies a Roman Legion at the Northern borders.


XXI. CH.XXI. CHAP.

1.2.3. c. S. Ninian made Bishop of the Southern Picts.
6. c. His Episcopall See, Candida Casa.

1. THE Holy young man S. Ninian (of whose birth and countrey, as like|wise his voyage to Rome to be instructed in the Catholick Faith we have heretofore trea|ted,) this year, wherin Theodosius slew the Tyrant Eugenius, shewd forth the glorious fruits of his pious education under the Holy Popes Damasus and Siricius: For now was he consecrated Bishop, and sent back into his own countrey to preach the saving Truths of Christs Gospell to the rude nation of the Southern Picts. For thus we read in his Life extant in Capgrave:
Ap. Capgrav. in Niniano.2. The Roman Bishop (Siricius) having heard that a Nation in the Western parts of Brittany had not yet receiv'd the Faith of Christ, exalted S. Ninianus to the Episcopall degree, and giving him his Apostolicall benediction destin'd him to become the Apostle of the foresaid Nation.
3. That which is here call'd a Western Nation in Brittany, is the same which S. Beda calls Southern Picts; situated between Cumberland and the Bay of Glotta or Cluide (Dunbritton.) For the Northern Picts inhabiting beyond that Bay received not the light of the Gospell till many yeares after.
4. Let us now prosecute S. Ninianus his Voyage,Id. ibid. as we find in the same Authour of his Life, who tells us, That the man of God in his return from the Citty of Rome, was moved with an earnest desire to visit the glorious Bishop S. Martin at Tours (whom some Writers affirme to have been his Vnkle:) whereupon he diverted from his iourney to that Citty. S. Mar|tin honourably receiv'd him: by inspiration knowing that he was extraordinarily sanctified by God, and that he would be a happy instru|ment of the salvation of many.
5. Being dismissed by S. Martin, the holy man pursuing his iourney,Id. Ibid. came at last to the place whither he was destin'd: And there he found a great concourse of people (who it seems had notice of his return.) There was express'd wonderfull ioy and devotion, and the praises of Christ sounded every where: because they all esteemd him as a Prophet. Then began he with great diligence to root up their ill planted super|stitions, to disperse their long gathered wicked customes, and to demolish their impious Idola|tries. Having thus purged their minds from er|rours, he instructed them in all duties belonging to good Christians, and by his works and example shewd them a pattern of all vertues and piety, all which he confirm'd by frequent miracles.
6. He chose for his place of Episcopall residence an habitation,Id. ibid. afterward call'd Wite-hern, seated neer the Sea, by which it is almost encompassed: to which there was onely one passage toward the North. This place is seated, saith Camden, in the Province of the Novantes,Camdne. in Scotis. now call'd Galloway. By the Latin Writers it is nam'd Candida casa, from the colour of it, and by the Saxons Wite-hern or white house: Here it was that in the dayes of the younger Theodo|sius Ninianus erected his Episcopall See. And here it is that Ptolomy places the Promonto|ry call'd by him Leucopibia, which seems to have been an erroneous transcribing of , or white houses.
7. The summ of what hath been written, is thus delivered by S. Beda,Bed. hist. l. 3. c. 4. The Southern Picts, saith he, forsaking the Errour of their Idolatry, receiv'd the true Faith by the preaching  most holy man, and most reverend Bishop Ninias, (Ninianus) who was by Nation a Brittain, and had been regularly instructed in the Mysteries of the true Faith at Rome.
8. Many years he spent in his Apostolicall Office, for his death ensued not till thirty eight years after his first entrance. He conse|crated Bishops, ordained Preists, and divided the the whole countrey into certain Parishes, as the Authour of his Life declares. There remains more to be written of him, which we will reserve till the time of his death. And whereas his See was establish'd in the Province of Galloway, which may seem to imply that he was a Scott: we shall in due place demon|strate that in those dayes that Province was belonging to the Iurisdiction of the Brit|tains, not Scotts.



A. D. 395.
XXII. CHAP.XXII. CHAP.

1. c. S. Regulus comes into the Pictish kingdom out of Greece, with the Relicks of S. Andrew, c.
6. c. Of the Culdei, or Coli-Dei.

1. THE Labours of S. Ninianus were no doubt much lightned by the arrivall thither of another Saint,A. D. 395. to wit, S. Regulus, who the year following by divine Inspiration came out of Achaia into the same countrey, bringing with him the precious Relicks of the Apostle S. Andrew. Whose story is thus sett down by Hector Boctius out of ancient Monuments:2. The holy man Regulus, saith he, as one night he watched at the Sacred monument of S. An|drew,Hict. Bo. l. 6. was admonished from heaven to take the bone of the holy Apostles arme, three fingers and as many ioints of one of his feet, and laying them up decently in a vessell to carry them to the Island Albion (or Brittany) seated in the utmost con|fines of the world: because that in future times there would live a people, which should give great veneration to the Apostle S. Andrew, and by his intercession receive great graces and benefitts, both earthly and heavenly through the Divine goodnes.
3. In complyance with which admonition the holy man undertook that tedious iour|ney, and was ioyfully received there: for as it follows in the Narration,Id. ibid. The report of his arrivall with that sacred Treasure being spread through the Regions of the Picts, inflamed the minds of many to see and venerate the holy Re|licks of the glorious Apostle. The people therfore flowd together from all quarters, bringing gifts and Offrings to the holy Apostle. There came like|wise Hirgustus (others call him Hungus) their King, being invited by the same of these things. The Holy man Regulus receiv'd him with a Soline Procession, in which Preists and Monks sung Hymns and praises to God. The King falling pro|strate on the ground with great veneration kiss'd the Sacred Relicks: And when all Holy Rites were performed after the Christian manner, of which the King was very observant, he freely bestowd his Royall Palace to the honour of S. An|drew, on Regulus and the Preists who were there to perform Divine service: and not farr from them built another Church dedicated to the same Apostle.
4. This is the place where in following ages the Scottish Arch-Bishops and Primats establish'd their Archiepiscopall See. Which place, saith Camden, the Ancients call'd Regimont, or Regulus his Mount: where Vngus King of the Picts erected the principall Church of his Kingdom, to this day call'd S. Andrews.
5. Some modern Writers, perhaps out of an aversion to Sacred Relicks doe professe a doubt of this Narration. Yet it is certain that Pope Boniface the Eighth in an Epistle of his to King Edward the first writes in this manner, Your Royall Highnes may please to understand that the Kingdom of Scotland was converted to the Vnity of the Catholick Faith by the Venerable Re|licks of S. Andrew the Apostle,Ap. M. Westmonast. A. D. 10. such was the great goodnes of Almighty God.
6. The forecited Hector Boetius describing the ornaments with which the pious King Hirgustus enrich'd his New built Church,Hect. Boet. l. 6. saith he adorned it with munificent gifts, Patens, Copes, Chalices, Basons, Lavers c. framed of silver and gold, and likewise with other precious furniture proper for Sacreduses, placing in the same Preists to perform Divine service there.
7. These Preists dedicated to Gods worship are the same which the Picts call'd Culdei, or Colidei, that is, worshippers of God. Some of these came with S. Regulus into Brittany, For he living in Achaia was a Father and Teacher of many who were addicted to true piety:Buchan. . Scot. l. 4. i . And to those others from among the Picts and Brit|tains ioynd themselves, leading a solitary life with such a fame of their Sanctity, saith Bucha|nan, that being dead their Cells were converted into Churches. And from hence was derived the succeeding custom among the Scotts, to call Tem|ples Cells. This sort of Monks was anciently call'd Culde and their Name and Institut remain'd till a later kind of Monks expell'd them. But this last clause he writes with the spirit of a fa|ctious Presbyterian: For not a later sort of Monks, but such Apostats as himself, enemies to the Divine Sacrifice celebrated by these, contemners of Gods Saints, were those who out of Scottland expell'd the Culdees or Reli|gious servants of God.
8. Notwithstanding, if we speak of the prime originall of these Culdei, we have already shewd that they began long before, when by reason of the furious persecution rais'd by Diocletian, a world of Christians re|tir'd themselves into desarts, there with safety and vacancy to attend to God by Prayer and Religious austerities: who therfore were call'd Colidei, and corruptly Culdei.
9. This digression we make upon occasion of the Gests of S. Regulus,Martyrol. Angl 21. August. whom the English Martyrologe celebrates among the Saints on the twenty eighth of August: where notwith|standing there is a mistake in placing his death in the year of Christ three hundred and eighty.



A. D. 395.
XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1. Honorius Emperour of the West.
2. c. Pelagius the Heretick appears c.
5. The Roman Legion call'd our of Brittany.
6.7. Alaricus invading Italy, is twise vanquish'd.
8. Innocentius Pope.

A. D. 395. Ambros. de obis. Theodos.1. IN the year of Grace three hundred and ninety five the glorious Emperour Theo|dosius dyed, for whose soule S. Ambrose devoutly prayd, the Prince Honorius assisting at the Holy Altar. He left his Empire between his two Sons, committing the Eastern Regions to the Elder son Arcadius, and the Western to the younger, Honorius: who being of tender years was left under the tuition of Stilico, whose daughter he maried. Yet Stilico afterward, not satisfied with this honour, attempted to establish his own son, to effect which he call'd, or at least permitted barbarous Nations to enter and wast the Empire, who in conclusion were the de|struction of it.
2. In the fourth year of Honorius his raign Pope Siricius dyed,A. D. 398. to whom succeeded Ana|stasius, a man saith S. Hierom, of rich poverty and Apostolick solicitude: which he express'd in opposing the Errour of Origen, which Ruffinus and his Disciple Melania now brought into Rome. The same Holy Pope likewise first re|press'd the Heresy of Pelagius, which first appeared under him: Of which for the rela|tion which that Arch-heretick had to Britta|ny from whence he came, we shall presently treat more largely.
A. D. 399.3. The year following, the same Emperour publish'd an Edict which Iacobus Gothofredus conceives to have been directed to the Vicar of Brittany. The From of Which Edict was this: As we utterly forbid the offring of Pagan Sacri|fices;l. 15. de Pa|gais. Co. Theod. so our pleasure is that the Ornaments of publick Works (though representing Pagan Superstitions) should be preserved. And to the end those who presume to demolish them, pre|tend not any authority for so doing, we hereby command, that if any ancient Inscription or Law be found, such papers be taken out of their hands, and brought to us. Thus Wrote the Emperour to Proclianus Vicar of the five Provinces: Into which number Brittany was lately divided, as hath been shewd.
4. This Island seems at this time to have enioyd repose,A. D. 400. being freed from the vio|lence of their Northern Enemies by a Roman Legion quartered in the confines. It was governed by a Roman Generall, call'd Marcus, whom Honorius sent hither.Claudian. Pa|negyr. ad Stilicon. Of this peacea|ble State of Brittany the Poet Claudian gives testimony, in his Panegyrick inscrib'd to Sti|lico, who was Consull in the year of Christ four hundred.A. D. 403
5. But this calm lasted but a little space: for troubles hapning in Italy, all the forces which defended Brittany being call'd away, this poore Island was left miserably expos'd to her barbarous enemies. Those Troubles were caused by an invasion of the Goths under their King Alaricus,A. D. 401. who out of Panno|nia by the Norick Alpes descended to Trent, from thence driving a Garrison of Honorius: and so peircing into Rhetia was there stop'd by Stilico, who made great preparations against him.
6. The following year a battell was fought between Alaricus and Stilico:A. D. 402. wherin the Gothes were vanquish'd, and might have been utterly destroyd, had not Stilico per|mitted them to retire back into Pannonia: This he did to the end his ambitious designs might more securely proceed during trou|bles, by means of which he continued in possession of the Empires forces.
7. Alaricus by pact with Stilico,A. D. 403. return'd towards Italy with a more numerous army. And presuming to subdue the Countrey, was again fought with by Stilico at Pollentia,Vsser. in Pri|mord f 595. Claudian. de el. Gerico. Id. de 6. Honory con|sulatu. and once more overcome. To this Battle, the Roman Legion, which was the only de|fence of Brittany, was sent for, as Bishop Vsher from Claudian the Poet well observes. But such frequent invasions by barbarous Na|tions oblig'd the Romans to strengthen their Citty with new walls and Towers, as the same Claudian elegantly relates.
8. In these times Pope Anastasius dying:A. D. 402. there succeeded him in the Apostolick See Innocen|tius first of that name: concerning the inte|grity of whose Faith thus writes S. Hierom to Demetrias a Virgin in Africa,Hieron. Epist. 8. Because I feare, (saith he) yea have been credibly inform'd, that the venemous spriggs of Heresy (he meanes Pelagianism) doe still budd forth in Africa, I thought my self obliged out of a pious affection of charity to admonish thee, firmly to hold the Faith of the Holy Pope Innocentius, who in the Apostolick chair is now Successour and Son to Anastasius: and take heed of entertaining any strange Doctrins, what ever esteem thou mayst have of thine own wit and skill.


XXIV. CHAP.XXIV. CHAP.

1.2. Of Pelagius the Brittish Heretick.
3.4. c The speciall Points of his Heresies: condemn'd by severall Popes Synods c.
11. Brittany infected.
12. Of Vigilantius his Heresies.

1. HEre it will be seasonable to treat of the New blasphemous Heresy of Pe|lagianism, which now began to infect the world. The Authour of it was Pelagius, by

birth a Brittain,A. D. 404. for which cause S. Augustin stiles him Pelagius by Sirname Brito:August. Epist. 106. Prosp. carm. de Ingra. and S. Prosper more expressely calls him the Brittish Serpent. And hereto consent S. Beda, Polidor Virgll and generally Modern Historians. But whether his originall came from the Roman Provinces in Brittany or the Scottish, some doubt may be made,Hieron. in Praefat. ad l. 3. coat. Pelag. considering S. Hierom in severall places mentioning him calls him a Scott, descended from the Scottish Nation bor|dering on Brittany: and elsewhere, he says that he the most stupide of men, was stuffed with Scottish pulse.Ap. Capgrav. in Albano. I. inmutheus. Not withstanding the Authour of S. Albanus his life in Capgrave affirms that he was Abbot of that famous Monastery of Bangor, where two thousand and one hundred Monks under the Discipline of one Abbot did get their living by the labour of their hands.
2. Certain it is that he was a Monk, for by that title he is call'd for the most part by the Bishops in the Councill of Diospolis, because he had no Ecclesiasticall degree. And S. Augustin saith,August. de Gest. Pelagy cap. 35. After many ancient Heresies, a New one is lately risen, not invented by any Bishops or Preists, no nor so much as inferiour Clarks, but by a sort of Monks, which dispute against the Grace of God.Isi. Pelas. l. 3. Epist. 314. Isidor the Pelusiot adds that he was a vain stragling Monk, incorrigible, one who wandred from Monastery to Monastery smelling out feasts, and fawning on Magistrats for their good chear c. observing withall that it was in his old age that he fell into this Heresy, whereas before he had liv'd, according to S. Augustins testimony, in repute for his sanctity and Christian life of no ordinary per|fection.Aug. l. 3. de peccat mer. c. 1. Sigeber. A. D. 404.
3. The speciall Points of his Heresy are thus sett down by Sigebertus: In Brittany, saith he, Pelagius endeavoured to defile the Church of Christ with his execrable doctrines: Teaching that man may be saved by his merits without Grace: That every one is directed by his own naturall Free will to the attaining of iustice: That infants are born without Originall sin, being as innocent as Adam was before his Transgression: That they are baptised, not to the end they should be free from sinn, but that they may by Adoption be ad|mitted into the Kingdom of God: And though they were not baptised, yet they should enioy an eternall and happy life, though excluded from the Kingdom of God.
4. These Heresies began to appear in pu|blick about the year four hundred and four or five: and being taken notice of by Pope Innocentius, Pelagius compos'd a Letter of Purgation, which was presented to his suc|cessour Pope Zozimus. After which he went into Palestina, not daring to come to Rome to clear himself. And his Doctrines being re|prov'd by S. Hierom in the East, and by S. Au|gustin in the West, Pelagius appeald to the iudgment of a lawfull Synod: which was assem|bled at Diospolis (or Lydda) in Palestina, and his accusors Heros and Lazarus, two Bishops from Gaule, by reason of the sicknes of one by the way, not being able to appear in the Synod, Pelagius gave such captious answers to the interrogations propos'd to him by the Bishops present, that he escaped a censure, and was acknowledg'd an Orthodox Catho|lick.
5. About the same time his prime Disciple Caeletius was condemned for his Heresies in a Synod at Carthage, from which he appeald to the Roman See, yet not daring to pursue his Appeale, he fled into Asia, and there by fraud obtained the degree of a Preist. After which another Synod of Numidia at Milevis again condemned the same Errours. A Copie of both which condemnations being sent to Pope Innocentius, he approv'd them, and excommunicated both Pelagius and Celestius, yet with a condition, that upon their revo|cation of their Errours they should be re|stor'd to Catholick Communion.
6. Their Heresies notwithstanding spreading abroad, the African Bishops of both Councils deputed S. Augustin by common consent to confute them: And with what diligence and efficacy he perform'd this charge, his glo|rious labours doe to this day admirably testify.
7. S. Innocentius being dead, his Successour Zosimus received an Appeale from the iudg|ment given by another Councill of Carthage against Celestius, who came to Rome, and pre|senting to the Pope a Discourse touching his Doctrine, which he profess'd to submitt to the See Apostolick: pretending likewise to subscribe to the Letters written by Pope Inno|centius to the two African Councils, in which his Heresy, by which he denied Originall sin, was principally condemn'd: Hereupon Pope Zosimus favourably interpreted his Libell or Discourse, and delayd his absolution only two months, till he could receive an answer from the Africain Bishops.
8. Pelagius likewise using the same arts, endeavoured to surprise Pope Innocentius, by a Book of his Doctrin written with such am|biguity of words, that his Hereticall senses could not be discovered but by readers of a more then ordinarily sharp sight and iudg|ment. This Book was likewise presented to Pope Zosimus: To which was added a Symbol of his Faith directed to the Pope and compo|sed so artificially, that it hath been printed as a Sermon of S. Augustins (the one hundred ninety first in number) by changing the be|ginning and end of it, instead of Beatissime Pater, saying Dilectissimi Fratres. At the arrivall of which Treatises at Rome, there was great ioy, as if the Hereticks had been con|verted. Of which Pope Zosimus informing the African Bishops, they again assembled at Carthage, and carefully pondering these things, they wrote back to Pope Zosimus, signifying to him, that it was not sufficient that Celestius should in grosse subscribe to Pope Innocentius his letters, but that he should also anathematize expressly the words im|piously sett down in his own Libell. They

likewise detected the fraud by which Pelagius in his Libell had vayled his hereticall sense.
9. Hereupon Celestius being urged by Pope Zosimus to pronounce anathema against the Doctrins objected to him by Paulinus a Dea|con, and which himself had manifestly inserted in his own Book, privately with|drew himself from his tryall: thereby shew|ing that his submission to be corrected by the See Apostolick, was false and hypocriti|call. At the same time severall Writings of Pelagius likewise were discovered, in which his Heresies manifestly appeared.
10. Pope Zosimus therefore without any further delay, imitating his Predecessour In|nocentius, saith S Augustin, did a second time with the like authority condemne their Doctrins and excommunicate their persons. Which Sentence of Condemnation was solemnly first of all in a Synod pro|nounced by Sixtus a Roman Preist, afterwards Pope, whom the Pelagians had esteem'd, but injustly, a principall Patron of their Heresy. Which Heresy having been proscrib'd by so many Synods, and more then once by the Roman See, the Emperour Honorius also publi|shed an Imperiall Sanction, by which he not only banish'd Celestius and Pelagius out of Rome, but ordained that whosoever should teach the same Doctrins, being thereof convicted in iudgment by whomsoever, should have the same punishment of Exile inflicted on them. Which Decree he com|manded to be published through the whole Empire. These were the Acts of many years, which to avoyd interruptions are summ'd up together.
11. Notwithstanding all this care of all Sorts of Magistrats, both Ecclesiasticall and Temporall, to extirpate this execrable Heresy out of the world, yet by reason it directly favourd the corruption of Nature, human Pride and sensuality, it continued in most countreys, and particularly in Brittany it made so generall a progresse that the neigh|bouring Churches of Gaule thought necessary to send into this Island two of their most eminent Bishops, and this two severall times, to represse it: Which how they gloriously performed, shall shorly be shew'd in due place.
A. D. 406.12. At the same time, as Pelagius infected Brittany, so did another infamous Heretick infect Gaule likewise. That was Vigilantius, concerning whom S. Hierome thus writes, Gaule alone was a countrey that produced no monsters of Heresies in former times.Hiero. Ep. ad Ripar. But on a sudden there arose one Vigilantius, who may more justly be called Dormitantius, who being full of an unclean Spirit entred combat against the Spirit of Christ, and denyed that the Sepul|chers of Martyrs ought to be venerated, condem|ning likewise the devout Vigils celebrated before the Festivalls of Gods Saints. Which Errours of his are detested by the whole Catholick world. He also imitating Iovinian,A. D. 407. at feasts decla|med against Fasting, prefer'd riches before voluntary proverty, and Mariage before Virginity.


XXV. CHAP.XXV. CH.

1.2.3. After Marcus, and Gratianus, Constantin is proclamed Emperour in Brittany.
4.5. c. Geffrey Monmouths fable of him disproved.
7. c. Constantins successes in Gaule, c.
11. Gerontius rebells against him: and is slain.
12. c. Constantin overcome by Constan|tius: and slain: And Rome is sack'd by the Vandals.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred and sixe,A. D. 406. Gaule was overrun by the Vandals, Sueves and Alans. Which opportunity being observ'd by the Picts and Scots, they likewise breaking out of their limits, wasted the confining Provinces of Brittany. The Governour of the Island at that time was Mar|cus, whom on a sudden the Army saluted by the Title of Emperour, imagining that under the conduct of so sublime a name, they might better resist the Enemy. But the unconstant soldiers finding his incapacity, as suddenly depos'd him, and in his place chose Gratianus, born in the same Island.
2. But within four monthes, they slew likewise Gratianus,A. D. 407. for his insupportable cruelty. Which being divulg'd in the coun|treys abroad, their old Enemies out of Ireland return'd, and being attended by the Scots, Norvegians and Daci, they march'd crosse the Island from sea to sea, wasting all with fire and sword.
3. In this extremity the Brittish Army proclam'd Emperour a Soldier called Constantin,Ped. l. 1. c. 1. not for any merit of his courage, saith S. Beda, but only for the hope they fancied in his name: as if the present ruins could not be repair'd but by another Constantin.
4. Concerning this mans Election, Gef|frey of Monmouth,Galfrid. Mo|nument. Flo|rileg. A. D. 435. follow'd by Florilegus and others, frames this story:How Wichelin (commonly call'd Guithelin) Arch Bishop of London seeing the calamity of Brittany, and weaknes of the Romans, pass'd over Sea into lesser Brittany (formerly call'd Armorica) where Aldroenus raign'd, the fourth from Conanus, whom Maximus had first constituted King there. To him the Bishop made his humble petition that he would out of commiseration to the countrey from which himself was descen|ded

undertake the Government of it.A. D. 411. The King refused this offer as to himself, but was content that his Brother Constantin should accept that Title, whom he furni|shed with Soldiers and a Navy,  sent them into Brittany: When presently the Brit|tains generally flock'd to him out of their caverns and lurking places, and vnder his conduct marching against the Ene|mies, obtain'd an illustrious Victory. This being done, they sett the Crown on his head at Chichester, and gave him to wife a Noble Roman Lady, who had been brought up by the same Bishop Guithelin. By her he had three Sons; the Eldest was Constans, whom he made a Monk at Winchester in the Church of S. Amphibalus: The other two were Aurelius Ambrosius and Vterpendra|gon, whom he committed to the educa|tion of the same Archbishop.
5. But these are fictions either invented or credulously embraced by Geffrey of Mon|mouth, a man whose end in writing a histo|ry was not to propagate Truth, but to exalt his own nation. For first, it is certain that when Constantin was proclam'd Emperour in Brittany, the Arch-Bishop of London was not Wichelin, but Fastidius Priscus, who dyed about the year four hundred and twenty: whose Successour was Voadinus; and after him Guithelin in the year four hundred fifty six.
6. Again that this Constantin was so far from being Brother of a King, that his ori|ginall was base and unknown, we have the testimony of the most ancient and authen|tick Historians. S. Beda sayes he was chosen (Ex infim militi) out of the lowest rank in the Army, and this not for any merit, but meerly a fortunat presage of his name. The place where he was chosen Emperour was Car-Segont neer Car-narvon, afterward call'd Caer-custenith, perhaps from this Con|stantins election there. Being chosen, he directed Messengers to the Emperour Honorius to excuse himself,Zosim. l. 5. as being by violence compell'd by the soldiers to accept that Title: thus writeth Zosimus; which alone destroys Gef|freys fable.
7. The same year Constantin pass'd over into Gaule, where gathering an army he subdued all the regions on this side the Cottian Alpes dividing Gaule from Italy:Zosim. ib. Sozom. l. 9. c. 11. and then, saith the same Zosimus, he accounted his possession of the Empire secure. He like|wise drew out of his Monasticall Solitude his Son Constans, whom he created Caesar: This is testified by Orosius and Marcellinus Comes.Oros. hist. . Marcell. com. chron.
8. The seat of his Empire he placed at Arles: he constituted firm guards upon the River Rhine, to hinder the excursions of the Germans: and utterly broke the forces of the Vandalls, Sueves and Alans, which had wasted all the Provinces between the river Seine and the Rhine.
9. Afterward he sent his Son Constans into Spain, who by many successfull combats subdued the countrey.A. D. 408. And whereas two Noble Brethren, Didymus and Verenianus having collected an army of Spaniards faith|full to the Roman Empire, had seised on the streit passages, through the Pyrenean moun|tains, Constans courageously broke through them. Which having done, he committed the care of defending those passages to for|raign Soldiers, to the great displeasure of the Spaniards, who thereupon entred into league with the Vandals and Gothes against him. For these good successes Constans by his Father was pronounced Emperour: to whom he repaired, leaving Gerontius in his place Generall in Spain.
10. But the year following he was sent back into Spain,A. D. 409. Zosim. l. 6. attended by Iustus a famous Captain. Whereat (saith Zosimus) Gerontius was so offen|ded, that he procured the barbarous Soldiers in Gaule to revolt: so that Constantin having sent a considerable part of his army into Spain, and not being able to represse them, severall Provin|ces both in Gaule and Brittany forsook their de|pendence on Rome, casting out the Roman Ma|gistrats, and governed themselves by their own will and laws. Notwithstanding the same Authour afterward insinuats, that the Em|perour Honorius himself freed the Brittains from their dependence,Id. ibid. writing letters to them wherin he exhorted them to provide for themselves.
11. Gerontius not content with this, assu|med to himself the Title of Emperour,Sozom. l. 9. c. 13. and in|vesting with the same purple Maximus whom he left in Spain, he with an army marched against Constantin, whom he be|seiged in Arles. But an Army from Honorius under the conduct of Constantius a Roman approaching, Gerontius his soldiers forsook him: and the Spaniards remaining, out of contempt of him attempted to kill him: and encompassing the house into which he reti|red, they sett it on fire: So that Gerontius having first killd his wife, at last killd him|self also.A. D. 411. Id. ib. c. 5. This is Sozomens relation.
12. As for Constantin he was again besei|ged at Arles by the Roman General Constan|tius: and being inform'd that Ebodicus whom he had sent into Germany to collect aid from the Franks and Alemanni, was inter|cepted in his return, he devested himself of his Imperiall Purple, and flying for refuge into a Church, was there consecrated a Preist. Whereupon the Soldiers in the Town, having pardon offred them, opened the gates. Constantin with his Son Iulian, was sent into Italy, but by the way was slain.
13. The year before Constantins unhappy death was deplorable to the whole world, by the destruction of Rome, overcome and sack'd by Alaricus King of the Goths. Then not only the immense wealth of the Citty for so many years heap'd together, but the ornaments of Churches became the prey of

barbarous Soldiers, who were astonish'd to see the munificent vessells with which Con|stantin the Great had enrich'd them.


XXVI. C.XXVI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Martyrdom of S. Melorus a young Brittish Prinie.

A. D. 411. Martyrolog. Anglic. 3. Lvar.1. OVR Martyrologe the same year wherin the Vsurper Constantin was slain commemorats a more happy death, call'd a Martyrdom of a young Brittish Prince, whose name was Melorus (or Meliorus.) Of whom mention is made in the Monuments of Cornwall:Capgrav. in Mel. from whence Capgrave hath ex|tracted the following Narration.
2. In the primitive times of Christianity, the Apostles Doctrin being dispers'd through all the regions of the world, Brittany was likewise converted from Paganism to Christianity: and of that Nation many beleiving in our Lord, and in their lives conforming themselves to the Apostles precepts, shined gloriously by many miracles. Of which number we are confident|ly assured that Blessed Melorus was. He was descended from a Noble family of the Brittains: for his Father, call'd Melianus, enjoyd the Dukedom of Cornwall. In the seaventh year of whose Rule an Assembly of the nobility being mets to consult about the generall affairs of the Province, Rinaldus brother to the Duke coming with force upon him slew him, and invaded the Dukedom.
3. Now Melianus had then a young Son, a child of seaven years old, named Melorus. Him also after his Fathers death his Tyrannous Vncle sought to kill, fearing least being come to mans estate, he should deprive him of the Principality. With this deliberation he brought the child with him into Cornwall: Where at the same time was assembled a Synod of Bishops: Who all interceded for the life of the child: so that the Tyrant contented himself with cutting off his right hand and left foot: in place whereof there was framed for the child a hand of silver, and a foot of brasse. After this Melorus was edu|cated in a certain Monastery of Cornwall till he was fourteen years old, spending his time in the reading Holy Scripture, every day growing in innocence, vertue and piety.
4. But then Rinoldus by many gifts and pro|mises of large possessions tempted, and obtain'd from Cerialtanus, to whose care the child was committed, an assurance of his death: Which he impiously accomplished by cutting off his head, which he sent to Rinoldus, challenging his pro|mis'd reward. The person employ'd for carrying the Martyrs head was a Son of Cerialtanus, who by a just iudgment of God fell from the Castle wall with the head in his hands, and broke his neck.
5. After this the Holy childs Nurse came to the house where the Body lay: and there she saw a Vision of Heavenly Angells, and lights gloriously shining. And having buried the Body in a decent place, the day following they saw it laid above ground. Three severall times they buried it, and still the same accident arri|ved. By common advice therefore they laid the Sacred Body upon a Cart, to which were tyed two young Bulls never used to the Yoke: These they permitted to goe at liberty without any leader, whither Gods Providence should direct them. The Bulls then on a sudden becoming tame, caried it to a certain place, where being arrived they stood still. But the company attending the Cart, not liking the place, which they thought unfitt for his buriall, employ'd their hands, arms and shoulders against the wheeles, to force them to roule forward. But they found the Cart by divine vertue so fixed, that by no strength or art it could be moved. After diverse attempts made to no purpose, at last giving thanks to God they buried the Sacred Body with great solemnity in the same place. There many devout people repairing, and imploring the Martyrs help and intercession in their afflictions and in|firmities, frequently with ioy obtain'd their desi|red remedy.
6. The Head of the Martyr was caried to the Tyrant Rinoldus, which he having touch'd, died miserably three days after. After whose death the Bishops and Clergy caried the Head, and buried it together with his Body. Severall dayes after this certain Preachers, not of Brittish blood took the Coffer wherin the Sacred Relicks repos'd which they caried in Procession through many places, and at last according as they were enjoyn'd, they arriv'd at Ambrisburg, where they layd the Holy Relicks upon an Altar. Thus find we related the Gests of S. Melorus in Capgrave.
7. Now Ambrisburg is a well known town among the Belgae (in Wiltshire) in the Territory of Winchester: so call'd from Ambrose the Son of Constantinus, the late mention'd Vsurper of the Empire, concer|ning whom we shall hereafter treat. M Camden adds out of an ancient Book,Camden. in Belgis. cal|led Eulogium, that there was erected a Mo|nastery of three hundred Monks, which after|ward was pillaged by a certain barbarous Tyrant call'd Gurmundus. Moreover that at Ambris|burg S. Melorus and his Sacred Relicks were in a speciall manner venerated,Vsser. in Pri|mord. Bishop Vsher affirms, saying, The solemnity of the celebra|ting the Relicks of S. Melorus by the inhabitants of Ambrisburg obscured in time the memory of Ambrius or Ambrosius.



A. D. 420.
XXVII. CHAP.XXVII. CHAP.

1. Victorinus Governour in Brittany: re|called.
2.3 c. Brittany poyson'd with Pelagia|nism by Agricola a Bishop.
4. Severall Arch-Bishops of London.

A. D. 412.1. AFter Constantins death severall other Tyrants arose in France, as Maxi|mus, Iovinus and Sebastian: but by the cou|rage of Constantius they were quickly sub|dued. As for Brittany, it again return'd to the Obedience of the Roman Empire. Constantius therefore sent Victorinus Gover|nour thither,A. D. 414. a man gratefull to the Brit|tains, and formidable to the Picts and Scotts, whose violences he easily repress'd as the Poet Rutilius testifies.Rutil. Itine|rar. But being too soon recall'd by Honorius, and the Roman Legion with him, the Brittains in a short time be|came miserably and iremediably expos'd to their barbarous cruelties.
A. D. 414.2. Pope Innocentius dying after he had the space of fifteen years governed the Roman Church, Zosimus succeeded him, who with the like care endeavoured to preserve the Church from the infection of Pelagianism: In whose place after two years was chosen Pope Bonifacius,A. D 49. Prsp. advers. Collator. who, saith Prosper, made use not only of Apostolick, but also Imperiall Edicts against the same Enemies of Divine Grace.
3. In his time this Island of Brittany be|came poyson'd with their presumptuous Doctrines. The unhappy instrument of which calamity was one Agricola, the Son of a Bishop call'd Severianus.Bale cent. 10. Bale is mistaken, when he affirms this Agricola to have been a Brittain, a Monk of Bangor and compa|nion of Pelagius: for he was by Nation a Gaul. And the same Authour with the like Errour confounds Agricola with Leporius, who infected Gaule with the same Heresy: But afterward going into Africa, was there recti|fied in his iudgment by S. Augustin.
A. D. 420.4. In Brittany there were at this time seve|rall Bishops full of piety and learning, who oppos'd themselves against this Heresy. Among whom the most celebrated was Fa|stidius Priscus Archbishop of London, highly commended by Gennadius and Trithemius as a man skillfull in Holy Scripture and a Zealous Preacher of Divine Truth: moreover illustrious in holy conversation and famous for his sharpnes of iudgment and elocution. Bale adds, that he left behind him a Book entitled Pious Admo|nitions, which probably contain'd an Anti|dot against the contagion of that Heresy. It is uncertain what year he dyed, and conse|quently when it was that Voadinus succee|ded him in that Bishoprick.


XXVIII. CHAP.A. D. 421.
XXVIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Brittains begg help of the Romans: a Legion is sent: and call'd back, c. And the Romans take their last leave of Brittany.

1. WHilst Brittany was thus infested with suggestions of Hereticks,Florileg. A. D. 420. the Scotts, Picts and Norvegians, saith Florilegus, misera|bly vex'd it with their incursions. In which necessity,Gildas in Excid. as Gildas writes, the Brittains sent messengers to Rome with humble and earnest Petitions for assistance, vowing their eternall subjection to the Roman Empire, in case their cruell enemies might be repell'd.
2. In complyance with which request, saith the same Authour, a Legion was sent into the Island, sufficiently furnish'd with arms,  which had not been partaker of the former defeat given to the Romans. This army coming to a conflict with those barbarous Nations,A. D. 421. slew great multi|tudes of them, and drove all the rest out of the borders, so freeing the poore Brittains from horri|ble vexations and imminent slavery.
3. Who the Roman Generall was under whose conduct this Victory was obtained, is not mention'd in story Probable it is that it was Chrysanthus the Son of Marcianus, who afterward was chosen Bishop of Constantino|ple: For concerning him Socrates thus writes:Socrat. l. 7. c. 12. In the raign of the Great Theodosius this Chry|santhus was by him design'd Prefect of Italy. Afterward he was constituted the Emperours Vice-gerent in Brittany: in the administration whereof he attained great commendation.
4. Who ever was the Generall, he toge|ther with his Legion was presently sent for back.Gillas in Excid. But before their departure, saith Gildas, they gave order to the Brittains once more to raise a wall between the two Seas (Glotta and Bodotria) to restrain the Enemies and be a defence to the Brittains. But this wall being made by a rude multitude destitute of a Governour, and framed for the most part of turfes, availed little or nothing at all. The bounds of this wall S. Beda thus describes:Bed. l. i. c. 2. It began toward the West about two miles distance from a Mona|stery call'd Aebercurnig; in a place nam'd in the Picts language Penvahel, but in English Pen|veltun: and going Eastward it ended neer the Citty Acluith. Now from the Name in the Pictish tongue Penvahel, a Brittish word, M. Camden iudiciously infers that the Picts were a Brittish Northern Nation, for in Welsh at this day Pengual signifies the Head of a Rampire (caput valli.)
5. So useles was this ill-built wall, that it was scarce finished, but the Scotts and Picts again broke in, for according to Gildas his relation,Gild. in Ex|bid. Assoon as the Legion

with great triumph and joy was gone homeward, those former Enemies, like ravennous wolves (Ambrones lupi) enraged with excessive hun|ger, on all sides encompassing the sheepfold in the absence of the shepheard, so they with ares and full-blown sayles invaded the Island, broke into the borders, and layd wast all things in their way, mowing down and treading underfoot the Brit|tains, like ripe corn.
Id. ib.6. Hereupon the afflicted Brittains again sent Messengers after a most deplorable manner, with rent garments and their heads covered with dust, to implore aide from the Romans, endeavouring like fearfull chickens to shrow'd themselves under their Mothers wings. They earnestly begg'd them to prevent the utter miserable ruin of their countrey, and that the Roman name might not be rendred contemptible to forraign Nations.
7. This wofull Petition was address'd to the famous Roman Generall Aetius Prefect of Gaule, under whom Brittany was also sub|iect. He therefore mov'd to pitty with so tra|gicall a relation, sent forces under the con|duct of Gallio a Cittizen of Ravenna, who once more vanquish'd the Enemies. But ha|ving done this he declar'd to them the Em|perours pleasure,That for the future Brittany must rely on its own strength, and not expect any assistance at all from Rome,Id. ib. which at so great a distance, and amid'st so many distractions could not attend to so remote a Province. He advis'd them therfore to exercise themselves in milita|ry affairs, to build fortifications in places convenient, especially towards the Sea, to strengthen their Citties with walls, c. And having thus counselled and encou|raged the Brittains, the Romans took their last leave of them: never returning more. Yet before they went, they once more joyn'd with the Brittains to repair the Wall, which they made far more strong then for|merly, contributing thereto both publick and private charges.






THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER BRITTISH KINGS II. PART.

THE NINTH BOOK.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. Kingdoms of the Picts and Scotts established in Brittany.

A. D. 421.1. _THE Romans having taken their farewell of this Island, it is from that Epocha that we may reckon the institution of two Kingdoms here, the Picts and the Scotts. For though heretofore there hath been mention made of severall Princes and Kings of each Nation, yet they seem to have been Kings rather by election, and in the nature of Generall's for present expeditions, then as enjoying an establish'd Principality.
2. For as much as concerns the Picts, though they always had their habitation in the Northern parts of Brittany, yet they were oft forced to change and contract their Seats: But now enjoying peace and secu|rity by the Romans absence, they became establish'd in their ancient Territory. Which Territory they in a few years enlarged ma|king an irruption through the Wall of sepa|ration, and possessing themselves of the Pro|vince more Southerly.
3. And as for the Scotts, they being hi|therto as auxiliaries of the Picts, mingled among them in all their invasions, and ot compell'd by the Romans to return to their habitation in Ireland and other Northern Regions: Yet now they fix'd their habitation in the Northern coasts of Brittany, under Fer|gusius their King.
4. Of these two Nations and Kingdoms, the principall in this age was that o the Picts: And if we enquire into their peculiar Seats, the Picts seem to have possess'd the Provinces about Edinborough confining to the Wall, which therefore was anciently call'd

the Picts-wall:A. D. 423. And the Scots inhabited the Northern and Western Provinces lying nea|rest to Ireland, from whence they came. But in the following age they turn'd their arms against the Picts, whose numbers and power they by degrees diminished, and at last utterly destroy'd their kingdom and name, and gave to the whole countrey the new appellation of Scotland.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1. Death of Honorius: to whom succeeds Va|lentinian the third.
2 c. A three fold Mission by Pope Ce|lestin into Brittany and Ireland.
6 7 S. Patricks Divine vocation.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred twenty three the Emperour Honorius dyed, in whose place succeeded Valentinian the third of that name, Son of Constantius, who had been created Caesar, and immediatly before his death Augustus. In the Eastern Em|pire there raign'd the younger Theodosius.
2. The same year dyed also Pope Bonifa|cius, and after him was chosen Pope Celesti|nus, to whom our Islands of Brittany and Ireland have an eternall obligation: for by him they were either preserved from errour, or converted to the Christian Faith. By him S. Palladins was sent to the Scotts, who freed them from their barbarous Idolatry. By him S. Patrick was directed an Apostolick Teacher into Ireland, where he wrought the like ef|fect with greater fruit And by him S. Germa+nus and S. Lupus, two holy and learned Bishops of Gaule, were employ'd to cure Brittany of the pestilent infection of Pelagianism, spread there by the impious diligence of Agricola; in which execrable employment he was as|sisted by the oft times excommunicated He|retick Celestius, prime Disciple of Pelagius, if the testimony of one single modern Au|thour, Claudius Menardus, may be taken.
3. Now the circumstances touching the execution of this three-fold Mission we in|tend consequently to declare. And though the Ecclesiasticall affairs of Ireland be not com|prehended directly within our present De|sign, yet since the great Apostle of that Coun|trey, as hath been shew'd, was a Brittain, both beginning and ending his dayes in Brittany, it will either be no excursion, or one very excusable, if not commendable, to insert here some of his principall Gests.
4. He did not begin the execution of his Apostolicall Office till after the time that S. Germanus and Lupus came into Brittany to ex|pugne the Pelagian Heresy: For by them he was encouraged therto. Till which time, he convers'd here in Brittany,A. D. 249. by his holy exam|ple inviting his countrey-men to the imi|tation of his vertues and piety.
5. The ancient Authour of his life extant in Capgrave,Ap. Cap. gr in S. Patric. A. D. 425. relates many admirable deeds perform'd by him, before he had addicted himself to the discipline and instruction of S. Germanus. One of which we will recite in this place, and probably hapning about this time: by which will be discover'd how wonderfully he was call'd to the Apostle|ship of Ireland.
6. On a certain day S. Patrick in his sleep saw a man coming to him as out of Ireland, having many letters in his hand, one of which he gave to the holy man, who read it. Now this was the be|ginning of the Letter: This is the voyce of the Inha|bitants of Ireland. Assoon as he had read those words, the same insta~t he heard the voyces of a world of infants crying to him out of their Mothers wombs in many Provinces of Ireland, and saying,We beseech thee, Holy Father, to come and con|verse among us. Having heard this, S. Patrick immediatly felt great compunction in his heart, and could read no more of the Letter.
And assoon as he awak'd, he gave thanks to God for this heavenly Vision, being assured that our Lord had call'd him to be an instrument of the salvation of those who had cryed unto him.
7. Hereto Iocelinus another Writer of his life adds,Iocelin. in vit. S. Patricij. That S Patrick hereupon ask'd counsell of our Lord the Angell of the great councell, tou|ching this affaire, and by the mean of the Angell Victor receiv'd this Divine Oracle, That forsa|king his parents and countrey he should passe over into Gaule, there to be more perfectly in|structed in the Doctrin of Christian Faith and Ec|clesiasticall Discipline.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1.2.3 c. Of S. Palladius Apostle of the Scotts in Brittany.
8.9. His Disciples Servanus and Terva|nus.
10. c. Of S. Palladius his death.

1. OF the foresaid three Missions the first that was put in execution was that of S. Palladius into Brittany.A, D. 429. This S. Palla|dius was a Deacon of the Roman Church, a man no doubt of great prudence, learning and sanctity, since he alone was made choice of, though as yet in an inferiour Ecclesiasticall degree, to free the whole Island of Brittany from Heresy and Infidelity. Twice was he sent as Legat of Pope Celestinus into our countrey. Concerning the first Legation thus writes Baronius, In the four hundred twenty ninth year of our Lord,Baron. hic. saith he, during the Consulship of Florentius and Dionysius, Pope Celestin by a Legation of the Deacon Palladius deliver'd Brit|tany

infected with the Pelagian Heresy.A. D. 431.
2. Being come into Brittany, assoon as he had inform'd himself of the state of the Island, how the Civiller part formerly under the Roman Iurisdiction was defiled by Heresy, and the Northern Regions, now possess'd by the Scotts, wholly buried in the mists of Pa|ganism: He gave notice hereof to Pope Ce|lestinus, who recall'd him to Rome, to advise with him about a remedy against both these mischeifs.
A. D. 431.3. Vpon serious consultation therfore, it was thought fit to divide these two employ|ments, and to commit them to severall persons. Hereupon in opposition to the e|lagian Heresy by which the Roman Island, as S. Prosper calls it, that is, the Provinces heretofore subject to the Empire, were miserably infe|cted, two Holy Bishops of Gaule S. Germanus and S. Lupus, were directed into Brittany, whose labours, with the happy successe of them, shall be presently declared. Again out of an Apostolick solicitude to rescue the barbarous Northern Regions from Paga|nism, the same Palladius after he was exalted to an Episcopall Degree, was by Pope Celesti|nus, as his Legat again sent to be the Apostle and converter of the Scottish Nation.
4. This double Mission is thus recorded by S. Prosper,Prosp. advers. . in . a Holy and learned Father, li|ving at the same time: Pope Celestinus, saith he, of venerable memory, upon whom our Lord had confer'd many gifts of his Grace for the defence of the Catholick Church; knowing that to the Pelagians already condemn'd no new examina|tion was to be allow'd, but only the remedy of Pennance, commanded that Celestius, who im|pudently demanded a new audience, as if his He|resy had not been discuss'd, should be excluded out of the confines of Italy. For his resolution and judg|ment was that the Statuts of his Predecessours, and former Synodall Decrees ought to be inviola|bly observed by himself, and that he should not admit to a new retractation those doctrins which already had deserv'd and suffred condemnation.
5. Neither did he extend a lesse zealous care towards Brittany,Id. ib. which he likewise freed from the same contagious discease of Heresy: for by his order (and the labours of S. Germanus and S. Lupus) he excluded from that secret retirement, divided by the Ocean from the rest of the world, certain Enemies of Divine Grace, which had seised upon that Island, which by producing the Arch-hereticks Pelagius and Celestius, had given an originall to their Heresy. Moreover the same Holy Pope ordain'd (Palladius) a Bishop to the Scottish Pagan Nation: and by these means whilst he studiously endeavour'd to preserve the Roman Island Catholick, he made the barbarous part of the Island, Christian.
6. Now here the Ancient and Later Scotts, that is, the Irish and the people now only call'd Scotts, doe earnestly contend which should appropriat to themselves S. Palladius for their Apostle, with exclusion of the other. But the controversy may be com|pounded by allowing each of them a share in him. For no doubt his Legation extended to the Scottish Nation in generall, both in Brittany and beyond the Sea. And during the short time that he lived he attempted the conversion of Ireland, but in vain. So that he was effectually the Apostle only of the Brittish Scotts.
7. Hereof we have a proof in the life of S. Patrick written by the ancient Authour Pro|bus:Probus in vit. S. Patric. Palladius, saith he, being ordain'd Bishop by Pope Celestinus, was directed to the conversion of this Northern Island of Ireland. But Almigh|ty God did not give Successe to his preaching: Neither can any man receive any thing on earth, unles it be given him from heaven. For the sa|vage and brutish inhabitants of this countrey would by no means receive his doctrin. Therfore he would not spend much time in a land not his own: but returned to him that sent him. And having pass'd the sea, he arriv'd at the confines of the Picts, where he remain'd till his death.
8. Moreover that the principall care of S. Palladius was exercis'd toward the Brittish Scotts appears in this, that his two Disciples Servanus and Tervanus are reckon'd among the learned Teachers of Brittany. Of which the former was sent to instruct the inhabi|tants of the Orcades, and the other to the Picts. Concerning Servanus the Centuriators of Magdeburg write in this manner: When Palladius was sent into Scotland,Magdebur. cent. 5. c. 10. f. 1430. Servanus ad|joyn'd himself to him, and together with him promoted the Gospell and propagated the Doctrin of it. He was afterward sent by the same Palla|dius, after experience had of his learning and Sanctity, to be an Apostle of the Isles of Orkney, and to teach the inhabitants there true Reli|gious Christian worship This he perform'd with great diligence and zeale: and thereby obtain'd the Title of the First Apostle of those Islands. Dempster indeed, a Scottish Writer, attribut that Title to another call'd Serfus, who, sayes he, preach'd there before S. Servanus and was Bishop of those Isles chosen from among the Culdees, or Colidei. But most pro|bable it is that Serus and Servanus were one and the same person.
9. And touching Tervanus likewise the other Disciple of S. Palladius,slaeus de reb. gest. Sco|tor. l. 4. another Scot|tish Historiographer thus writes, Palladius ha|ving promoted Servanus to the degree of Bishop sent him to the Orcades, to imbue that rude and barbarous Nation with the Faith of Christ. He likewise created Tervanus Arch-Bishop of the Picts. In which places these two holy men perform'd the Office of their Mission so diligently, by advancing piety and religion among them, as likewise by rooting out the poyson of the Pelagian heresy out of the minds of many, that the one worthily deserv'd to be call'd the Apostle of the Orcades,Magdebur. Cent. 5. c. 10. and the other of the Picts. The fore|mention'd Centuriators adde, That Terva|nus was sent to the Picts to water our Lords vine|yard planted among them by S. Ninianus: So that he seems to have been Ninianus his Suc|cessour.

A. D. 429.And indeed this agrees exactly to the account formerly given touching the Gests and death of S. Ninianus Bishop of Wite-hern (or Candida casa) for in the year following this that Blessed Saint dyed.
10. Little more is found recorded in an|cient Ecclesiasticall Monuments touching the Gests of S. Palladius. And no wonder, his life not continuing much more then a year after he was made Bishop,Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 13. as S. Beda declares, who saith that he dyed in the eighth year of the younger Theodosius. Which eighth year is to be reckoned from the death of his Vn|cle the Emperour Honorius, and not of his Father Arcadius: For at that time Theodosius was but eight years old, and under the tui|tion of Isdegerdes King of Persia. This if Car|dinall Baronius had considered, he would not have thought fit to correct S. Beda's Chrono|logy.
11. Certain modern Writers by mistake conceiving this Palladius to have been an Asiatick, doe impute to him the implanting of the Eastern rites in the celebration of Ea|ster among the Brittains. And Trithemius likewise erroneously confounds him with Palladius familiar freind of Iohn of Ierusalem, who was Bishop of Helenopolis, infected with the Errours of Origen, and a great defender of Pelagius. Whereas this Palladius was a Ro|man Deacon, who in the time of Pope Zosi|mus wrote the life of S. Iohn Chrysostom, and was a zealous opposer of Pelagius and Cele|stius, against whom he composed a Book.Martyrolog. Angli. 27 Ianuar. His memory is celebrated in our English Marty|rologe on the twenty seaventh of Ianuary.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Mission o S. Germanus and S. Lupus into Brittany.
4. c. Gests of S. Germanus before his Mis|sion.
8. c. And of S. Lupus.
10. c. Their voyage into Brittany, and Miracles.

1. PResently after Saint Palladius his first voyage into Brittany, upon his infor|mation sent to Pope Celestinus, were deputed the two holy Bishops S. Germanus and S. Lupus to defend the Catholick Faith against the Enemies of Grace who had perverted many in this Island.Bd. hist. l. 1. cap. 7. The occasion of whose jour|ney hither is thus described by S. Beda: The Brittains, saith he, being neither willing to re|ceive the perverse Doctrins of those who blas|phem'd the Grace of Christ, nor also being able by disputes to refute their subtilties who endea|voured to introduce that impious perswasion; agreed at last upon a discreet and happy advice, which was to demand assistance in this spirituall warr from the Gallican Bishops. Whereupon a Great Synod was assembled (not in Brittany, as Camden and Spelman suppose, but in Gaule, as appears by the relation of Con|stantius the Ancient Authour of S. Germa|nus his life:) In which Synod a serious consul|tation was had who should be sent thither to de|fend the Catholick Faith. And at last by a ge|nerall and unanimous consent, S. Germanus Bi|shop of Auxere (Altisiodorensis) and S. Lupus Bishop of Troyes (Tricassinae civitatis) were made choice of to goe into Brittany to confirm the Faith of Celestiall Grace.
2. Now though in this Narration of S. Beda no mention be made of Pope Celestins interposing in the busines, yet S. Prosper in the passage cited in the foregoing Chapter shews that the whole busines was managed by his orders: and more expressly in his Chronicon he saith, Pope Celestin sent Germa|nus Bishop of Auxerre, in his place and with his authority (Vice su) to drive the Pelagian Hereticks out of Brittany, and to establish the inhabitants of that Island in the Catholick Faith.
3. Before we attend these two Holy Bishops in their journey to Brittany, the relation and obligations we have to them require a par|ticular information concerning their per|sons, qualities  former education Besides this, we shall be able to judge of the Reli|gion and state of the Brittish Churches in those times by observing their actions and beha|viour, who are now become the Teachers and Reformers of our Countrey. So that any indifferent Reader will be able to perceive whether that Religion which S. Augustin the Monk taught the Saxons about a hun|dred and seaventy years after, was changed from that which these holy Bishops profess'd, as some Modern Protestants pretend it was.
4. First then touching S. Germanus, he was born at Auxerre in Gaule,Vid. ipel. 31. ulj. descended from illustrious parents. From his infancy he was brought up in literature, wherin by reason of his naturall capacity he so advanced himself, that he became a great ornament to his countrey. And to the end that nothing might be wanting to render him consummate in learning, after severall years frequenting the Gallican Schooles where he was taught the liberall Sciences, he went to Rome, and there he enrich'd his mind with a perfect knowledge of the Imperiall Laws. At his return he was made Governour of the Citty and Territory of Auxerre, the place of his Nativity.
5. But not to dilate upon the occurrents of his Life during his secular state, we will, from the Relation of Constantius a pious and learned Preist of the same age who wrote his life, declare by how strange a Providence he was assum'd into the Ecclesiasticall Profession and promoted to the sublime degree of a Bishop.
6 Whil'st he was Governour of Auxerre, the Bishop of that Citty was a holy man call'd

Amator. This good Bishop being in the Church, and whil'st he was preparing himself to perform his Office,Id. Ibid. perceiving among others Germanus Prefect of the Citty entring with a body and mind compos'd to modesty and piety, he com|manded immediatly that the dores should be safe lock'd. And then being accompanied with many persons of the Clergy and Nobility, he laid hold on Germanus, and devoutly calling on the name of our Lord, he cut off his haire, and de|vesting him of his secular ornaments, he very respectfully cloathed him with a Religious habit: Which having done he said thus to him, Now, most dear Brother, it is our duty to be diligent in preserving this honour committed to thee without stain: For assoon as I am dead, Almighty God committs to thee the Pastorall charge of this Citty.
7. Amator shortly after died, in whose place Germanus succeeded, about the year of Grace four hundred and eighteen, as Bishop Vsher reckons.Id. ibid. And being Bishop, the auste|rity of his life is thus describ'd by the same Authour: From the first day in which he under|took the Episcopall Office to the end of his life, he never used Wine, vinegar, oyle nor so much as salt to give a savoury tast to his meat. At his Refections he first took ashes into his mouth, and after that barley bread: and this so slender and ungratfull diet he never us'd till toward sun-set. Some-times he would passe half a week, yea sea|ven whole days without any satisfaction given to his craving stomack. His bed was hard boards coverd over with ashes: and to prevent any profoun'd sleep, he would admit no pillow under his head. Why doe I speak of sleep? When as he spent whole nights in continuall sighing, and incessantly waterd his hard couch with his tears. He was a zealous observer of hospitality, and whensoever any poor or strangers came to him, he would prepare for them a plentifull feast, whilst himself fasted. Yea with his own hands he would wash their feet, kissing them and some|times bedewing them with showrs of teares. Withall to the end he might cleanse himself from the stains which by familiar conversation with men could not be avoyded, he built a Monastery, into which he oft retir'd himself, feeding and re|freshing his mind there with the wonderfull sweetnes of celestiall contemplation. Thus qua|lified was S. Germanus before he exercis'd his Apostolicall Office in Brittany, impos'd on him by Pope Celestinus.
Haras in Lup. 19. Iulij.8. Next as touching his companion S. Lu|pus: he was born at Toul a Citty of the Leuci, of a Noble family: his Fathers name was Epiro|chius. After whose death, he was sent to schoole, and there imbued in the study of Rhetorick. He was maried to Pimeniola Sister to S. Hilarius Bi|shop of Arles, a Lady from her youth inflam'd with a love of Chastity. And hence it came to passe, that after seaven years spent in mariage, by divine inspiration both of them mutually ex|horted one another to a state of Conversion. And Lupus himself by a strong impulse from heaven was moved to visit the Blessed S. Honoratus first Abbot of the famous Monastery of Lerins. To whom being come, he humbly submitted himself to his Discipline, with meek shoulders under|going the yoak of our Lords service, and morti|fying himself with continuall watchings and fa|stings. After he had spent a year there, in a great fervour of faith he return'd to the Citty of Mascon, with an intention to sell his possessions there and distribute the money to the poor. When Loe on a sudden he was unexpectedly snatch'd away, and compell'd to undertake the admini|stration of the Bishoprick of Troyes. His admira|ble sanctity is celebrated by the writers of those times: and particularly Sidonius Apol|linaris in an Epistle written to him after he had been forty five years Bishop,Sidon Apol|lin. l. . Epi. 1. stiles him Father of Fathers, Bishop of Bishops, and a se|cond Iacob of his age.
9. Such were the Apostolick Reformers of the ancient Brittish Churches: their humility and austerity of Life had a proper and speci|ficall vertue to oppose the Pride and sensua|lity of Pelagian Hereticks. Such Missioners as these were indeed worthy Delegats of the Apostolick See: whose particular Gests before they came to Sea, we leave to French Eccle|siasticall Annalists: as how S. Germanus con|secrated with a Religious Veyle the holy Vir|gin S. Genoveufe: how he bestowd on her as a memoriall, a certain coyn casually found, imprinted with the sign of the Crosse. But the accidents befalling them at Sea must not be omitted, which are thus related by the fore|nam'd Constantius.
10. These two holy men, saith he, under the conduct and direction of our Lord took shipping, and were by him safely protected and tryed in and by many dangers. At first the Ship was ca|ried with favourable winds from the Gallick shore, till they came into the midst of the Sea, where no land could be discover'd. But presently after this the fury of a whole Legion of Devills, envying their voyage design'd for the salvation of a world of soules, assail'd them. These oppose dan|gers, raise stormes, darken the heavens, and make darknes more horrible by adding therto fearfull swellings of the sea and ragings of the aire. The sailes are no longer able to sustain the fury of winds, nor the boat to resist mountains of waves dashing against it. So that the ship was  forward rather by the prayers then skill or force of the mariners: And it so fell out that the prime Pilot, the Holy Bishop Germanus was then secure|ly compos'd in sleep. That advantage the tem|pest took to encrease in horrour, since he who only could resist it was in a sort absent: So that the ship overset with waves was ready to sink. Then at last S. Lupus and all the rest in great trouble and feare awak'd the old man, who only was able to withstand the fury of the elements. He not at all astonish'd at the danger, addresses his prayers to our Lord, and his threats to those of the Ocean, and to the raging storms he oppo|ses the cause of Religion which invited them to that voyage. And presently after taking a small quantity of oyle which he blessed in the Name of

the holy Trinity, and Sprinkling it on the raging waves, immediatly quelled their fury. Then he admonished his Collegue, and encourag'd all the rest: So with one breath and clamour prayers were powr'd forth to our Lord. Immediatly the Divine vertue shewd it self present, the infernall Enemies were dissipated, a calm tranquillity ensued, the winds are turn'd and become favou|rable to their voyage, the waves serviceably drive on the ship, so that in a short time having dispatch'd a vast space they safely arriv'd in a quiet and secure haven.
11. This Oyle made use of by S. Germanus, was not that Sacramentall oyle consecrated for the spirituall comfort of the Sick: but or|dinary Oyle which we frequently read to have been used by holy men upon the like occasions, and by their benediction of it to have produc'd the like effects, in severall exigences. Of the former fort of Sacramen|tall Oyle S. Iames in his Epistle speaks: and of this latter, S. Mark in the sixth Chapter of his Gospell,Baron. ad. A. D. 425. Sozom. lib. 6. c. 2. ibid. c. 29 saith Baronius. Severall examples of the like may be read in Sozomen, as where S. Anthony by annointing a lame man with oyle cur'd him: and another holy Monk call'd Benjamin by the like means cured severall diseases. And Ruffinus testifies that in his presence and sight severall miracles were after the same manner wrought by religious Hermits.


V. CHA.V. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Germanus his Disputation against the Pelagians, and Miracle.
10. c. A victory over the Scotts, by his Prayers.

1. THese two Holy men (saith the same Constantius) being landed, a great mulitude from severall quarters met to receive them,Constan. l. 1. c. 19. of whose coming they had been informed by the predictions of wicked Spirits which were sore affrighted thereat. For these being by the power of Preists cast out of those whom they had possess'd, did openly declare the furiousnes of the tempest, and the dangers which themselves had oppos'd to their voyage, and how by the command and sanctity of those holy men they had been vanquish'd. Afterwards these venerable Bishops with their fame, preaching and miracles fill'd the whole Island of Brittany, the greatest of all others. And being ouerpress'd with the mul|titudes of those who resorted to them, they preached Gods word not only in Churches, but in lanes and high wayes: whereby Catholicks were confirmed in their faith, and those who had been deprav'd were reduced to the Church. They were receiv'd as if they had been indeed Apostles, considering the authority which their holines gave them, the eminency of their learning and the wonderfull miracles wrought by them.A. D. 431. Divine Truth therefore being declared by persons so qualified, generally the whole Island submitted to their doctrin. The authours of the contrary perverse persuasion lurked in dark holes, being, as the wicked Spirits also were, vexed to see the people freed from their snares. But at last, after long study and meditation they presum'd to enter into dispute with these Apostolick men.
2. The place made choice of, as most proper,H. Boet. hist. Stor. l. . for this disputation, was (not London, as Hector Boethius imagins, but) Verolam, then a famous Citty neer S. Albans, where the Body of the glorious Martyr Saint Alban repos'd. Now what pass'd in that solemne conflict is thus related by Constan|tius.
3. The Pelagians came pompously attended by their flattering disciples, in glittring and costly raiment:Constant. bi. Supr. and they rather chose to run the ha|zard of a conflict, then by their silence to con|fesse they had an ill cause. Infinite numbers of people were assembled there, with their wives and children. The disputants stood on each side, very unlike in their condition. For on one side was placed divine authority; on the other, human presumption: Here was Orthodox Faith; there perfidious Errour: Here Christ was ac|knowledg'd the authour: there, Pelagius. At the first entrance the Holy Bishops gave free scope of disputing to the Pelagians, who vainly spent the time and tired the auditory with empty, verball discourses. But after them the Venerable Bishops poured forth the torrents of their elo|quence accompanied with Evangelicall and Apostolicall thunder. They mingled with their own discourses, texts of divine Scripture, and their assertions were attended with testimonies of Gods word. Thus vanity was convinc'd, and perfidiousnes confuted: insomuch as the Pela|gians by their inhability to reply confessing their own guilt, the people standing by as iudges, could scarce contain their hands frrom violence to them, and with clamours acknowledged the Victory.
4. Immediatly after this a certain person of authority, being a Tribune of the army, coming with his wife into the midst of the Assembly, leading in his hand his young daughter about ten years old, which was blind: Her he presented to the oly Bishops, desiring their help for her cure. But they bid him first to offer her to the Adver|saries. Who being deterr'd by an ill conscience, joyn'd their entreaties with her parents prayers to the Venerable Prelats: Whereupon perceiving the expectation of the people, and their adversa|ries conviction, they address'd themselves to God by a short prayer. And then S. Germanus full of the Holy Ghost invok'd the Blessed Trinity, and taking from his neck a little boxe full of Holy Relicks, in the sight of the whole multi|tude he applied it to the eyes of the young maid, which immediatly loosing their former darknes were filld with a new light from heaven. At this so apparent miracle the parents exult, and the people tremble. And after this day all mens minds were so clearly purged from their

former impious heresy that with thirsting desires they receiv'd the doctrin of these Holy Bishops.
5. The truth of this narration is ac|knowledg'd by severall Protestant Writers, as Archbishop Parker, S. Henry Spellman and others:Antiquit. Brittan. f. 7. 46. Spelman. A. D. 446. who highly exalt the learning, Sanctity and Orthodox Faith of these two Apostolick Bishops: but withall they purpose|ly conceale the miracle and manner how it was performed: fearing to commend that in S. Germanus which they resolve to repre|hend in the Holy Monk S. Augustin, calling his devotion to Gods Saints, superstitions, and his bringing into Brittany holy Relicks, tri|viall fopperies, affirming him to have been a Teacher rather of superstition then Faith. But let us proceed in the Narration of Constantius.
. vii upr.6. Perverse Heresy being thus repress'd (saith he) and the Authours of it confuted, so that all mens minds were illustrated with the purity of Faith, the holy Bishops repair'd to the Sepulcher of the glorious Martyr Saint Alban, with an inten|tion to give thanks to Almighty God by his inter|cession. There S. German having with him Relicks of all the Apostles and diverse Martyrs, after Pra|yer made he commanded the Sacred Sepulcher to be opened, because he would there lay up these precious Gifts: For he thought it convenient that the same Repository should contain the members of many Saints out of diverse regions, whom Hea|ven had receiv'd and crownd for the equality of their merits. Having then with great reverence depos'd  joynd together so many Sacred Relicks, he digg'd up from the place where the Blessed Martyr S. Alban had shed his blood, a masse of dry earth, which he meant to take along with him, in which were yet extant marks of the Martyrs death,  palenes of his Persecutour. These things being thus perform'd, an innumerable multitude was that day converted to our Lord.
7. What became of this Boxe with the new Relicks of S. Albanus in it, after S. Germanus his death, the same Authour will acquaint us, saying, The holy Bishop being dead,Id. ibid. his inheritance was afterward divided: The Emperour first took his portion, and after him next the Bishops. The like contention followd about dividing his poverty, which usually befalls after the death of rich men when every one strives to get some thing, and all cannot be satis|fied. The Empresse (Galla Placidia Mother of Valentinian) being heyre only of his Benediction, had for her share his little Boxe of Sacred Relicks.
8. The occurrents hapning after this dis|putation and miracle are thus further des|cribed by the same Writer, At their return from this meeting the treacherous Enemy of man|kind preparing snares for the Holy Bishop,Id. ibid. by a casuall fall S. Germanus putt his foot out of joynt. This affliction the Devill procur'd, being igno|rant that after the example of Blessed Iob, his merits would be advanced by his suffrings. Now during the time that by this infirmity he was constraind to abide in a certain lodging, it hapned that a fire took in some houses not far off, which being covered with straw and sedges were quickly devour'd by it, so that the fire driven forward by wind quickly approach'd to his lodging. Whereupon a great concourse of people came to the Venerable Bishop in a great fright, intending to take him in their armes, and cary him out of danger. But he reprehended them, and utterly refused to remove, having a firm Faith that no harm should hap|pen to him. The multitude then despairing of his safety, endeavour'd all they could to stopp the pro|gres of the flames. But Almighty God the more to shew his Power and his servants Faith, so ordai|ned that whatsoever the people endeavoured to preserve, was consum'd: and that place only where the sick person lay, was preserved. For the flames, as if afraid to touch the Holy Bishops lodging flew quite over it, though they raged violently on both sides of it: So that among the rolling flames the house wherin he lay was only untouch'd. The mul|titude seing this miracle exulted, rejoycing that their labours and endeavours had been conque|red by divine power.
9 Whilst he lay there, a numberlesse multitude continually attended and watch'd at the dore of this holy poor man: some seeking health for their soules, and some for their bodies. The won|derfull vertues and miracles which our Lord wrougth by his servant, can scarce be related, they were so many. He being infirm himself gave strenght and health to others; Neither would he permit any one to apply any remedy to his infir|mity. But on a certain night he saw standing be|fore him a certain person in white garments, who stretching forth his hand seemd to raise him up from his couch, commanding him to stand firm|ly. After which, all his pain pass'd away, and his strength was so restor'd, that the day following he confidently undertook to pursue his journey.
10. After this followd a generall benefitt to the whole Brittish Nation procur'd by this holy Bishops merits and prayer:Id. ibid. which the same Authour thus relates. In the mean time the Saxons and the Picts with joynt forces made warr upon the Brittains, who therefore were drawn together into a body. But being distrustfull of their ability to resist such powerfull enemies, they humbly implor'd the assistance of these Holy Bishops, which they chearfully promis'd, and hast|ning their journey to the Brittish camp, they so encreased the courage and resolution of the Brit|tains, as if a new Army had been joyn'd to them. Thus our Lord himself by the ministery of these his Captains seemd to be General of the Army. Then was the holy time of Lent, which the presence of these Venerable Bishops caused to be obser|ved with greater devotion: Insomuch as by their dayly preaching great multitudes flockd to re|ceive Baptisme: for the greatest part of the army desired to be partaker of that blessed Sacrament. Hereupon a Church was prepared against the so|lemnity of Easter, and though the place was open feilds, yet it was ordered as if it had been in a Citty. Thus the Army went in Procession, moist|ned with the water of Baptism, and being infla|med with the fervour of holy Faith they con|temned the guard of outward weapons, ex|pecting more sure protection from heaven.

This order and posture of the Brittish army was come to the Enemies knowledge, who not doub|ting a Victory against unarm'd people, with great chearfullnes hastned to sett upon them. The Brittains in the mean time were acquainted with their march: and assoon as the Solemne Feast of our Lords Resurrection was past, the greater part of the Army being newly baptis'd, took to their arms and prepar'd themselves for a battell: S. Germanus himself being their Gene|rall. He maks choice of a band of light arm'd soldiers, and takes a view of the countrey round about: and observing a valley compass'd with mountains lying directly in the Enemies way, he there places a new army, of a part of which him|self would be Captain. Now the feirce Enemies approach'd, and were discover'd by such as had been placed in ambush. Then on a sudden S. Ger|manus their Leader gave order to all his soldiers that with loud clamours they should repeat the words pronounc'd by him: and immediatly while the Enemies thought to fall on, presuming that they had not been discovered, the Holy Bishops three times cryed out aloud ALLELVIAH, whereupon the whole Army with one voice thundred out likewise ALLELVIAH, which noyse was terribly multiplied, and encreas'd by the Eccho's from the mountains round about.
11. The sound alone of this sacred word suffised to terrify the Enemies Army, which fell a trem|bling, as if not the rocks only, but heaven it self had falln on their heads: insomuch as they all betook themselves to a general flight, vex'd that their leggs could not cary them away fast enough. They run all wayes, every where they cast away their arms, glad to escape with their naked bo|dies. Great numbers of them in their headlong flight were swallow'd up by a river through which a little before they had march'd with con|fidence and leasure enough. All this while the Brittish Army without striking a stroke was spectatour of the vengeance which Heaven tooke on their Enemies. Afterward they gather the spoyles and prey expos'd to them, with great de|votion acknowledging the Victory due only to God. The Holy Bishops then triumph indeed to see the Enemies defeated without blood-shed: they triumph for a Victory gaind not by arms, but Faith alone. And thus having every wayes set|led this rich Island in security both from their spirituall and carnall Enemies, after so glorious a Victory over the Pelagians and Saxons, they pre|pared themselves for their return, to the great greif of the whole Nation.
12. This wonderfull Victory is beleiv'd to have been obtain'd neer a town call'd Mold in Flintshire: for there is a large feild which still retaines the name of S. Germanus, being call'd in the Brittish language Maes-garmn. There also runs the River Alen, in which probably the Picts and Saxons were many of them drown'd. And besides this, the place being situated neer the Sea, lay fittly for the abord of the Enemies Navy and armies. This Victory likewise seems to be celebrated by S. Gregory the Great, who expounding those words of Iob,A. D. 430. (Cardines quoque mari operiet.) He covereth the bottom,Gregor. M. l. 27. Moral. c. 6. or roots of the Sea; makes mention of Alleluiah sung by the Brittains, and the great vertue thereby obtain'd over the Ocean and all their Enemies. S. Beda in|deed applies this passage to the times of S. Augustin and conversion of the Saxons: Whereas that Book was written before Saint Augustins arrivall in Brittany: and there|fore more properly belongs to the present story.
13. The great blessings confer'd by these Venerable Bishops on our Island were in some degree recompenc'd by the prospe|rous voyage which at their return they ac|knowledg'd from the intercession of the Tutelary Saint of Brittany, the glorious Martyr S. Albanus: For so writes the fore mentio|ned Authour Constantius,Constan.  supr. saying, Their own merits and the intercession of the Martyr S. Al|banus obtain'd for them a calm voyage by Sea, so that their prosperous ship rendred them safe to the desires of their freinds at home: From whom they had been absent little more then the space of a year, during which short time so many wonderfull things were wrought by them, never to be forgotten, nor without great veneration mention'd by us. This was S. Germanus his first voyage into Brit|tany. Within six years he will be obliged to return once more, and make a longer aboad here.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Patrick a Disciple of S. Germa|nus: receives his Mission from P. Cele|stinus.
7.8. His companions in his Mission.
9.10. Irish Magicians give warning of his coming.
11. c. Of the Staff of Iesus.

1. DVring the time that S. Germanus re|main'd in Brittany,A. D. 429. S. Patrick being then sixty eight years old, inseparably ad|hered to him, from him he learnt many in|structions in Christian Doctrin  Disciplin,  receiv'd many examples of vertue and piety for his imitation. By him likewise he was encourag'd to undertake the Conversion of the Irish Nation: but withall admonish'd to expect from the Apostolick see of Rome a commission and authority to execute that Apostolicall Office.A. D. 430.
2. For which purpose he accompanied S. Germanus into Gaule, from whence the year following he went to Rome,Iocolin. c. 24. being de|sirous, saith Iocelinus, to have his actions and iourney into Ireland confirm'd by the autho|rity of Pope Celestinus. He had appointed by Saint

Germanus,A. D. 431. for his companion to Rome, to be a comfort in his travell and a witnes of his holy conversation a certain Preist named Sergecius, a devout servant of our Lord. When he was arriv'd at Rome he committed himself to the Prebends of the Roman Church to be more perfectly instru|cted in their instituts.
A. D. 431. Stanihurst. in vit. S. Patric.3. Afterwards he repair'd to the Holy Pope Celestinus, and humbly casting himself at his feet earnestly besought him to employ his care for the conversion of the Pagan Irish Nation. Which Petition of his being very acceptable to the Holy Pope, he a while after sent for him, and changing his name from Magonius to Patricius, as prophecying that he should be a spirituall Father of many soules, he promoted him to the Episcopall dignity, and so directed him to his voyage into Ireland. Thus writes Stanihurst in the Life of our Saint. Other Authours affirm that he was ordain'd Bishop by S. Amator, or by an Archbishop cal|led Mathew: But all generally agree that he receiv'd his Mission only from Pope Celestinus.
4. And hereof S. Patrick himself is a most authentick witnes, as may appear in an Epistle which he wrote of his Legation, which begins thus, In the name of our Lord Iesus Christ. I Patricius a poor humble servant of our Lord, in the four hundred and thirtieth year of his Incarnation was sent Legat by the most holy Pope Celestinus into Ireland, the inhabitants whereof by the Divine Grace I converted to the Faith of Christ, c.
5. This Epistle is extant in Capgrave, and also in the fifth Tome of the Great Biblio|theque of the Fathers:Biblioth. Pa|tron. . part. 3. f. 793. Where is added this Observation of the learned Gerardus Vossius, This Epistle of the Legation of S. Patricius we found some years since among the Manuscript Collections of Marianus Victorius of pious memory Bishop of Reate, who receiv'd it transcrib'd faith|fully out of a most ancient Copy of Glastenbury Abbey, at the time when he attended Cardinal Poole sent by the Pope Legat into England. So that the authority of it seems not fitt to be rejected. The whole tenour of this Epistle has been already produc'd in the fifth Chap|ter of the second Book of this History,Vid. supr l. 2. c. 5. upon occasion of treating concerning the first foundation of the Abbey of Glastenbury by S Ioseph of Arimathea and his disciples.
6. In the same Epistle S. Patrick also testi|fies that together with the Episcopall Degree S. Celestinus bestowd on him twelve years of Indulgence. His words are, I found in Writings of a later date that S. Phaganus and Diruvianus obtain'd from the Holy Pope Eleutherius who sent them, ten years of Indulgence. And I brother Patricius received of Pope Celestin of happy me|mory twelve years.Florileg. A. D. 491. Hence it is, that Florilegus saith, That S. Patrick took his iourney to Ireland, enrich'd with spirituall treasures.
Iocelin. c. 26.7. He was accompanied in his Legation, saith Iocelinus, with twenty persons eminent for their wisedom and holy conversation: Which were assi|gned to him for his assistance by Pope Celestinus. In his iourney he diverted to S. Germanus his instructour: from whose liberality he received chalices, Preistly vestments, and store of Books, together with many other things proper for Eccle|siasticall Ministery.
8. One of his principall companions was the same Sergetius, or Segetius, who by S. Ger|manus his order had attended him in his iourney to Rome, being a pious and vertuous Preist. There are mention'd in Ecclesiasticall monuments two, whose names were Auxi|lius and Isserninus (nam'd by some Servinus:) their names are found subscrib'd in a Synod assembled afterward by S. Patrick in Ireland. Others there were of inferiour Ec|clesiasticall Orders,Vsser in Pri|mord. f. 82. saith Bishop Vsher, who under S. Patrick ministred to our Lord.
9 Warning of S. Patricks coming into Ireland was given severall years before by the Magicians and Pagan Prophets there,Ap. Capgrav. in S. Patricio. as we read in his Life extant in Capgrave. For they said, A man will come hither with his wood, whose Table shall be placed on the Eastern side of his house, and some persons standing behind, together with others from the Table will sing, and the Congregation will answer them, saying, Amen. When this man comes he will destroy our Gods, subvert our Temples, destroy Princes which resist him, and his Doctrin shall remain and prevaile here for ever:
10. With such words as these,Probus in S. Patricio. saith Probus, the Magicians incens'd both the Prince and all the people to hate the Blessed Bishop S. Patricius. For two or three years they compos'd a certain Rhythme, which according to the obscure idiome of their rude language imported thus much. A head of art and skill, with his crook-headed staff will come: From that hower every house shall be bored through at the top. He will chant an abomination from his Table at the fore part of the house, and his whole family will answer, So be it, So be it. This in our tongue and sence means thus much, The Master of all wisedom will come with his sign of the Crosse, by which the hearts of all men will feele compunction: And from the Altar of the holy Mysteries he will convert soules unto Christ: and all the Christian people will answer, Amen. When these things come to passe, then our Pagan kingdom shall fall. And all this was afterwards really fullfilld.
11. Hereby appears that the peice of wood which those Magicians foretold should be brought by S. Patrick, is interpreted by Pro|bus to be a woodden Crosse: Whereas others affirm that by it is signified a certain won|derfull Staff which S Patrick before his iour|ney receiv'd from a Holy Hermite, and which was call'd, The staff of Iesus. The strange story how this Staff was first receiv'd, and what wonders it afterwards wrought, I wlil here sett down from Iocelinus the Authour of S. Patricks life, yet without interposing my credit for the truth of it.
12. S. Patrick,Iocelin. in vt S. Patricij c 26. saith he, by Divine revelation pass'd over to a certain Solitary Hermit living in an Island of the Tyrrhen Sea, whose name was Iustus, which he made good by his actions; being a

man a a holy life, great fame, and much merit. After devout salutations and good discourse, the same man of God gave to S. Patrick a staff, which he seriously affirmed had been bestow'd on him immediatly by the hand of our Lord Iesus him|self, who had appear'd to him.
13. Now there were in the same Island at some distance other men also who liv'd solitary lives: Of which some seem'd very fresh and youthfull, and others were decrepit old men. S. Patrick after some conversation with them, was informed that those very old men were children to those who appeared so youthfull. At which being asto|nish'd, and enquiring the occasion of so great a miracle, they thus aquainted him, saying, We from our childhood by Divine Grace have been much addicted to works of Mercy, so that our dores were always open to all travellors which deman|ded mea or lodging. On a certain night it hapned that a stranger having a staff in his hand was en|tertain'd by us, whom we used with all the cour|tesy we could. On the morning after he gave us his benediction, and said, I am Iesus Christ: My members you have hitherto oft ministred to, and this night entertain'd mee in my own person. After this he gave the staff which he had in his hand to a man of God, our Father both spiritually and carnally, commanding him to keep it, till in succeeding times a certain stranger named Pa|trick should come to visit him: and to him he should give it. Having said this, he presently ascended into heaven. And from that day we have remain'd in the same state of Youthfull comelines and vigour to this hower. Whereas our hildren who then were little infants, are now as you see become decrepite old men.
14. Now what fortune soever so stupendi|ous a story may fin'd in the minds of the Rea|ders: certain it is that a staff beleiv'd to have belongd to S. Patrick, and nam'd the staff of Iesus,Bernard. in vi. S. Ma|lachi. was for many ages in great veneration among the Irish. For thus S. Bernard in the life of S. Malachias an Irish Bishop written by him relates, Nigellus, saith he, seing that he must be compell'd to fly, took with him some precious ornaments of the See of Armagh, name|ly a copy of the Holy Gospells which had former|ly been S. Patricks, and a staff cover'd with gold and adorn'd with precious stones, which they call the staff of Iesus, because, as the report is, our Lord himself held and form'd it with his own hands. This was of high Esteem and veneration in that Nation, and well known by the people, whose reverence to it was so great, that whosoe|ver was seen to have it in his hands, they foolish|ly shew'd the same respect and veneration to him, as if he had been their Bishop. And Giral|dus Cambrensis in his Topography of Ireland writes also thus,Girald. Cam|brens. in topo+graph. c. 34. In the Vulgar opinion with this staff S. Patrick cast out of the Island all venemous beasts. Of which staff the Originall is as uncertain as the vertue most certain.


VII. CHAP.D. A. 432.
VII. CHA.

1. When S. Patrick entred Ireland.
2.3.4. His first Converts.

SAint Patrick seems to have entred into Ireland in the year four hundred thirty two, as Bishop Vsher computes. The inhabi|tants of the countrey, saith Stanihurst, having advice of his landing flock'd to him from all parts:Stanihurst. in vit. S. Patric. For though some among them attempted to drive the Holy Bishop from their coasts, yet the greater part of the common people came joy|fully to him, as if he had been of their own Na|tion. For in S. Patrick there were many quali|ties which invited them to expresse great good|will and familiarity towards him. He was a comely personage, very civill in conversation, and though extremely grave, yet without morosity. Besides this he spoke the Irish language perfectly, and from his youth had inform'd himselfe concer|ning their naturall dispositions: by which means he became presently as one of them. But God himself was the principall cause of conciliating their affections to him: by whose speciall Grace in a short time great multitudes yeilded their assent and obedience to Christian doctrines preach'd by him. S. Patrick therfore, as became a good Shep|hear'd, with great care watch'd over his new flock, by dayly admonitions informing the new-converted Christians in all duties of Piety, con|vincing the Errours of the Pagans, and confoun|ding the Magicians which oppos'd him.
2. Especiall notice is taken in Ecclesiasti|call Monuments of the conversion of one Irish man, whose name was Dicon, through whose land S. Patrick passing, gaind him to our Lord, after a wonderfull manner, and from a wolf chang'd him into a Lamb. Of him Probus thus writes:Prob. in vit. S. Patric. Dicon coming suddenly with weapons, intended to kill S. Patrick and his companions. But assoon as he saw the Holy Bi|shops face, he felt compunction in his heart. For our Lord immediatly turn'd his thoughts, inso|much as he lead him meekly to his house: Where the holy Bishop rested some time, preaching to him the Faith of Christ: So that this man first of all the Island beleived, with all his family.
3. Notwithstanding another ancient Au|thour, cited by Bishop Vsher,Ap. Vsser. in Pelmord. cap. 17. f. 846. recites the con|version of one call'd Sinel, as the first of all. His words are, S Patrick sent by Pope Celestinus into Ireland, landed there at the mouth of the River Dee. But an impious Count, call'd Nathi, who formerly had resisted S. Palladius, contradi|cted S. Patrick and his Doctrin. However Sinel the Son of Finchado by the preaching of S. Patrick beleived in Almighty God: and he was the first among the Irish-Scotts, who was baptis'd by the Holy Bishop: Vpon whom and his seed S. Patrick bestow'd his Benediction.
4. By this testimony it appears that S. Pa|trick first landed in the Province of Lenster: from whence he directed his journey into Vlster, where having converted Dicon he obtain'd a feild call'd Sabhl, two miles di|stant from the Citty of Doun. His particu|lar journeys, pious actions, laborious prea|ching and admirable miracles are copiously related by Ecclesiasticall Writers of Ireland; to whom the Reader is refer'd for informa|tion, since these matters are not specially pertaining to our History.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2 3. Of S. Carantac, or Cernac, a Brittain, and Disciple of S. Patrick.
4.5. Of S. Luman, another Disciple.

1. WE must not here omit what is rela|ted of a Disciple and attendant of S. Patrick call'd Carantacus, a Brittain, con|cerning whom the Authour of his Life writes, That thirty years before the Birth of S. David he began to labour in preaching the Gospell in Ireland.
2. He was, as hath been said, by descent and countrey a Brittain,. . op. Capgrav. in . Son of Keredic Prince of the Province of Cardigan (Cereticae Regionis:) This is acknowledg'd by the Irish Historians. The summ of his Gests is thus extracted out of his life written by Iohn of Tinmouth, extant in Capgrave. A certain Prince named Keredic had many children: among which one was called Carantac, a child of a good disposition, who began early to doe those things which he thought pleasing to God. Now in those days the Scotts did greivously vexe Brittany, so that his Father unable to sustain the weight and troubles of Government, would have resign'd the Province to Carantac. But he who lov'd the celestiall King far more then an earthly kingdom, fled away: and having bought of a poore man a wallet and staff, by Gods conduct was brought to a certain pleasant place, where he reposing built an Oratory, and there spent his time in the praises of God: From his child hood he embrac'd purity and innocence. At last he pass'd over into Ireland, invited by his affection to S. Patrick. Whither being come, by common advice they de|termin'd to separate themselves, and that one of them should travel in preaching the Gospell toward the right hand, the other toward the left. In their company there were many Ecclesiasticall persons attending them: and they agreed once every year to meet together at an appointed place. Whither soever this holy man went, an Angel of our Lord in the likenes of a Dove accompanied him, who chang'd his name from Carantac into Cernach, which was an Irish appellation. All along his voyage he wrought great miracles for the confirmation of the Faith preach'd by him, and heald many thousands of their diseases.
3. The wonderfull Gests of this holy man Cer|nach or Carantac, are to be read in Irish Histo|rians, and how the Grace at first given to the Apostles was plentifully given to him. He was an admirable soldier and champion of Christ, a spi|ritual and devout Abbot, and a patient Teacher, not refusing to preach saving Truth to every one. During many years spent by him in that Island he brought an incredible number to wash away their sins by Pennance: and both day and night he offred innumerable Prayers to God. After he had converted much people to our Lord, who wrought very many miracles by him, he at last return'd to his own native countrey in Brittany, where he retir'd to his former Cave, accompanied by many disciples. There having built a Church he determin'd to abide. But not long after being again admonish'd by a voyce from heaven he re|turn'd into Ireland, where in a good old age, and full of holy works he rested in peace on the seaven|teenth of the Calends of Iune: and was buried in his own Citty, which from him was call'd Cher|nach.
4 Hereto we will adjoyn the breif narra|tion of the Gests of another Brittish Saint and compaion of S. Patrick into Ireland, call'd Luman, who was Son to Gollitus a Brit|tain, and Nephew to S. Patrick by his Sister Tigridia. He was the Founder of the Church or Trim in Ireland: The occasion and manner whereof is thus related by Bishop Vsher from Iocelinus and Tirachanus.
5. S. Luman came to the ford of Truim,Ap. Vsser. in Primrd. c. 17 f. 853. which runs before the Castle of Fiedilmed Son of Loi|gur. And early in the morning Fort hern son of Fiedilmed found him preaching the Gospell of Christ: who wondring at the Doctrin taught by him, presently beleiv'd, and was baptis'd in Christ by Luman at a fountain arising in the same place. With him he remain'd till his Mother, who ought after him, came to the place. She was overioy'd at the sight of the Holy man, because she also came out of Brittany, and being instru|cted by him she likewise beleiv'd and returning to her house told her husband all things that had hapned to her self and her son. Fiedilmed was much joy'd at the arrivall of Luman, because his Mother call'd Schot-noesa had been a daughter of a Brittish Prince.Fiedilmed therefore went to him, and saluted him in the Brittish language, questioning him particularly touching his descent and doctrin: Who thus answer'd him, My name is Luman, I am a Brittain, a Christian and Dis|ciple of the Holy Bishop Patrick, who was sent by God to convert the inhabitants of this countrey to the Faith of Christ, and baptise them: He sent mee hither according to the will of God.
Fiedil|med immediatly beleived with his whole fami|ly: and offred to him and S. Patrick his whole Territory: all this he offred together with his Son Froitchern for ever till the day of Iudgment. Now Fiedilmed himself removed his habitation beyond the River Boindeo: but Luman with Foirtchern stay'd at the Ford of Truim till S. Pa|trick came thither, where they joyntly erected a

Church, two and twenty (or rather, twelve) years before the Church of Armagh (Alti|machae) was founded. For the Annals of Vlster refer the beginning of that Archiepiscopall Church to the year of Grace four hundred forty four.


IX. CH.IX. CHAP.

1.2. Of S. Benignus, a Disciple of S. Patricks.
3.4. Of the Holy Fire at Easter: and the Irish Magicians Prophecy.

1. BEfore we interrupt the story of S. Patrick, we will out of the Antiqui|ties of Glastonbury and Malmsburiensis relate the Conversion of another eminent Saint, who also was afterward his Disciple and Succes|sour in the Archiepiscopall See of Armagh, and call'd by him Benignus.
2. The Venerable Bishop S. Patrick preaching the Gospell through severall Provinces of Ireland came to a plain call'd Brey (or Breg:Antiquit. Glaston. in Patricio. Malmsbur.) which was very spacious and beautifull. With which being delighted, he determin'd there to celebrate the Feast of Easter then at hand. His first acquain|tance and familiarity in that Province was with a certain man, who having heard his Doctrin presently beleived, and receiving the Sacra|ment of Baptism was chang'd into a new man. With him S. Patrick lodged. This man had a young child call'd Beonna, who bre a tender affe|ction to S. Patrick, so that he would oft play with him, and embrace him, sometimes kissing his foote, which he would presse to his breast. When the holy man retir'd to rest, the child would weep, and say he would not sleep unles he might lye with him. Whereupon S. Patrick with a Pro|pheticall eye perceiving the great Graces which the Divine bounty would conferr upon the Child, vouchsaf'd to take him to his bed, and gave him the name Benignus. A while after when the Holy Bishop was ready to take his iourney, the child with pittifull cryes begd that he would not forsake him, saying that if he forsook him he would dye. He was therfore forc'd to receive him into his waggon, and withall prophecied that he should be his heyr and successour in the Bishoprick: which accordingly came to passe.
3. This was the first solemnity of Easter which the Holy Bishop celebrated in Ireland, saith Pro|bus:Probus in vit S. Patric. And he celebrated it by imitating the Son of God, who at his last supper with his Disciples con|secrated his Body and Blood for the redemption of mankind.
4. The day before this great Feast of our Lords Resurrection S. Patrick (observing the Ecclesiasticall Rite still in use) kindled the Holy Fire,Id. ibid. Iocelin. in vit. S. Pa|tricij. the flame whereof shone brightly about the place. Now according to the custom of that countrey it was unlawfull for any one to light a fire, before it was kindled in the Kings palace. Hereupon the King, whose name was Logorius, perceiving the brightnes of the flame, in great indigna|tion threatned death to whosoever he was that had presumed to infringe that custom in his kingdom. The Magicians who were pre|sent said to the King, O King, live for ever: And know for a certain, that this fire which against Law has been thus kindled, unlesse it be presently extinguish'd, will never cease to the worlds end. Moreover it will obscure all the fires which according to our customs we kindle, and the man who lighted it will be the destruction of thy Kingdom.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of S. Winwaloc, his Gests and death.
6. c. Of his Deacon S. Ethbin.

 WHilst S. Patrick laboured in the Gospell with so great successe, Brit|tany was illustrated with the glory of another great Saint: who notwithstanding by reason of the calamities afterward hapning, was forc'd to leave his Native countrey, and passe over into Armorica in Gaule. This was S. Winwaloc the son of a certain Noble per|son call'd Fracan cousin german to a Brittish Prince nam'd Coton, as wee read in the Galli|can Martyrologe.Malbranc. de . l. 2. c. 26. 32.
2. Malbranc a French Antiquary affirms that his Mothers name was Alba, and sir|name Trimavis, citing for his authority the ancient Manuscript Monuments of Monstrueil. And the said Martyrologe gives this Character of him,Martyrolog. Gallican. 3. Mars. Winwaloc from his childhood was inflam'd with an earnest desire of celestial things to despise worldly allurements, and live to God only. Wherfore he earnestly begg'd of his parents that e might be commended to the care of a certain Religious man, to be imbued by him in the knowledge of Holy Scripture and the docu|ments of piety. Having obtain'd his request, he made wonderfull progres in Holines and vertue under his discipline: insomuch that when he was but seaven years old, he became an example of all piety and goodnes. In processe of time having undertaken a Monasticall Profession, Divine Graces shone more brightly in him, being withall enrich'd with the Gift of Prophecy. Many mira|cles almighty God wrought by him, in performing which, having a firm Faith, he made use only of the Sign of the Crosse and oyle which had been bless'd. Among which miracles the most stupen|dious was his raising a young man to life.Haraeus ex Surio 13. Marij.
3. At the same time, saith Haraeus from Surius, the most holy Prelat S. Patricks glory was famous in Gods Church, who like a bright starr illustrated Ireland. The report of whose ad|mirable vertues kindled so great an affection to

him in S. Winwaloc, that he us'd all endeavours to goe to him, and be subject to his direction in piety.But whilst he busied his thoughts with this design, S. Patrick in a vision presented himself to him with an Angelicall brightnes, and having a golden Diadem on his head: he thus spoke to him: Behold I am the same Patrick, whom thou so earnestly desirest to visit: But to prevent so te|dious a iourney by sea and land, our Lord hath sent mee to thee to fullfill thy desire, and that thou maist enjoy both my sight and conversation.
Besides this he foretold him that he should be a Guide and Directour of many in spirituall warfare: for which end he gave him many wholesom in|structions: Exhorting him withall to desire from his Master some companions: and that with them he should remove to another place. Assoon as this Vision vanish'd, S. Winwaloc went to the Cell in which the Father of the Monastery was atten|ding to Divine Meditation and contemplation.To whom assoon as he had declar'd his Vision, he with a joyfull countenance said to him, My son, thou hast been honour'd with a Divine visitation and revelation. And without delay, as if he had receiv'd a precept from heaven, he assign'd to him eleaven Disciples, such as were most fervent in Gods service c.
4. The same Authour adds that with these companions he pass'd over into a certain Island, where for the space of three years they lead an Heremiticall life. But the place being both expos'd to violent tempests, and also incommodious by reason of its barrennes, S. Win|waloc humbly begg'd of God that he would direct them to a more convenient habitation. Our Lord heard his servants prayers, and shewd him a place further remov'd in the Sea.But wanting a ship he renewd his Prayers to God: and having done this he said to his Brethren Be courageous and firm in a strong Faith, and as you see mee leade this Brother by the hand, so doe every one of you take his next fellows hand, and follow one another.
Then invoking the name of our Lord, with his Pastorall Staff he strook the Sea, upon which God renewd once more the ancient Miracle of the Red sea, for it opened a passage for them: so that ta|king one another by the hand, and himself marching in the front, they walk'd securely over the dry sands, the waters on both sides standing like walls, and as they went they sang to our Lord a Hymne of praise and joyful|nes.
5. Concerning his austerities, wee read thus in Capgrave,Capgrav. i S. Winvva|loc. From the twentieth year of his age to his death S. winwaloc was never seen to sitt in the Church. He never exceeded moderation in any thing: Never was he deiected with sadnes, nor dissolute in mirth; never angry or turbulent, but kind and affable to all, Every day he repea|ted the hundred and fifty Psalms, sometimes standing with his armes stretch'd forth in the figure of a Crosse, sometimes alln on his knees. From the day that he began to build his habita|tion, he never used any garment of wooll or lin|nen, but made use only of goat-skins. Neither on his bed had he either feathers or cloaths: but instead of feathers he strowd under him Nutt|shells, and instead of blankets sand mingled with pebles: and two great stones he putt under his head. He us'd the same garments day and night. He never eat wheaten bread, and but a small proportion of bread made of barley, with which was mingled an equall measure of ashes. He took his refection once only in two, and some|times three dayes. His other dyet was a mixture of meale and cabbage, without any fatt at all Vpon saturdays and sundays he would add a little cheese sodd in water, and at Easter a few small fishes.
3. It was his usuall custom dayly to visit a Church about a mile distant from his Monastery, atten|ded by a Deacon named Egbin: and there to offer Sacrifices to God both for the living and dead. And such was his diligence and devo|tion at the Holy Altar, that he me|rited there to receive his reward of eternall happines:For as it follows in the same Au|thour, One day an Angel appeard to him and said, Reverend Father, the heavenly Cittizens desire thee for their companion: and soon shalt thou be deliver'd from thy painfull exercises.After this he presently call'd his Brethren toge|ther and said to them, Prepare your selves to day, for assoon as I have sung Masse, and communica|ted the Body and Blood of our Lord, at the sixth hower of the day our Lord will receive mee out of this mortall body. Having therefore cele|brated Masse as he stood at the Altar between two Monks which sustain'd him on each side, and was singing with his Brethren, he ren|dred his soule to God, as untouch'd by cor|porall sicknes, as it was free from any carnall staines.
4. The same happy manner of his death is likewise recorded in the Gallican Martyro|loge:Martyrolog. Gallican. 3. Mar. and the day signd by it is the third of March. Where is further declar'd, that in the times when the Normans wasted France, his sa|cred Body was translated (from his Monasery at Tauriacum) to the Provinces further remov'd from sea, and thence carried into Flanders, and laid in the Blandin Monastery at Gaunt, where the Feast of his Memory is celebrated on the first of August, the day of his Translation. Notwithstanding Malbranc earnestly con|tends that his sacred Relicks repose at Mon|strueil,Iac. Mal branc. de Mo|rinis. where they shew likewise his Chasu|ble, Albe and stole: and there is a Church dedicated to his memory, in French call'd S. Waly.
5. Now though S. Winwaloc dyed out of Brittany, yet there were not wanting the monuments of his memory and Sanctity. A town in Shropshire, call'd even in the Saxons time Wenlock, as Malmsburiensis te|stifies, (which seems a contraction of Winwaloc) from him took its denomi|nation. There it was that the Holy Vir|gin Milburga founded a Monastery of Reli+gious Virgins, as shall in due place be decla|red.
6. And whereas in the Gests of S. Winwalo

mention hath been made of his attendant and Deacon calld Egbin, or as others write it Ethbin; the memory of his Sanctity also is particularly preserv'd in the Gallican Martyrologe, where wee read that he overliv'd his Master,Martyrolog. Gallican. 19 Octob. went over into Ireland, there in a Wood call'd Neeten built a Monastery, where with great sanctity he lived, and dyed on the nineteenth of October. Severall other particulars are there related of him, which considering he was a stranger to this Island doe not require a place in this History. Onely one passage in which S. Winwaloc is also concern'd, shall be here produced, viz:7. Ethbin by his merits and piety being Deacon, was chosen to be the dayly attendant and assistant to the Holy Preist Winwaloc. Now it was S. Winwalocs custom to repair dayly to a a little private Church separated from noyse and abode of people about a mile distant from his Monastery, that he might more quietly and without distraction offer the Divine Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead. Going thither one day, accompanied by his Deacon Ethbin, there mett him one vayld in the figure of a miserable Leaper, with a lamentable voyce begging assistance. Ethbin mov'd with great compassion and charity em|brac'd and kiss'd the Leaper, and the same also at his monition did S. Winwaloc. Our Lord accepted their office of charity with great kindnes: for he loves to be cherish'd in his poor members: and therfore he was pleas'd to give each of them a present reward of their unfeign'd Charity. For flying from their em|braces our Lord immediatly appear'd in a cloud in great glory and with gracious words assur'd them that their names were already written in the Book of Life, and that they should with his Saints be partakers of his kingdom. This most happy assurance of their future blessednes Ethbin out of a vile esteem of himself ascrib'd to the merits of S. Winwaloc: And he on the other side moved with the same Humility and charity cast the merit on Ethbin.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1. S. Ninianus death.
2.3. c. The Centuriatours testimony of him.
6.7. His Miracles.
8. Of Casa Candida.
9. Alcuinus his Epistle touching him.

1. THE same year four hundred thirty two is mark'd with the happy death of S. Ninianus,A. D. 432. Vid. sup. l. 1. c 21. Ap. Capgrav. in Ninian. whose Gests have been for|merly related. This Holy man, saith the Au|thour of his Life, wonderfully shining with mi|racles, and illustrious for many vertues at last approch'd to the happy day in which God gra|ciously call'd him out of this mortall life. Thus being perfect in Grace and piety, mature in age, on the sixteenth of the Calends of October, he happily mounted to heaven. His Body was bu|ried in the Church dedicated to S. Martin, which himself had built from the foundation. Hence may be disprov'd the assertion of an Irish Writer,Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. 1059. extant in Bishop Vshers Antiquities of the Brittish Churches, concerning S. Ni|nianus his going into Ireland and dying there.
2. The Lutheran Centuriators of Magdeburg likewise confirm what is here deliver'd of his dying in Brittany, and moreover adde some things deserving our observation: Their words are these,Magdeb. cent. 5. f. 1429. Ninianus a Venedotian was a Teacher of Christian verities of a desert more then ordinary: He to his old age did large|ly communicate the Talent wherewith God had entrusted him, among the Brittains, Scotts and Southern Picts. He was a man assiduous in the reading of Holy Scripture, mercifull to orphans, widdows and poor: illustrious in miracles and sanctity. By his pious industry the Nation of the Picts first of all relinquishing their Idolatry, em|braced the true Faith of Christ. He dyed among the Picts in the Province of Galloway, in the year of Grace four hundred thirty two having been the first Bishop of Candida casa.
3. Here the Reader may observe, that this Bishop was, by the confession of these Lutheran Protestants, famous for his Sanctity and mira|cles, and withall one who dayly studied the Holy Scriptures: Yet he was very devout in giving respect and Veneration to Gods Saints, to whose honour he likewise built Churches: S. Martin dyed not above thirty years before S. Ninianus ended his life, and yet we find a Church built by S. Ninianus, and dedicated to S. Martin. Yet the same Protestants make sharp invectives against the Roman Church for imitating these Saints magnified by themselves.
4. The Example of S. Ninianus was imi|tated by the Brittish Church neer the same age, for when S. Augustin the Monk came into Brittany to convert the Saxons, he found saith S. Beda, in the Citty of Canterbury a Church dedicated to the honour of S. Mar|tin, which had been anciently built in the times when the Romans inhabited this Island.
5. S. Ninianus before he dyed divided the Provinces of the Picts into Parishes, he ordained Preists there, and consecrated Bishops. This he did by the authority of the Roman Bishop, from whom, as hath been rela|ted, he received his Mssion.
6. As touching the Miracles which God wrought by his servant S. Ninianus, al|though my intention be to be spating in relating such things, yet since the foremen|tion'd Lutheran Writers acknowledge this Saint to have been famous for them: it may be expedient in this place to record one, as followeth:Ap. Capgrav. in Ninian.7. In the Region of the Picts, saith the Au|thour of S. Ninianus life, there was a certain Prince named Tudwal, a proud, high-spirited man, who contemning the admonitions of this man of God, and derogating from his doctrin and life, resisted him openly. On a certain day having been more then ordinarily troublesome and rude to him, God the Supreme heavenly Iudge would not suffer any longer the iniuries offred to his holy Servant to passe unrevenged, but strook this proud man with an intolerable pain in his head, by the violence of which those lofty eyes of his became utterly blind. So that he which had before impugn'd the Light of Divine Truth, deservedly lost the light of this world. But upon beter consideration he sent a message to the holy Bishop, humbly beseeching him in imitation of our Lords benignity, to return to him good for ill, and love for hatred. The Ve|nerable Bishop hereupon first sharply reprov'd the Prince, and then touching him, imprin|ted on his eyes the sign of the Crosse; when im|mediatly his pains ceased, his blindnes was dis|sipated, and afterward the Prince highly honou|red the Holy Bishop, and readily granted what|soever he ask'd of him.
8. As touching the place of his Buriall and Episcopall See call'd Candida casa, and by the Saxons Wit-hern,Malmsb. de . l. 3. Malmsburiensis thus writes of it: Candida casa is the name of a place in the confines of England and Scotland, where is the sepulcher of the Blessed Confessour Ninias; by nation a Brittain, who there first preached the Gospel of Christ. That name was given to the place by occasion of a Church which the holy Bishop there built of hew'n stone, which to the rude Brittains seemd a wonder. This Holy man Ninias is celebrated by Antiquity for his many miracles.
Vssr. in Pri|md. f. 669.9. There is extant in Bishop Vshers Brittish Antiquities an Epistle of our Learned Countreyman Alcuinus, not printed among his works, wherin he testifies the great fame of the Sanctity and Miracles of this Blessed Bishop:A. D. 435. It is directed to the Religious Preists then living at Candida Casa. And Paschasius Radbertus recounst a Miracle in the same age wherin Alcuinus who attended on the Em|perour Charles the Great, liv'd, which miracle hapned to a devout Preist celebrating Masse at the Saints monument, There was a certain Religious Preist,Ratbert. l. de corp. c. sanguine Christ. cap. 14. saith he, nam'd Plegils, who frequently solemnis'd Masse at the Body of S. Ninias Bishop and Confessour. Who living a ver|tuous and holy life, began frequently to beseech our Lord that he would please to shew visibly to him the nature and verity of the Body and Blood of Christ in the most Blessed Sacrament. This Prayer he made, not from want of Faith in the truth of the Mystery, but meerly out of an affe|ction of devotion and piety. Consequently the Authour declares, how to his great conso|lation our Lord appeard to him in the Sacra|ment in the form of a young child.


XII. CHAP.XII. CH.

1.2. c. S. Germanus his second coming into Brittany.
6.7.8 He Ordains Bishops here. Of Landaff.
10.11. He instituts the Vniversity of Oxford.

1. THree years after the death of S. Ni|nianus,A. D. 435. S. Germanus Bishop of Aux|erre was once more invited into Brittany to perfect the good work which he had for|merly begun, in rooting out the Pelagian Heresy there spreading it self again. The re|lation we must borrow from the same Au|thour, the learned Preist Constantius, to whom Baronius gives this Character,Baron. hic. that he was a Writer of those times of most perfect integrity and sincerity in all things.
2. In the mean time,Constant in vit S. Ger|mani l. 2. c. 1 says he, a Message from Brittany comes, declaring that the perversity of the Pelagian Heresy by the impious diligence of a few Authours began to enlarge it self there. Hereupon once more the prayers of all are a|gain address'd to S. Germanus, that he would maintain the cause of Divine Grace, which by his diligence formerly prevayl'd. The Holy Bi|shop made no delay to comply with their petition: for his delight was to labour and even spend his strength in the service of Christ. The Devills envy began now to languish, as the Holy mans vertues encreas'd, neither durst he so much as tempt him whom by experience he knew to be a freind of God.
3. There was adjoyn'd to him for his compa|nion Severus Bishop of Triers, a person of con|summate Sanctity, who had long preach'd the word of God to the Nations of Germania Prima. In his way he pass'd by Paris, where he is received with great joy and acclamations of the people, as

the presence of so eminent a Saint well de|served.
4. In the mean time infernall Spirits flying through the whole Island foretold the return of Saint Germanus, being forc'd to doe so against their wills. Insomuch as that one nam'd Ela|phius, a principall person of the countrey, with|out any notice given of the Holy Bishops journey came in hast to meet them: He brought with him his Son, upon whom from the flower of his youth a lamentable infirmity had seis'd. For all his members were withred, and the hamm of his leggs so drawn together that by reason of the drynes of his thigh, he could not sett his foot to ground. Elaphius was attended by almost the whole province, which assembled together, though no advice had been given them of the Holy Bi|shops coming. By whom, assoon as they mett toge|ther, an Episcopall Benediction was confer'd on the people, and the words of Truth preach'd to them. S. Germanus perceives that the generality of the people persever'd constant in the doctrin which he had left among them: and that the fault adhered to a few busy persons: which are diligently sought out, and without delay condemned.
5. As for Elaphius, he humbly kneeling kiss'd the Bishops hands, presenting to him his lame Son: whose sad condition and ne|cessity were sufficiently recommended to the Bishops charity by his youth and debility, without his fathers request. So miserable a spectacle mov'd compassion in all, but espe|cially in the holy Bishops mind; which com|passion they interpreted to be a sign of Gods clemency to cure him. Presently therefore Saint Germanus compell'd the young man to sitt down: and then handled his hamm that was contracted, and with his right hand strok'd over all the members weakned with that infirmity. Immediatly perfect health and strength attended that wholesom touch: the withred members recovered their natu|rall iuice and humidity, and the sinews their office and agility to move them. Thus in the sight of all the young man was resto|red to his father as if he had been new made. All the people are astonish'd at this miracle, by which means the Catholick Faith is perfectly confirm'd in their minds. The rest of the time was spent in preaching up and down, which wan|ted not efficacy to convert and reform the hea|rers. So that by an universall consent the Au|thours of the perverse Doctrine are brought be|fore the Holy Bishops, and then banish'd out of the Island. This holy work was with such solidity per|form'd then, that to this day the Orthodox Faith remains in those places unstaind. Thus all things being well compos'd, the Blessed Bishops return'd, with a voyage as prosperous as they came. This is the summary narration of Constantius, tou|ching S. Germanus his second journey into Brittany. Which Constantius liv'd about forty years after Saint Germanus his death, and dedicated his Book to Patiens Bishop of Lyons.
6. Notwithstanding our Ecclesiasticall Mo|numents record many more particular bene|fits which our Countrey receiv'd from the Holy Bishop Germanus during his abode this second time in Brittany, which seems to have continued severall years, though how many, does not appeare by any Chronologists: therefore we must be excus'd if we cannot assign the particular actions of this Saint to their determinate times.
7. By many deeds of the holy Bishop here, it may be concluded that he came with Com|mission from the See Apostolick, Pope Sixtus then sitting in the Chair of S. Peter. For Saint Germanus seeing many Churches deprived of Pastours, by which means the people be|came wavering in their Faith call'd a Synod (which was an act of Iurisdiction committed to him) and by common advice selected learned and pious men, whom he or|dained Bishops, placing them in severall Churches.
8. Thus we read in the History of the Church of Landaff,Hist. Landa|vens. How after the foresaid Bi|shops had rooted out the Pelagian Heresy, they consecrated Bishops in severall quarters of the land. And over all the Brittains toward che right hand side (that is, the Southern parts of Brittany) they promoted the Blessed man Dubri|cius to be Arch-Bishop, who was an eminent Do|ctour, and was chosen both by the King Mouricus and whole Diocese. At Landaff they constituted an Archiepiscopall See with the said Kings consent, where a Church was built, and dedicated to the honour of the Prime Apostle Saint Peter. These are the borders of it, c. Now where|as Landaff is here call'd an Archiepi|scopall See, it is an Errour either of the Authour or Transcriber. True it is that when that See was afterward transplanted to Car-leon, an Archiepiscopall See was esta|blished there.
9. As touching the Holy Bishop Dubricius we shall treat more of him separatly, after an account given of S. Germanus his actions. And whereas it is said that by the consent of King Mouricus an Episcopall See was erected at Landaff: notice is to be taken that this Mou|ricus was Son to Theodoric Prince of Glamorgan|shire (Morganniae) who,Godvvin. in Catalog. Epi|scop. in Lan|daff. as Bishop Godwin relates, resign'd his Principality: and embra|ced a Monasticall or Eremiticall life. But af|terward when the Saxons invaded the Island, he was drawn out of his Cell to be leader of an Army, and courageously rushing among the enemies receiv'd a mortall wound: for which merit he was enroll'd in the number of Martyrs.
10. S. Germanus his next care after ordai|ning Bishops, was to visit the Schooles, the sources of Learning: For these two are the Pillars to sustain and perpetuate Faith. Brian Twyne the Advocat of the Vniversity of Ox|ford affirms positively that Saint Germanus studied in that Vniversity.Tvvynu. in Apol. lib. 2 But generally all Authours, ancient and Modern agree that he

establish'd good order there:A. D. 439. yea and pro|bably to encourage both Teachers and Disci|ples, himself for some time taught among them, and gathered many Auditours. Among whom one of the principall which we find in Records was S. Iltutus, or Elcutus, of whom here after, as likewise of another whose memory is celebrated in Lesser Brit|tany, nam'd S. Briocus.
11: Concerning S. Germanus his establi|shing the Vniversity of Oxfor'd, we have an illustrious testimony of our learned coun|trey-man Asserius, who liv'd above eight hundred years since: For treating of the Controversy between the Students of Oxford and Grimbaldus whom King Alfred had cal|led out of France to govern that Vniversity, he introduces the Students thus pleading for themselves, in opposing the change that Grimbaldus would make in their Instituts,Asser. ad A. D. 86. They the Schollars likewise (saith he) proved by unquestionable testimonies of ancient An|nals, that the Orders and Instituts of that place had been establish'd by pious and learned men, as Gildas, Melkin, Nemri, Kentigern and others, who all grew old in their studies there, and admi|nistred all things happily in peace and concord. They shewd moreover that Saint Germanus came to Oxford and abode there half a year, ap|proving wonderfully their said Orders and Insti|tuts. This was when he travell'd through Britta|ny preaching against the Heresies of the Pela|gians. This Testimony is of great force in case that passage be not an Addition of a later hand to Asserus, as is much to be su|spected.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1.2. c S. Germanus his Faith was Ro|man, the same with that of Saint Au|gustin the Monk. This testified by Pro|testants.
6.7. Churches built to his honour by the ancient Brittains.

1. AFter how long abode in Brittany S. Germanus returned home, is un|certain. But the infinite obligations our Na|tion has to him are unquestionable. Among which the greatest of all is his establishing the Catholick Faith here so firmly that it con|tinued inviolate many ages. Insomuch as even Protestant Writers attribute to him the Title of Apostle of Brittany.
2. It will therefore be expedient that we conclude the Narration of his Gests with de|claring what Doctrines in Religion S. Germanus himself profess'd, for the same, we may be sure, he left behind him in Brittany. This Enquiry seems necessary, because it will give light for a resolution, whether in the following age Saint Augustin the Monk sent by Saint Gregory the Great to convert the Sa|xons, taught them a new Religion full of Su|perstitions, and quite changed from that which Saint Germanus profess'd, as Prote|stants affirm: who therefore magnify Saint Germanus for the purity of his Faith, and as much derogate from S. Augustin.
3. Touching therefore Saint Germanus his Religion, particularly in the Points now most controverted, and wherein Saint Au|gustin is charged to have been faulty, we cannot more certainly, nor more inge|nuously determine it, then by seeking in|formation from a person of eminent lear|ning in Antiquity, a Protestant, or how|ever without question no Roman Catholick, to witt, M. Selden: Who in a Treatise by him call'd Analecta Anglo-Britannica has inserted one Chapter exactly pertinent to our present purpose, The Title of which Chapter is, Touching the practises of Eccle|siasticall Discipline wherewith Germanus and Lpus Bishops imbued the Brittains. Which Enquiry he consequently satisfies in the following Chapter, in the manner follow|ing.
4. Germanus Bishop of Auxerre and Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Gaule came into Brittany to restore Christian Religion deprav'd by the He|resy of Pelagius and Errours of Pagans.Sellen. An|lect. Anglo-Brittann. l. 2. c. 1. Girald. Cam+br. Descript. c. 18. Their do|ctrines and documents taught by them, as the fame is, which also Giraldus Cambrensis testifies to have continued to his dayes, were as followeth. 1. Of every loaf of Bread set before them, one corner they gave to the poore. 3. They sate three together at dinner, in memory of the Blessed Tri|nity. 4. If any one mett in the way a Religious Monk or Clergy-man, or any one in a Religious habit, he would presently lay aside his weapons, and with a low inclination of his head demand his Benediction. 5. Generally all the people doe earnestly demand Episcopall Confirmation and Inunction with Holy Chrism, by which the Holy Ghost is conferr'd 6. They some times bestow the Tithe of all their Substance, cattle and Sheep, namely either when they marry, or undertake some long Pilgrimage, or by the Churches Order submitt to some extraordinary Pennance for their sins. This they call the great Tithe: and two parts of it they bestow on the Church where they recei|ved Baptisme, the third they give to the Bishop of the Diocese. 7. Beyond all other externall la|bours of Mortification they are most devoted to Pilgrimages undertaken to Rome, to visit the Monuments of the Apostles. 8 Beyond any other Nation they expresse a devout reverence to Chur|ches and Church-men, likewise to Relicks of Saints, to portable Bells, Sacred Books and the Holy Crosse. And this devotion hath been rewar|ded, with greater peace they any other Chur|ches enjoyd. 9. For entire security is observed in regard of Beasts feeding not only in Church yards but much beyond them through all bounds inclosed with ditches which Bishops design for observation of peace and indemnity. And

greater Churches,A. D. 435. to which antiquity always afforded greater reverence, have power to grant and enjoyn the observation of such peace and security for cattle, whilst at morn they goe, and at Even return from their pastures. This peace and security is observ'd so inviolably, that if any one should incurr the mortall indignation of his Prince, and afterward seeke refuge in a Church, he may enjoy the fruit of this Peace both for his person and goods. And indeed from such large immunities, far beyond the ancient Canons (which in such cases allow safety only to a mans life and body) occasion of great abuses have been taken: for by reason of such impunity many doe audaciously practise hostility, and from such pl|ces of Reuge doe horribly infest the whole coun|trey about, and even the Prince himself.
5. There is scarce any one of these Chri|stian practises but was taught by S. Augu|stin also: and yet Protestant Writers condemne S Augustin for them, and absolve S. Ger|manus, yea magnify him, and glory in an opinion that they are conformable to his Doctrin and Discipline. They allow to Saint Germanus the glorious Title of Apostle of the Brittains, who taught them no new Do|ctrins of Christianity, but only confirmed them in what they had beleived before: And the same Title they with contempt refuse to S. Augustin, who withdrew the barbarous Pagan Saxons from their Idolatry and Infideli|ty, and instilled first into their minds the true knowledge and worship of God, Faith in the Redeemer of the world, and Venera|tion to the Holy Crosse the Sign of our Redem|tion. Such partiality the Spirit of Schism does naturally produce.
6. Our Ancestours in testimony of their gratitude to the Venerale Bishop S. Germanus, and the high esteem of his Sanctity approved by many Miracles, not long after his death built Chappells and Churches to his honour. Particularly concerning one of these Camden thus writes, In Cornwall neer the River Liver there is a village named from Saint German,Camden in Danmoniis. to which, during the Da|nish tumults, the Episcopall see of that Pro|vince was transferr'd, out of feare (it being a place more remote and secure:) There a Church had been erected and consecrated to the honour of S. Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, who extirpated the Pelagian Heresy that began to rise anew among the Brittains. In Yorkshire likewise a famous Monastery was consecrated to him, as the same Authour thus testifies, The River Ouse does water Selby a town well peo|pled:Id. in Brigant. there King William the First founded a Church in memory of S. Germanus, who hap|pily wounded to death the many-headed Hydra of Pelagianism, which was oft quelld, and oft revived again. The Abbot of this Monastery and of S. Mares at York were the only two Nor|thern Abbots which had Seats in Parliament.
7. Among the Silures in Northwales the Memory of S. Germanus is much celebra|ted: for from him a part of Radnorshire is called Guarthenion. For as our ancient Hi|storian Nennius relates, Vortimer the Son of Vortigern in satisfaction for injuries done by his Father to Saint Germanus,Nennius up. Camden in Silares. dedicated that part of the countrey to him where he had been wrongd. In memory of which it took the name of Guar|theny, which in the Brittish language signifies a calumny justly retorted. Besides these, many other Monuments testifying the like vene|ration to the same Apostolick Bishop might be produced, but these are sufficient, And this last Example proves this Devotion of the Brittains to him to have begun presently after his death.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. c. Vortigern chosen King of all Brit|tany: His Character, c.

1. HItherto,A. D. 418. since the time that the Romans had relinquish'd all care and protection of Brittany, the severall Provinces of the Island had been governed by petty Princes independent on one ano|ther. But in the year four hundred thirty and eight by reason of the frequent inroads of their cruell Enemies the Picts and Scotts, by a common agreement of the severall Provinces a Generall Captain of the whole Nation was chosen, after the example of their Ancestors in the days of Iulius Cesar, and the Kingdom established in his line.
2. Which choice unhappily fell on Vorti|gern, a man born for the destruction of his countrey, for he it is that by his slouth|full vices first weakned it, and afterward calling in to his aid the barbarous warlick Saxons, prostituted it to their rapines and tyranny. This Character we read of him in Malmsburiensis,Malmsbur. l. 2. i. de Reg. c. 1. At that time Vortigern was King of Brittany, a man voyd both of courage and counsell: yea addicted wholly to carnall plea|sure, and the slave of almost all vices: parti|cularly of avarice, pride and luxury. He, as we read in the Gests of the Brittains, solicited and with the hope of making her a Queen de|flourd his own daughter, and of her gott a Son: Who notwithstanding his incestous birth was, by a miracle of Divine Grace, a Saint, his name being S. Faustus.
3. His wife was a Lady equall to him in blood, but most unlike in disposition. By her he had three Sons, Vortimer, Catigern and Pascentius. Whilst she lived, he gover|ned his Principality with moderation: but after her death he loosed the rains to all vices. For which having been reproved by S. Germanus, and upon his impenitence in a Synod excommunicated,M. Westmo|nast. he revenged himself by inflicting the fore mentioned iniuries and calumnies upon the Holy Bi|shop.

But in the end was severely punish'd by fire from heaven.A. D. 438.
4. Before his Election to the Vniversall Government of Brittany, he was Prince of the Danmonij, or as others write, Consul of the Gevisses inhabitants of the South-western parts about Cornwall, or South-wales. Which Principality it seems he had governed well enough, to be esteemd not unworthy to be preferr'd above his formerly fellow Princes: though indeed that age, the men of which Gildas calls (atramentum aetatis) the inke of their age, afforded it seems so little choice, that a Prince not absolutly vicious deser|ved reputation. However this unworthy King is recorded a restorer of the Citty of Oxford. We will awhile suspend a relation of the Gests of this unhappy King, to the end we may interpose some affairs touching the Churches of Brittany at this time oc|curring.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. c S. Dubricius ordained Bishop of Landaff by S. Germanus: The place of his Birth, c.

1. AMong the actions beneficiall to Brittany done by Saint Germanus, the election and consecration of Saint Du|bricius to the Bishoprick of Landaff was de|servedly reckoned. This Dubricius (say the Centuriatours of Magdeburg) sirnamed Gainius Vagiensis,Magdes. en|tur. 5. in Du|brici. from the place where he was born; was peradventure the Son of a Monk by Euedila a Noble Virgin, and grew after|ward famous among te English. Thus write they without all authority from antiquity, desirous to faign one Example at least, to be a president for their Master Luthers in|cest.
Put in Du|bric, Bae ibid. Povvel in annat. in Iti|rat. Cambr. l. . c. . Cap|grav.2. But from more authentick Testimo|nie it appears that Saint Dubricius was by nation a Brittain, born in the Province of the Dimeta, or West Wales: he was sirna|med Gainius from the River which runs by the place where he was born. His Fa|thers name is not mentioned among Au|thours, his Mother was Euedila, a woman of a clear fame for her vertues: Thus write Bale, Picts, Powel and the Authour of his life in Capgrave.
Ibid.3. It is there moreover related how being a child care was taken to imbue his mind with litterature. And having attained a few years more, he made such proficiency in learning, that not the ignorant only, but such also as had ac|quired a good degree in knowledge, repaired to him to encrease their skill: among whom were Saint Theliaus, Saint Sampson, Saint Aidanus and others. In the soile of his Na|tivity neer the River Vaga (from whence he was called Vagiensis) he chose a fitt seat for his own and his Disciples studies, and there he spent many years in the charitable em|ployment of communicating his learning to others. Afterward having by command of an Angel built a Church there, he preached and taught the people wholesom Christian Doctrin. Moreover by imposing his hands he often cured many infirmities, insomuch as those which came to him sad and unsound, returned joy|full and in health. And therefore he was qua|lified fitt to be advanced by S. Germanus to the Degree of a Bishop.
4. The period of his life is uncertain. Yet certain it is that he lived to a very old age: for many years after this he was trans|ferr'd by Aurelius Ambrosius then raigning to the Arch-Bishoprick of Car-Leon in the Province of Monmouth. So that he will once more occurre in our History. As for his Disciples Saint Theliaus, Saint Itutus, c. eminent Saints and Doctours, which therefore could not likewise escape the calumnious pens of the Lutheran Centu|riators, we shall treat of them in the follow|ing age.
5. But here we must not omitt what a learned French writer, Andrew Saussay in his French Martyrologe relates of another famous Disciple of Saint Germanus named Saint Briocus a Brittain, who was afterward Bishop in Armorica or lesser Brittany, so il|lustrious for his Sanctity, that the See of his Bishoprick is to this day from his name called S. Brieu, a suffragan Bishoprick to Tours.
6. Saint Briocus,Sauss. in Mar|tyrolog. Galli+can., . April. saith he, was by coun|trey an Englishman (he should have said a Brittain) of the Province of Corticia, descen|ded of a Noble Stock. He was by Saint Germa|nus of Auxee preaching the Orthodoxe Faith there, brought out of Brittany into Gaule, and here by him instructed happily in the Disci|pline of Piety. After he had enriched his mind with saving Doctrins, he returned into his Native countrey, and there informed his parents in the true Faith, which he likewise preached with great successe in the countrey about. After this being desirous to employ our Lords Talent yet more copiously, he came over into Armorica: where having shed the beams of Evangelicall Light on the minds of his kinsman Conanus Count of Triguer (Trecorensem) he afterward cleansed him with the Laver of Bap|tism. Then assembling severall devout persons aspiring to the perfection of a Religious life, he built a Monastery, and there by the libe|rality of the said Count he layd the founda|tions of an Episcopall See, and being consecra|ted Bishop by the Archbishop of Tours, Metro|politan of that countrey, he with an admirable splendour of vertue ad piety governed the said Diocese the space of thirty years. Afterward making a journey to Angiers to furnish him|self with Ecclesiasticall ornaments, he there

breathed forth his spotlesse soule.A. D. 439. From thence his Body was caried back, and with great ho|nour buried in the Church which himself had built, where frequent miracles were wrought at his Relicks: Thus as he gave his name to the Monastery, Town and Mother-Church of that Diocese, so he likewise afforded continuall pro|tection to them.
7. Certain Irish Historians would chal|lenge S. Briocus to their countrey, as having been born in the Territory of Cork. But his having been a Disciple of Saint Germanus, who had nothing to doe with Ireland, proves him a Brittain. And whereas Bishop Vther conjectures that the Master of Saint Briocus might have been another Saint Ger|manus Bishop of Paris, who lived in the fol|lowing age: His living with Conanus and relation of kinred to him demonstrate him both a Brittain, and more ancient then the younger S. Germanus.


XV. CH.XV. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Patrick comes out of Ireland into Brittany: thence goes to Rome, c
4 c. At his return: he retires to Gla|stenbury: His Chart: Relicks of Saint Steven, c.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred thirty nine, Saint Patrick having with wonderfull advantage laboured in our Lords vineyeard in Ireland the space of eight years, returned into Brittany, where, saith Malmsburiensis, he abode thirty years in the Isle Avallonia, or Glastenbury, leading a most holy life. Notwithstanding whether at that time he visited Glastenbury, is uncertain Probably the motive of his leaving Ireland might be to take a journey to Rome, and there give an account of his Apostleship: or this is affirm'd by severall Authours, as Capgrave, Bishop-Vsher, c.
Cagrav in Patricio. Vsher. c. 17. f. 810. Iocelin in Pa+tricio.2. Iocelinus adds that before his voyage he fixed his Episcopall chair in the Citty of Armagh, resolving in his mind that the same should be the Prime Metropolis and Mistresse of the whole Island. And to the end that this design might have an effect irrevocable, he de|termin'd to repair to the See Apostolick, and thence obtain authentick Priviledges to ratify this his purpose. An Angel from our Lord approv'd his intention of undertaking that our|ney, c. Whereupon having ordain'd Bishops Preists, and other Ecclesiasticall Ministers, whom he placed in opportune residences, he gave them his benediction, and took leave of them.
3 That in his way either to, or from Rome, he retir'd into a Monastery, to enjoy for some time the peace of contemplation, is affirm'd by our Historians, and that Gla|stenbury was the place chosen by him, in which afterward also he repos'd himself, there happily ending his dayes. And herein he imitated the holy practise of former Saints, as Saint Fugatius and Damianus, who after labouring in their Apostolicall Office, retir'd from worldly conversation, and spent their last days in conversation with God alone.
4. What were the speciall exercises of S. Patrick in his retirement, is related by ancient Writers,, viz. attending to Prayer, Fasting and purity of Life: instituting rules for a Monasticall Profession in Glastenbury, where he found Religious men the Succes|sours of S. Ioseph of Arimathea and S. Fu|gatius and S. Diruvianus: These S. Patrick reduced from an Eremiticall, to a Coenobiti|call course of life, gving them instituts which himself had receiv'd from his glo|rious Vnckle S. Martin of Tours, who long since had cloathed him with the Monasticall habit. Which Habit, saith Iocelin, was a White Cowle of the naturall-colour of the wooll, over his other garments, by which was de|noted purity and innocence. And this fa|shion was imitated by the Iih Monks, as likewise the Monks of Brittany, before Saint Augustins coming, who to distinguish himself from them, assum'd a Black Cowle, whence the New Monks his Successours were usually stiled (Nigri Monachi) Black Monks.
5. In Glastenbury it was where S. Patrick wrote that famous Chart,The Epistle or Chart of S. Patrick. the whole tenour whereof hath been already produced in the second Book of this History, upon occasion of declaring the foundation of that most famous Monastery.In which Chart the Holy Bishop particularly describes the Isle then cal|led Ynswitrin where was an ancient Chappell consecrated to the honour of the most blessed Virgin: And how there he found twelve Hermites, Successours of the Disciples of S. Phaganus and Diruvianus, by whom he was elected their Head. There also he declares his happy invention of a Writing compo|sed by the foresaid Apostolicall men Phaga|nus and Diruvianus, in which was contain'd that they had receiv'd from Pope Eleutherius ten years of Indulgence: and that by a reve|lation from our Lord they had built a Church to the honour of S. Michael the Archangel: How likewise by a Vision it was signified to him that he was to honour the same Blessed Archangell in the same place: for a testimo|ny of the certainty of which Vision his left arm withered, and was not restored till he had acquainted the rest of his Brethren with what he had seen. This Chart S. Patrick left with two devout Irish Monks, Arnulphus Ogmar, his companions, which resolved to remain attending on the said Chappell. In conclusion, the Holy Bishop relates how he conferr'd an Indulgence of a hundred dayes on those who by cutting down wood clea|red

a passage for the devout Visitants, of the Chappell consecrated by our Lord himself to the honour of his most Blessed Mother.
Ap. Capgrav. in S. Patricio.6. At his return from Rome S. Patrick brought with him some Relicks of the Holy Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and likewise of Saint Stephen the Blessed Deacon and Martyr: together with a linnen cloath, on which was sprinkled of the Blood of our Saviour Iesus-Christ, which holy Relicks were reserved there behind the Altar of Saint Patrick. This is the nar|ration of the Authour of S. Patricks life in Capgrave.
7. That which is here deliver'd particu|larly concerning the Relicks of S. Stephen the Martyr seems confirmed by what Baro|nius out of Ancient Writers reports, how this same year Eudocia wife of the Emperour Theodosius brought from Ierusalem the said Relicks, which were layd up in the Church of S. Laurence the Martyr, and there piously venerated by devout Christians.
Iocelis. in Pa|tricio.8. Iocelinus who expressly affirms that it was in S. Patricks return from Rome that he visited Brittany, further declares that during his abode in this his Native countrey, he foun|ded many Monasteries, filling them with Reli|gious men, who willingly submitted themselves to the observation of that form of a Religious life which was prescribed by him: That he foretold with the tongue and Spirit of Prophecy many unfortunate and many prosperous things which in future times should befall Brittany: And more|over that he foresaw and foretold the Sanctity of S. David then enclos'd in his Mothers womb (who was born in the year of Christ four-hundred sixty two) whereby is confirm'd what in the Antiquities of Glastenbury is as|serted concerning S. Patricks long abode in Brittany after his converting Ireland.


XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

1.2. Of Bachiarius Disciple to S. Patrick: His Pilgrimage: His Epistle to an ince|stuous Preist, c.

1. AMong the Brittish Disciples of Saint Patrick the memory of Saint Bachia|rius, whom some affirm to be the same with Saint Maccaeus, or Mocthaeus, is celebra|ted. He was,A. D. 443. Pits in Ba|chiario. saith Pits, by Nation a Brittain, and Disciple of Saint Patrick: He addicted him|self to the study of litterature at Car-leon. He was an excellent Poet, and skillful Mathematician: for his younger years he entirely employd in such studies.Gennad. in Catalog. Gennadius in his Catalogue gives him the Character of a man excellently versed in Christian Philosophy. Adding withall, that for conserving his integrity and Chastity he for|sook his countrey, and undertook a long Pilgri|mage.
2. We were inform'd above from Girardus Cambrensis, that the Brittains instructed by S. Germanus accounted Pilgrimages, especial|ly to Rome, among the works of Piety. And many motives S. Bachiarius might have to absent himself from his countrey, besides that mention'd by Gennadius: For it could not but much afflict his soule to be a specta|tour of the enormous vices raigning there: and probably he had a foresight of the mise|ries which would shortly befall it.
3. Concerning this Pilgrimage,Pits vbi sup. the fore|cited Authour Pits thus writes; Bachiarius seeing his countrey afflicted with dayly calami|ties, out of compassion to it, and with an inten|tion to implore divine assistance, undertook very tedious and laborious Pilgrimages. But there wanted not detractours and calumniatours in those times, who therefore charged him with levity, inconstancy and vanity, if not worse. Whereupon he was obliged to cleare himself by writing an Apology, in which he seriously pro|tested that he undertook and perform'd those travells meerly for the love of God, the salva|tion of his soule, and comfort of his afflicted coun|trey. And because it was impossible for him to purge himself to all his detractours, he wrote his Defence to S. Leo the first Pope of that name, the common Father of all Christians, as may be collected from Gennadius, Honorius and Cap|grave.
4. There is moreover extant in the Great Bibliotheque of the Fathers a learned and ele|gant Epistle written on this occasion by the same S. Bachiarius.Biblioth. PP. He had heard that a certain Preist by the Devills suggestion had violated a consecrated Virgin, for which he was cast out of the Church, without any hope of being restor'd. The Holy man was deeply afflicted both for the enormity of the Crime, and extreme rigour of the punishment. Whereupon he wrote an Epistle replenish'd both with Divine learning and compassio|nate Charity. This Epistle he gave to a Preist call'd Ianuarius, whom he humbly entreats, and strongly evinces for the Restitution of the Offender, shewing that in the most fruit|full feild of Gods Church there grew herbes medecinall to every wound Then addres|sing his speech to the guilty Preist, he power|fully aexhorts him to Pennance, in an inclos'd Monastery, there to expiate his crime by fasting, sack-cloath and prayer, and to begg the Intercession of Gods Saints in his behalf: And fearing least he should accumulate his sin by joyning Mariage to his incest, he terrifies him with shewing the abominable excesse of marying one who was espous'd  consecrated to our Lord, when she took the Veyle of her Religious Profession. By which Epistle may be seen, as in a Mirrour, the State of the Ecclesiasticall Disciplin of those times, the inviolablenes of their Religious Vows and Celibacy of Preists: So that we may easily iudge what censure the Prime Apostle of Re|formation, Luther with his Catherine Bor, would then have incurr'd.
A. D. 446.5. Besides this Epistle, the same S. Bachia|rius wrote many other Treatises which are reckond up by the Centuriators of Magde|burg: who adde that he liv'd to a very old age, dying in the year four hundred and sixty. If he be the same with him whom Bi|shop Vsher calls Maccaeus, and the Annals of Vlster name Muchti or Mochta, his death is prolonged much longer, till the year of Grace five hundred thirty five.


XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Brittains lamentable de|mand of succours: in vain.
6. c. They call in the Saxons, to their destruction.

A. D. 445.1. IN these times the Vandals by their in|cursions and numerous Armies grei|vously opprs'd the Roman Empire. Which opportunity being observ'd by the Picts Scotts, they likewise broke their limitts, and miserably wasted the Provinces of Brittany which had been subject to the Romans. This hapned in the eighth year of Vortigerns raign.
A. D. 446.2. The year following they continued their invasion with such extreme violence, and were so weakly resisted by the Brittains sortned with luxury, that after much blood|shed, and horrible wasting of the countrey, their only refuge was to the Romans, whom with the most humble and passionate Pray|ers they solicited to afford them succour.
3. Their short, but lamentable Epistle directed to Aetius Generall of the Roman for|ces is thus recorded by Gildas:Gildas. Beda l. 1. c. 13. To Aetius third time Consul: The groans of the Brittains. Our barbarous enemies drive us to the Sea: the Sea beates us back upon our barbarous Enemies. Between these two we are expos'd either to be slain with the sword, or drownd: and to avoyd both we find no remedy.
4. But these letters avayld nothing: for the Romans with much adoe being scarce able to secure the heart of their Empire, could not defend the remote bounds. So that the Brittains wanting arms, and much more wanting hearts, became dayly a prey to their enemies. With this calamity another was ioynd much more terrible, which was extre|mity of famine (saith S. Beda)Bed. l. . c. 14. which forc'd many of them to render themselves slaves to their Savage enemies: Only a few being by these miseries taught the wisedome to seek aid from heaven, retir'd into inaccessible mountains  caves, from whence they took the courage often times with good successe to sett upon their Ene|mies, busy only in heaping spoyles, which they recover'd from them, and drove them back into their own quarters.
5. But this refreshment lasted but awhile,A. D. 450 because their Piety and recourse to Divine help presently vanish'd. For as the same Authour from Gildas declares,Id. ibid. After the Hostile invasions of their enemies ceased, the Island began to abound with all manner of fruits and provisions, beyond what any former age could remember: And as their plenty abounded, so did their luxury: which was quickly accompa|nied with all sorts of vices: especially cruelty to one another, hatred of Divine Truth, c.
6. Gods patience therefore being spent towards a people which grew worse both by prosperity and adversity, he brought upon them Enemies far more Savage and barbarous then either the Picts or Scotts: Or rather he so infatuated the reprobat Brit|tains, that they themselves invited from a remote countrey those new Enemies to con|sume them. These were the Saxons, the Angli and Iutes, Nations of Germany, terrible for their undaunted courage and agility, saith Paulus Diaconus: most formidable to the Ro|man,Paul. Diac. because most sudden and violent in their enterprises,A. Marcell. saith Marcellinus: Esteemd the most warlick Nations among the Germans for strength of bodies, courage of minds, and pa|cience to suffer all corporall labours and incommo|dities, saith Zosimus.Zosimus.
7. But before we particularly relate the last fatall Tragedy of the ruine of the Brittish Kingdom and State in this Island, some more speciall occurrents hapning at the same time, and relating to Ecclesiasticall affaires, require first to be dispatch'd, that they may not interrupt the contexture of that dismall story.


XVIII. CHAP.XVIII. C.

1.2. c. S. Patrick returns into Ireland Calls a Synod: The Decrees of it.
5.6 Of S. Albeus, c. Disciples of S. Patrick.
7. Conversion of K. Engus.
8.9. c. S. Benignus his Successour in Armagh: His retreat.

1. SAint Patrick,A. D. 450. though for his parti|cular consolation he had retir'd him|self into the secure repose of a Monastery, yet it was with this condition, that whenso|ever any emergent, pressing necessity of Gods Church, requiring his presence and care, should intervene, he would quitt the Office of Mary sitting at our Lords feet, and exchange it for that of Martha's ministery in attending and providing a supply to his necessities in his members.
2. And some such cause occurr'd, some disorders in the new-founded Church of Ireland hapned, which after ten years quiet

repose drew him out of his solitude: Which though we cannot precisely determine what it was, yet no doubt it is involv'd in some one or more of the Canons and De|crees of a Synod which upon his return into that Island he assembled.
3. Which Decrees for many ages con|ceal'd, and by negligence expos'd to rust and mothes, have been of late days by the industry of S. Henry Spelman rescued and re|stor'd to light, though in severall places defac'd. Wee will not here trouble the Reader with the entire Transcript of them: since those who are more curious may have recourse to the said S. Henry Spelmans first volume of Brittish and English Councils:Spelm. de Concil. pag. It will be sufficient to select from them some speciall Canons, which will give us some light to discover the Ecclesiasticall Discipline of those times.
4. It is there ordain'd, That if any Eccle|siasticall person from the Dore-keeper to the Preist,Synod. Hiber can. 6. shall not for decency wear a Tunick, and have his hair cutt after the Roman manner: or shall permitt his wife to goe abroad unvayl'd, shall be separated from the Communion.bid. c. 9. Again, That a Monk and consecrated Virgin shall not abide in the same lodging, nor travel in the same Cha|riot.ib. can. 10. That if a Monk shall neglect the Divine Office, and wear long haire, he shall be excom|municated. That the Alms of Excommuni|cated persons,ib. can. 12.13. ib. 14.15. or Pagans shall not be receiv'd. That if any Christian shall be guilty of manslaughter, fornication, or consulting Soothsayers, he shall perform Pennance for each crime, the space of a year: And he that is guilty of stealing, half a year, of which, twenty days he shall eat bread only: But withall he must be oblig'd to restitution.ib. can. 16. That if any Christian shall beleive Spirits may be represented in a Glass, he shall be anathematiz'd,ib. can. 17. c. That if any consecrated Virgin shall marry, she shal be excommunica|ted till she be converted and forsake her adul|teryes: which having done she shall perform due Pennance: After which they are forbidden to live in the same house or town.ib. can. 23. That if any Preist shall build a Church, he must not offer Sacrifice in it before it be co~secrated by the Bishop. That if a Clergyman be excommunicated,ib. can. 28. he must say his Prayers alone, and not in the same house with his Brethren: Neither must he pre|sume to offer or consecrate, till he be absolv'd. That a Bishop may not ordain in another Bishops Diocese,ib. can. 30. without his permission: Only upon Sundays he may offer Sacrifice.ib. can. 33. That a Clark coming from the Brittains into Ireland without Letters testimoniall, be not suffred to minister.
5. There is no mention made of this or any other Irish Synod in any Authour, except only in a generall expression of Iocelinus,Prob. in vit. S. Patr. c. l 2. and Probus who wrote S. Patricks life extant among S. Bedas works. And in him wee find this only passage, The most holy Bishop S. Patrick together with three other Bishops and many Clercks came to a fountiain call'd Debach, which flows from the side of Crochon toward the East; there to celebrate a Synod touching Ecclesiasticall affaires, and they sate neer the fountain. When behold two daugh|ters of King Logaren came early in the morning to wash in the same fountain, as woemen there usually did: and they found the Holy Synod with S. Patrick neer the fountain. Now the Bishops names were S. Patrick, Auxilius and Isserni|ninus: for this is the Inscription of this pre|sent Synod,Synod. Hibrn Inscriptio. Thanks be given to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Ptricius, Auxilius and Is|serninus to the Preists, Deacons and whole Clergy Health. It is better we should premonish those who are negligent, then blame things past for Salomon says, It is better to reprove, then be angry. The te|nour of our Definition is here under written, and begins thus; If any captive, c. Of these two Bishops Auxilius and Isserninus mention has been made before.
6. Another Holy Bishop and Disciple of S. Pa|trick challenges once more a commemora|tion in this History,Ap. Vsser. in Primord. f. 66. to wit, S. Albeus, in whose life extant in Bishop Vsher we read, That when he heard that S. Patrick had converted to our Lord Engus King of Munster (Momonensium) and was with him in his Royal Citty Cassel, he came to salute them Now the King and S Patrick much rejoyced at the arrivall of S. Albeus, whose joy to see them also was great. There the Holy man reverently entertained his Master S. Pa|trick, for he was very humble. After this King Engus and S. Patrick ordaind that the Archie|piscopall See of all Munster should for ever be placed in the Citty and chair of S. Albeus.
7. And as touching the Conversion of King Engus this passage also is extant in the same learned Authour,Ib. f. 865. a little before, The glorious Bishop S. Patrick having sowen the Faith of Christ in the Regions of Lenster, prosecuted his way to the limits of Munster. And the King of Munster, na|med Engus, hearing of the Holy Bishops coming, with great joy mett him, having an earnest desire to beleive and be baptised. He conducted therefore S. Patrick with much reverence and joy to his Royal Citty, call'd Cassel: and there the King having been instructed, beleived and received Baptism.
8 It is probable that S. Patrick abode at this time severall years in Ireland:A. D. 53. For three years after this he consecrated S. Benignus Arch|bishop of Armagh. And then quite devesting himself of all solicitude for others, he retur|ned into Brittany to his much desired soli|tude of Glastenbury, where he likewise ended his dayes.
9. As for his Successour S. Benignus,A. D. 460. he also after seaven years spent in care of his Province, thirsting after solitude, and willing to see again his most beloved Master, came to Glastenbury, desirous to receive from him a most perfect Rule of Monasticall Profession. This he did, saith Malmsburiensis,Malmsbur. Antiq. Glast. by the ad|monition of an Angel. And being come thi|ther he demanded of S. Patrick what place he should make choice of to live in Vnion with God alone, divided from human society.
10. The Answer given him by S Patrick, who

encourag'd him to persist in his present pur|pose,A. D. 460. is thus recorded by Adam of Domer|ham:Adam Do|merham in Antiquit. Glaston. Ioan. Monachus. Benignus, saith he, discovered to S. Patrick the motives of his journey: who exhorted him to pursue happily his well begun purpose, saying, Goe, my beloved Brother, taking only your staff with you. And when you shall be arriv'd at the place appointed by God for your repose, wheresoever having fix'd your staff in the ground, you shall see it flourish and grow green, there know that you must make your abode. Thus both of them being comforted in our Lord with mutuall dis|courses, Saint Benignus being accompanied only with a youth nam'd Pincius, begun his journey through wooddy and marish places. But assoon as he was arriv'd in an Island where he saw a soli|tary place, which he iudg'd fitt for his habita|tion, he presently fix'd his staff in the ground, which without delay wonderfully grew green, and brought forth fresh leaves. There therefore Saint Benignus resolv'd to abide to his death in the service of God alone. And to this day the same Tree, the witnes and sign of his Sanctity, remains flourishing with green boughs, neer the Oratory of the blessed man, c.
11. The same Authour further proceeds to declare how by another miracle God te|stified that the Holy mans watchings, fasting and prayers with other austerityes were ac|ceptable to him.Id. ibid. Although, saith he, that soli|tary place separated from wordly conversation was very opportune and proper for attending to God and Divine things: Yet one incommodity it had, that there was no water neer: So that young Pin|cius was compell'd every day to fetch water al|most three miles off. whence it came to passe that partly through wearines, but principally through suggestions of malignant Spirits he grew disheart|ned, which the Holy man perceiving oftimes en|deavoured to comfort and encourage him. At last taking compassion of his labours, he prostrating himself on the ground, humbly and heartily besought our Lord to open for his servant a spring of water, which might sufficiently supply his ne|cessities. After which admonish'd by an An|gelicall vision he gave his staff to young Pincius, commanding him to goe to a certain place full of reeds, and there striking the ground with his staff, he should without doubt find water, so earnestly desir'd by them. The child obeyd, went to the place, and in the name of the Blessed Trinity he strook the ground three times, making three holes in it with the end of the staff: which he had no sooner done, but immediatly a fountain gush'd forth: from whence to this day a brook, and that no small one, is supplied, which is both good for fishing, and healthfull likewise for many in|firmities: The same Narration is likewise to be found in Iohn the Monk, and the summ of it in Capgrave:Capgrav. in S Benigno. who calls the Island in which S. Benignus liv'd, by the name of Ferramere.
22. Bishop Vsher in confirmation of this relation made by our Brittish Historians, tou|ching S. Benignus his coming into Brittany, collects likewise from ancient Irish Writers that the same Holy Bishop four years before his death relinquish'd his Archiepiscopall See of Armagh, and retired himself. So that he is to be suppos'd to have ended his life about the year of Christ four hundred fifty five. Six-hundred and thirty years after, his Sa|cred Body was translated to Glastenbury, by the direction and care of Thurstin then Abbott: The ceremonies and solemnity of which Translation are to be read in the Antiquities of that famous Monastery.Antiquit. Glaston. f. 87.


XIX. CHAP.XIX. CH.

1.2. c. Many Irish Saints in Cornwall.
4.5. c. Of S. Piran: and S. Cadocus there.

1. THE Example of S. Patrick and S. Be|nignus was imitated by many other Irish Saints, which to enjoy a perfect vacan|cy from worldly affaires retired into Britta|ny to consecrate themselves to God in a life of Austerity and Contemplation. And in Brittany the Province whither they most fre|quently betook themselves was Cornwall: In|somuch as Camden had just ground to say,Camden. in Danmon. i. That the people of Cornwal have always born such a veneration to the Irish Saints, vhich retir'd thither, that almost all the towns in that Province have been consecrated to their memory. There is S. Buriens, dedicated to an Irish Religious wo|man of that name: to the Church whereof King Ethelstan in the year nine hundred thir|ty six gave the Priviledge of Sanctuary. There is the town of S. Iies, so call'd from S. Iia a woman of singular sanctity, which came thither from Ireland. There is S. Colomb, na|med not from S. Columbanus, as some Histo|rians erroneously imagin, but from an Irish S. Colomba, as the same Authour assures us. There is S. Merven, S. Erben, S. Eval, S. Wenn, S. Enedor and many other places, all which took their names from Irish Saints.
2. But one speciall Irish Saint is there ve|nerated, to whom in a more particular man|ner a place is here due. That is S. Piran, call'd by the Irish, S. Kiaran. Concerning whom B. Vsher out of an ancient Authour thus writes,Vssr in Pri|mord. c. 16. f. 718. that he hearing that in Rome Christian Reli|gion was most truly taught and faithfally practi|sed, forsook Ireland and travelled thither. Where being arrived he was instructed in Christian Faith and baptised. And there he remaind twenty years, reading Divine Scriptures, many books of which he gathered together, and learning Eccle|siasticall Rules with all diligence.. He addes fur|ther, that at Rome he was ordaind Bishop, and sent into Ireland thirty years before S. Patrick: for which reason some Irish Writers call him (Sanctorum Primogenitum) the first-born of all their Saints. But it is scarce credibile that four Bishops (as they pretend) should have been sent into that Island before the days of S. Patrick, who yet is acknow|ledged the Prime and only Apostle of that

Countrey,A. D. 453. and in the Roman Martyrologe is said to be the first which preached Christ in IrelandMrtyrol. Rom 7.Mart.
Ap. Capgrav.  S. Pirano.3. More probably the Authour of S. Pirans life in Capgrave affirms that he was one of the first twelve Bishops consecrated by S. Patrick to propagate the Faith which he first preached there. And after that by his labours the Gospell had made gd progresse, by S. Patricks example S. Piran and many others inflam'd with the Divine Love, forsook all wordly things, and lead an Eremiticall life, among whom was S. Bredan, c.
4. But omitting others, let us see what the same Authour writes concerning the Mo|tives inducing S. Piran to retire himself in his old age into Brittany:S. Piran, saith he, calling together his Disciples and the rest of the people thus spoke to them,d. ibid. My Brethren and beloved children, It is the Divine Will that I should forsake Ireland and goe into Cornwall in Brittany, there to expect the end of my dayes. I cannot resist the Will of God c.
Having thus discours'd unto them, he sailed into Cornwall, where he built a mansion for himself; and many miracles God was pleas'd to work by him among the people. At last infirmity of body having seised on him of which he languish'd, calling his Bre|thren together, and copiously instructing them in things which concern the Kingdom of God, he commanded his grave to be made ready, which being done he went down into it on the third of the Nones of May, and there rendred up his soule to God, which with great glory was receiv'd into heaven. His sacred Body reposes in Cornwall toward the Northern (Severn) sea, fifteen miles from Petrock-stow (Padstow) five and twenty from Mousehole.
5. The Memory of this holy man yet re|mains in the same place, which Camden in his perambulation thus declares;Camden. in Danmos. A more spa|cious region hence runs East ward, the coast wherof winds nor thward: where nothing occurs in the way, which has any note of antiquity, but only a chappell dedicated to S. Piran, seated in a sandy place: who was a Holy man which came from Ireland, and if wee may beleive the Legend, fedd ten Irish Kings and their armies with his three cowes, rais'd to life dead piggs and dead men: and in that place devested himself of his mor|tality.
6. Wee might adjoyn here the Gests of other Holy men, who began to be known about this time, as S. Cadocus, sirnamed Sophias, Abbot and Martyr: likewise S. Gildas, not the Historian, though he also liv'd at the same times, and S. David Bishop of Menevia, who was born in the year of Grace four hundred sixty two. But because their prin|cipall actions were perform'd many years after in the following Age, wee will refer them thither.


XX. CHAP.A. D. 435
XX. CH.

1.2. c. Proofs that the story of S. Vrsula belongs to this time: And Disproofs of all others pretentions.

1. DVring the raign of the infamous Brittish King Vortigern,A. D. 453. whilst the minds of the Brittains effeminated with vice yeilded allmost without resistance to the ty|ranny of their neighbours, and call'd in for more barbarous enemies from a remote countrey to be Tyrants of their own: God rais'd another Brittish army to blott out the shame and cowardice of the former: an army of Virgins conducted by a Royal and Saintly Virgin, the glorious S. Vrsula. For that to this time their Martyrdom is to be referd, and not to any former age, many circumstances in their Story, which cannot suit with former times, doe demonstrate strongly.
2. For those Authours which assign this Story the year of Grace two hundred thirty eight are manifestly disproved,Chron. Colo|niens. Harige Abb. in Cata|loy. Episcop. Tngrens. because the name of Hunns, who were their murderers, was not in those days known in Italy or Germany: besides they mention a certain Pope named Cyriacus, of whom there is no memory in the rank of Roman Bishops, saith Baronius. Adde to this that no reason can be alledged why such numbers should then either fly, or be sent out of their countrey.
3.Galfrid Mo+nume. Polyd Virgil. l. 3. o. Trith m. Hist. Franc. Baron. Other Writers therefore more probably affirm that S. Vrsula and her companions suffred when the Tyrant Mayimus in the year of Christ three hundred eighty three lead with him into Gaule a great army of Brittish soldiers,A. D. 383. which he seated in Armorica: to whom these virgins are suppos'd to be de|stin'd for wives.Marc. Vlfe+rus. This opinion is iustified by Baronius from Galfridus and Polydor Virgil, to whose authority may be added that of the Breviary of Sarum in the Lessons of that Feast.
4. But the short time of Maximus his raign after his passing ouer into Gaule, and his continuall employment in warr, could not permitt him to attend to the settling Colonies of inhabitants in Armorica, whither himself never went: for as Zosimus writes, he pre|sently march'd to the banks of the Rhene.Zosimus. l. Paul. Amilius. Moreover the French Historians refer the ere|cting a Principality of Brittains in Armorica to a much later date, when Meroveus was King of the Francks, which was in the year of Grace four hundred forty eight. Likewise Dionotus Prince of Cornwal, who was Father to S. Vrsula, is acknowledg'd by our best Hi|storians to have liv'd long after the Emperour Gratianus his time, who was slain by Maximus: so that S. Vrsula could not be alive, much

lesse mariageable in those dayes. Neither is there any mention among Historians of Hunns so early infesting Germany, or exer|cising Piracy on the River Rhene or the Western Ocean.
Gotefrid. Vi|erb. Chron. par. 16.
Werner. ad A. D. 434.
Sabell. En+nead. 8. l. 2. Sigonl. 23. Sigebert. ad A. D. 43. Herm. Eleim. n vit. S. Vr+sulae.5. Those Historians therefore have best or|derd their calculations who assign the Mar|tyrdome of these glorious Virgins to the pre|sent Age when Attila King of the Hunns, truly sirnam'd Gods Scourge, wasted Italy and the Western Regions. To demonstrate which, if we consult the Writers of those times, we shall find that the Armies of Attila consi|sting of a mixture of many barbarous Na|tions, to the number of seaven hundred thousand soldiers, overran and destroy'd a great part of Germany and Gaule, and this both by Sea and land.Sidon. Apoll. panegyr. de vito. For this we have the Testimonies of Writers either then alive, or within few years after: Thus Sidonius Apol|linaris elegantly describes in verse this hor|rible invasio~ of Gaule by vast armies of those barbarous Nations,Greg. Turn. hist. Franc. l. 2. c. 26. in a Panegyrick to Avitus, chosen Emperour in Gaule, written by him. And Gregory Bishop of Tours relates their wa|sting of Germany, the burning of the Citty of Metz, their massacring of Preists before the holy Altars, c. And in the life of S. Lupus we read how that holy Bishop was lead away captive by Attila from the Citty of Troyes to the Rhene.
6. Now wheras in the Gests of these Holy Virgin-Martyrs frequent mention is made of the Tyrant Maximus: for which cause prin|cipally Baronius and other Writers doe assign their Martyrdom to the time when Maximus who slew the Emperour Gratianus, went out of Brittany into Gaule attended with a nu|merous Brittish Army: We shall in the Ro|man story find another Tyrant Maximus also, descended from the stock of the other Ma|ximus slain by the first Theodosius,Procop. de bel. Vadal. l. 1. A. D. 455. Sidon. Paneg. car. 7. as Procopius relates: which younger Maximus in these times invaded the Empire after the death of Valentinian: and of whom Sidonius makes mention at the same time that he describes the wasting of Aremorica, whither these Holy Virgins intended their voyage. And moreover the same Authour in the same Pa|negyrick mentions the Piracy exercis'd by these barbarous people on the Brittish Sea, where he again repeats the name of the same Maximus, who appointed Avitus his Generall to resist them. All these circum|stances, and occurrents meeting at this time strongly argue that now it was that S. Vrlusa and her holy Companions so gloriously began and finish'd their voyage.
7. This will yet more clearly appear if we consider the present state of Brittany. For now Vortigern having call'd in the Saxons to aid him against the Picts, Hengistus and his Brother Horsa at first arriving with small but warlick Troops, serv'd the Brittains success|fully against their Enemies: But afterward despising their freinds for their vices and cowardlines, they sent for more numerous forces, and together with them Hengistus caus'd his beautifull daughter Rowena to be brought: with whose allurements the foolish King Vortigern being ensnared, demanded her for his wife, and bought her of her Fa|ther with the price of the whole Province of Kent. After which the Saxons making peace with the Picts and Scotts, turn'd their arms onely against their Benefactours. At first they began complaints about pay and want of provisions, theatning unless they might be satisfied, to lay the whole Island wast. Which threats they presently after with all inhuma|nity executed, and in a dire manner took re|venge of all the crimes committed by the Brittains against God and his Religion, which they professed.
8. During these troubles and miseries tra|gically described by Huntingdon,Huntingdon. l. 2. a world of Brittains of both sexes forsook their coun|trey, upon which a malediction from God did so visibly lye, and fled into strange Re|gions, whilst others submitted themselves to perpetuall slavery under the Saxons.Gild. de Ex|cidio. And be|fore him Gildas affirms the same, saying ex|pressly, That very many pass'd ouer Sea into for|raign countreys with greivous howling and la|mentation, and in their voyage by Sea they ioyntly with mournfull voyces repeated those sad words of the Psalmist, Thou hast,  Lord, given us up as sheep to be devoured, and hast dispersed us among the Nations. This seems to be a description most proper to the condi|tion of the weaker sexe: Which no doubt by the provident care of their parents and freinds was in the first place secured from the violence of their barbarous Enemies. And those words, Thou hast dispersed us among the Nations, doe most fittly suit to these Vir|gin-Martyrs, whose Sacred Relicks have been dispers'd among all the Nations of Chri|stendom.


XXI. CHAP.XXI. CH.

1.2 c. S. Vrsula and her Companions, Brittains: not Irish-Scotts, as a late Au|thour dreames.
4.5. c. Their Number, and cause of their voyage, c.

1. HAving thus setled the time of the Martyrdome of S. Vrsula and her de|vout companions, we will now proceed to a Narration touching the countrey out of which they issued, their Names, as many as are recorded, and other particulars relating to their voyage.
2. There is so generall a consent of Eccle|siasticall Writers constantly affirming S. Vrsula and her companions to have been without all controversy Brittains, that a late Irish Authour, calling himself Candidus Eblanius, who upon the authority only of Petrus de

Natalibus, challenges her for an Irish woman, has, therby expos'd to the world his disin|genuous ignorance only, without hope of gaining beleif from any. He fancies that they were sent over Sea to the new Brittish inhabitants of Armorica, presently after the Elder Maximus his expedition. But how could Ireland at that time afford such an Army of Christian Virgins, when S. Patrick had not yet entred it as an Apostolick Missio|ner, but only a child caried thither Captive by Pyrats?
Martyrolog. Gallican. 21. Octob.3. But perhaps, saith he, they were Irish Scotts newly seated in the Northern parts of Brittany: among whom S. Daria the Mother of S. Vrsula according to the Gallican Marty|rologe is said to have lived. Indeed it is possi|ble that to avoyd the violence and fury of the Saxons now wasting Brittany, S. Daria might at this time seek refuge among the Irish-Scotts: But that the inhabitants of Ar|morica, call'd by Sidonius Apollinaris, Brittains seated along the River of Loire, neglecting their neighbours and kinred, the Brittains on the other side of the Sea, should send so far as Scotland to their old and never recon|cil'd Enemies,den. Ap. l. 1. Epist. 7. for wives, or that a countrey so unsetled should be able to spare so great a multitude of Virgins, this is rather a sick mans dream, then the assertion of a sober man.
4. In the next place touching the num|ber and quality of the Virgins companions of S. Vrsula, the constant opinion is that they were eleaven thousand. This is the number extant in the ancient Prayers of the Church, so we read in the Book call'd Hortu|lus animae, fram'd according to the old cu|stom of the Roman Church: and thus we read in the Howers of the Blessed Virgin according to the use of Sarum.The Church of Colen likewise (saith Hermannus Heien) the faithfull Guardian of the Relicks of S. Vrsula and her com|panions,Herm. Heien in vit. S. Vr|sula. hath without any contradiction accusto|med to praise God, and celebrate their memory with these following Antiphons, The jubilation of Divine praise doth continually sound in the Quire of the Saints, where the God of Gods is glorified in Sion. Alleluia. Among whom elea|ven thousand Virgins which follow the Lamb without spot, doe joyfully praise him with celestiall Hymns for ever Alleluia. These by Divine ordi|nance coming from the West, have here shed their blood for the name of Christ, because by no perse|cution they could be withdrawn from his Confes|sion. Let us therefore with all creatures blesse the Lord of heaven who has adorn'd and dignified this place with so pretious a Martyrdom.
5. The cause of the departure of such mul|titudes of Virgins, accompanied, no doubt, by many more of both sexes, is thus declared by Trithemius:Trithem. compnd. l. 1. art. 387. though he mistake in assi|gning the time of the Elder Maximus. His words are these: The number of soldiers which under their Captain Conanus went out of Britta|ny into Armorica was thirty thousand fighting men, and a hundred thousand plebeians to till the ground: All these by the command of Maxi|mus were transported out of Brittany into Armo|rica (then scarce inhabited.) Of those, many were unmarried: and those which had wives, left them at home. Now Conanus and those with him being Christians would by no means take to wives the daughters of Idolatrous Pagans. Neither indeed would they have married Gaulish women though they had been Christians, so great an aversion they had from them. At that time there was in Brittany on the other side of the Sea op|posit to Armorica, a certain Prince named Dio|natus, who succeeded his Brother Caradoc in that Principality: to whom likewise the Emperour Ma|ximus at his departure had committed the care of the whole Island, as being a very prudent man. He had a daughter named Vrsula, the most beau|tifull amongst all the Virgins of Brittany, and withau~ very devout to our Lord. Conanus there|fore the ninth Prince of Armorica, who passio|natly loved this Lady, by his Messengers and letters to Dionatus Prince of Cornwal, begg'd earnestly of him to send her to be his wife, and with her a certain number of Virgins signified in his letters, to be married to his soldiers, accor|ding to their qualities, that is, Noble Virgins for persons of quality, and plebeians for inferiour soldiers. Dionatus therefore desirous to comply with the desires of Conanus, gathered out of all the Provinces of Brittany eleaven thousand maids of Noble blood: and of an inferiour rank three|score thousand women, partly maids and partly such as had been married. All these he made to be assembled at London, and from all the coasts of Brittany commanded ships to be brought, suffi|cient to transport so great multitudes. Thus writes Trithemius.
6. Vsuardus will inform us how this femall Army was ordered,Vsuard. in Chron. and distributed into ranks under their Leaders, reciting likewise the names of the principall Ladies: for thus he writes, Of the eleaven thousand Virgins the Queen and Captain General was S. Vrsula, daughter of Diontus a King of the Brittains, and espous'd to Conanus Prince of Armorica, or lesser Brittany. All these Virgins, together with in|numerable more attending them, were crown'd with Martyrdom at Colen, c. Now over the whole Army there were joyn'd to S. Vrsula four other Virgins having a generall command, whose names were, Pinnosa, Cordula, Eleutheria and Florentia. Vnder these she appointed eleaven others, each of which was to govern a thousand and the names of those eleaven we will in the next Cha|pter sett down, besides those of particular Virgins.
7 Most of those names, and many other besides are to be found in the Martyrologes of Canisius,Mart. Angl. . Novemb and of England: as likewise in the Of|fices of a world of particular Churches, which celebrate their memory as shall be shew'd hereafter. And it must be ascrib'd to a mira|culous Providence, or Revelation that they have not utterly perished. And thus having premis'd these generall observations tou|ching this blessed Army of Saints, we will now prosecute their Voyage.



XXII. CH.XXII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The story of the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the eleaven thousand Virgins.
10.11. S. Cordula out of fear hides herself, but next day returns, and is Martyred.

1. THE History of the Martyrdom of these glorious Virgins, though for the sub|stance of it attested by a world of particular Churches through all the Regions of Christen|dom, yet has been so corrupted by the pro|digious fictions of vain Writers even in more ancient times, that some doe que|stion whether ever there were any such persons at all, and doubt not but the Le|gend of their Martyrdom is false. The rather, because the Writers of that age, of the age immediatly following, Gildas and S. Beda, doe not in their Histories make any expresse mention of them.
2. But as for Gildas, his design to bewayle the generall destruction of the Brittish state, and to declare the horrible crimes over|spreading the Nation, which provok'd Al|mighty God to give them up to the fury of a barbarous people, which though ignorant of Gods Law, yet was lesse stain'd with vices against the Law of Nature and reason then the other: This considered, no wonder if tying himself to his present subject, he did not in so short yet comprehensive a narra|tion involve occurrents hapning abroad. Yet as hath been declared, he has expres|sions which seem intended to describe in a generall way this particular matter, deser|ving to be the sole argument of the Penn of a ready Writer.
3. And as for S. Beda, it is no wonder if his History, intended only to relate the af|faires of the Saxons, does not recount such particular occurrents of the Brittains. Not|withstanding in other Treatises he twice ex|pressly mentions the celebration of the Me|mory of eleaven thousand Virgin Martyrs suf|fring for their Faith and Chastity at Colen:Bed. in Ephe|mer. id. in Martyrol. 21. Octob. to wit, in his Martyrologe and in his Ephemeris. So that his authority and testimony alone, living so neer these times, and being so wel vers'd in Ecclesiasticall Antiquities, does render the truth of their story, in grosse un|questionable.
4. The particular Narration of which shall here be nakedly set down according to the consent of most of our Writers. For as for the pretended Revelations of S. Elizabeth, wherin we are told of an unheard of Pope Cyriacus, of Iames a Patriark of Antioch, of Seaven Bishops and eleaven Kings, all these Brittains, and accompanying S. Vrsula in her voyage, as likewise of their wandring and sporting three years upon the Sea, c. These things, though formerly thrust into the Lessons of the Roman Breviary, yet upon se|rious examination and correction of it by three Popes, are now cast out as impertinent and uncertain Tales; we following so great an authority, will likewise neglect them.
5. The plain and simple Narration of their Gests therefore is this. S. Vrsula and her elea|ven thousand chast companions chosen out of all the Provinces of Brittany, together with a great but uncertain number of at|tendants, partly to avoy'd the fury of Bar|barous Saxons wasting their countrey, and partly to goe to their design'd Husbands ex|pecting them in Armorica, in the year of our Lord four hundred fifty three saild out of their port in Brittany, and pursuing their voyage Westward and toward the South, by contrary winds and Tempests were not only stopp'd in their course, but driven backward, and forced to shelter themselves at the en|trance of the Rhene into the Sea.
6. At this time infinit numbers of Hunns, Gepids, Russians and other barbarous Nations of the North, both by land and Sea vexed Germany and Gaule, as the Writers of that age unanimously testify. And by Gods spe|ciall Providence, who intended to match these Holy Virgins to a Spouse incomparably better, then their parents had design'd them to, in the same station where they took harbour a great Navy of those savage Pirats lay floating, so that there was no possibi|lity for them to escape.
7. They are therefore seis'd upon by these Pirats, among whom were mingled great numbers of the old Enemies of Brittany, the Picts, for the cheif Captains of this fleet are said to have been Gaunus a Hunn, and Melga a Pict. Being thus become Captives, they are in boats conveyed up the Rhene as far as Colen, where their generall forces were encamped, and as some Writers affirm, had beseig'd that Citty.
8. When they were arriv'd thither, and encompass'd with innumerable multitudes of Savages hating Christian Religion, and bru|tish in their sensuall lusts, both their Faith and chastity are at once assaulted, and no means, either by allurements or threatnings are left unattempted to expugnate their chast breasts. In this extremity S. Vrsula with flaming words exhorts her companions to contemn death, to sacrifice their chast soules and bodies to their celestiall Bridegrome, and willingly to follow him who now calls them to receive eternall crowns of glory. She tells them that in this conflict, though their enemies be never so many, strong and cruell, yet that themselves were unconque|rable, unlesse they would willingly yeild up the victory, c.
9. With this Exhortation the minds of these holy Virgins become so full of courage that they think their Executioners delay their death too long. Insomuch as among so

vast a multitude of tender maids not one single person was found which either out of hope or fear yeilded to the wills of the barbarous soldiers. They all willingly offer their necks and breasts to the enemies swords, which with unheard of cruelty are employ'd to exterminate from the earth so many immaculate soules: not one of which by a miraculous care of Almighty God suf|fred any violation in their bodies.
10. Onely one there was among them, which though she did not yeild to the bar|barous Enemies, yet out of a naturall fear of death, sought by hiding her self to delay it. Her name was Cordula. Yet she the next morning came to the place where her com|panions bodies lay massacred, and condem|ning her former cowardlines, willingly of|fred her self to her persecutours, professing publickly her Faith and chastity: And thus though she came late to receive her Crown with her companions, yet her courage seem'd now greater, in that she expos'd her self single to the fury of an innumerable multitude of savage enemies. Her memory is thus particularly celebrated in the Roman Martyrologe, on the day following the Mar|tyrdom of S. Vrsula and the rest:Martyr. Rom. 2. Octob. At Colen on the tenth of the Calends of November is solem|ni'd the memory of S. Cordula: who being one of the companions of S. Vrsula, after she had in a fright to see their cruell massacre hid her self: afterwards repenting, she voluntarily came forth out of her hiding place, and last of them all receiv'd the crown of Martyrdom.
11. Such a Sacrifice as this had never before, nor hath been since offred to Almighty God by his Church. We read of a S. Agnes, a S. Ca|therine, a S. Lucia and a few other miraculous Examples of courage and chastity in tender Virgins: but they were single persons, nei|ther is it unusuall with God to shew the power of his Grace in some particular favou|rits of his, to exalt the Faith and confound Vnbeleivers. There have likewise been recor|ded illustrious Examples of multitudes of men which have freely without resistance suffred Martyrdom, as the Thebaean Legion, c. But such courage in men, especially soldiers who dayly look death in the face, is not to be esteemed very extraordinary. Whereas here we find a far more numerous Army, consisting of young, timerous, tender Vir|gins, to whom ordinarily the sight of an Enemies look is insupportable, offring themselves freely to innumerable swords: Among them all not one single soule is found which yeilds to their flatteries or fury: and but one which delays her suffring the space onely of a single night, after which, she, as it were animated with the united, Spi|rits, of all her Companions, next day solicites the united fury of innumerable Enemies against her self alone, and gloriously trium|phing over the rage of men and Hell too, is ioyfully receiv'd among her blessed Co~panions.


XXIII. CHAP.XXIII. CH

1 2.3. c. The Names of these Holy Vir|gins: Their Sacred Relicks dispersed all the world over. Names of Churches where they are Venerated.

1. THE fame of this Tragedy in which was display'd the extremity of savage cruelty in men, and miraculous courage in Virgins, was no sooner spread abroad in the world, but that all countreys and Churches became suitours to be enrich'd with a por|tion of their sacred Relicks, which have been spread through Germany, Gaule, Italy, Brit|tany yea Asia, Africk, and of late India it self: So exactly was fullfill'd the Canticle of S. Vrsula and her Associats mention'd by Gil|das, Thou, O God, hast given us as sheep to be devoured, and hast disperst us among the Nations.
2. Not above ten years after this glorious Martyrdom, that is, about the year of Grace four hundred sixty three (saith Hermannus Fleien one of the Canons of Colen) Solinus, nam'd by others Aquilinus, Arch-Bishop of that Citty (as we find in our ancient Re|cords) out of reverence to the Memory of these holy Virgins, enclosed with walls the sacred place of their Martyrdom, in which was erected a Church consecrated to their cheif Captain S. Vrsula, which remains to this day: by the accesse of which place the Citty of Colen was so much enlarg'd. He also took out of the ground, as carefully as he could, their sacred bones, which he reverently again buried in chests hewn out of stone.
3. Neither did Brittany long delay to te|stify her veneration to these her blessed countrey-women. A witnes whereof is a well known Town call'd Maidenhead. For thus writes Camden: The Thames, saith he, winds back to a little town formerly call'd Southlington,Camden. in Atrebat.
but afterward Maidenhead, from the Supersti|tious reverence there given to the head of I know not what holy Virgin, one of the eleaven thou|sand Brittish Martyrs, which under the conduct of S. Vrsula returning from Rome into their coun|trey, were martyrd by Attila, call'd the Scourge of God, near Colen in Germany. Thus he cen|sures the piety of a world of devout Empe|rours, Kings, Princes, Bishops and Doctours of Gods Church in all ages.
4. A volume might be written if we should eap up all testimonies which a world of Churches have given of their veneration to these Holy Martyrs. Therefore we will only here sett down a Catalogue of such of their Names as have escaped oblivion: And there|to adjoyn the Churches where many of them are venerated, in regard their Holy Relicks repose there.
5. S. Vrsula for orders sake divided that innocent Army into certain Squadrons. First then she gave a generall authority over all under her to these Virgins, S. Cordula, S. Eleutheria, S. Florentia and S. Pinnosa. Next she assign'd the care  inspection of a thou|sand to each of these following, S. Benedicta, S. Benigna, S. Carpophora, S. Celindes, S. Cle|mentia, S. Columba, S. Lata, S. Lucia, S. Odilia, S. Sapientia and S. Sybylla. After which these particular Virgins names are recorded: Saint Agnes, S. Antonina, S. Areaphila, S. Babcaria, S. Baldina, S. Candida, S. Caraduma, S. Chri|stina, S. Columbina, S. Corona, S Cunera, Saint Deodata, S. Flora, S. Florina, S. Florentina, S. Grata, S. Honorata, S. Honoria, S. Hostia, S. Languida; S. Margarita, S. Margaria, S. Oliva, S. Panpheta. S. Panefrides, S. Pavia, S. Paulina, S. Pharanina, S. Pisona, S. Sam|baria, S. Sancta, S. Semibaria, S. Terentia, S. Valeria.
6. The Body of S. Vrsula her self is still preserv'd at Colen: but her Head was transla|ted to Paris:Martyrolog. Gallican. 22. Octob. where the illustrious Colledge of Sorbon acknowledges her their Patronesse. At S. Denys in France there is a commemoration of Panefredis, Secunda, Semibaria, Florina and Valeria, companions of S. Vrsula, whose relicks repose there. At Huy in Germany is celebrated the Translation of S. Odilia, famous for frequent miacles. In Flanders the Mona|stery of Marcian possesses some part of the Body of S. Cordula. The Monastery of Good Hope belonging to the Premonstratenses enjoy the Relicks of S. Terentia, S. Marguarita, S. Baldina, S. Samburia and S. Margaria, transla|ted thither when Reinaldus was Arch-Bishop of Colen. The Monastery of S. Martin in Torny glories in the Bodies of S. Honorata Florina, and some part of the Relicks of S. Vrsula. The Monastery of S. Amand in Pa|bula preserves the Bodies of three of these Virgins, whose names are unknown. At Andain in Arduenna repose the Bodies of S. Grata S. Hostia and S. Areaphila. A Hospi|tal in Tornay possesses S. Languida. At Arras the Bodyes of S. Beata and S. Sancta are said to repose in the Cathedrall Church. Four of these Holy Virgins are celebrated at the Monastery of S. Bertin in S. Aumar. At the Church of S. Salvius the Relicks of S. Pavia and S. Ca|radumea are venerated. The Norbertins at Vicoine possesse the Bodies of S. Corona, S. Pha|ranina, S. Babcaria S. Margarita, another S. Margarita, S. Benedicta, S. Cordula, S. Samba|ria, S. Deodata, S. Panpheta and S. Christina. The Canons of Tungres venerate the Heads of S. Pinnosa and S. Oliva. The Nunnes of Mays venerate the Relicks of S. Paulina, S. Floren|tina and eight other Holy Virgins compa|nions of S. Vrsula. In the town of Rhenen in the Diocese of Vtrecht is celebrated the me|mory of S. Cunera: which holy Virgin in our Martyrologe is said to have been withdrawn from the slaughter by a certain noble Matron, in whose house she was awhile conceal'd: but being discover'd had her neck broken. But the Belgick Writers say that she in com|passion was by a certain Noble man privately taken from the rest, and conveyed to his house: Where his Lady conceiving a furious jealousy against her, with the help of her Mayd murdred her, and hid her body in the stable: into which the Lords horses at his return would by no means enter: And here|by was discovered his Ladies crime. The Nunnes of Saint Belian honour the Body of S. Honoria, translated thither above three hundred years since.
7. In Spain likewise at Pobletum in Cata|lonia rests the Body of S. Columbina: And at Dertosa are venerated the Relicks of S. Can|dida. Moreover as Mendoza testifies, in all the Religious Houses of the Iesuits through all Portugall some parts of the Bodies of these Virgin-Martyrs are reverently repos'd: and the Feast of S. Vrsula and her companions is after a particular manner solemnis'd over all that Kingdome. Lastly a Father of the same Society named F. Gomez,Hist. Societ. l. 5. . 19. caried with him into the East Indies a Sacred Head of one of these Virgins: by whose intercession the ship and passengers were freed from an otherwise unavoydable danger.
8. We will conclude this Narration with a passage of the learned Thomas Bozius who treating of the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and her companions,Bosius design. Eccles. l. 22. c. 3. writes thus, How great a measure of Christian fortitude hath been im|planted in the hearts of the women of that Nor|thern Island since the time that S. Eleutherius Bishop of Rome sent into Brittany S. Fugatius and S. Damianus Romans; may be evidently seen from this one example: For from all anti|quity of the Church through the whole world cannot be produced an Example equalling the vertue and courage of these Holy Virgin-Mar|tyrs.




THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER BRITTISH KINGS THE TENTH BOOK.

1. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

12. c. Of the Saxons. Angli and Iutes.
6 7. Their naturall disposition: and em|ployments.
8.9. Their Religion, Deities, c.
10.11. Their Chastity.

1. _THE Narration of the Gests and glorious Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the eleven thou|sand Brittish Virgins hath obli|ged us to transgresse a little the order of time in this History. For by that occasion we have inserted some particular occurrents touching the actions and cruelty of the Sa|xons in Brittany, whereas their first entrance into it, and the occasion thereof hath not yet been declared: Which therefore now are to be related in their order.
2. But in preparation hereto, enquiry is to be made who these Saxons were, whence they came, and with what Associats, how they were qualified both in regard of their naturall disposition, and also their Civill po|licy and Religion. In consequence whereto we will consider the present miserable con|dition of Brittany, and the speciall crimes ge|nerally raigning in it, which according to the judgment of prudent men then alive, provoked Almighty God to root out the in|habitants, and in their room to place a strange, barbarous and inhuman people.
3. There came into Brittany (saith S. Beda) great numbers of three the most robustious and couragious Nations of Germany,Bed. l. 1. c. 15 to wit, the Sa|xons, English (Angli) and Iutes. At the first the Saxons were most numerous. For though in following ages Brittany took the name of England (Anglia) from the Angli, so that the appellation of Saxons was quite oblite|rated: Yet after their first invasion and pos|session of the Island, it receiv'd a new name from the Saxons, and to distinguish it from its originall countrey of Saxony, it was call'd (Transmarina Saxonia) Saxony beyond sea, as appears in the Epistles of S. Bonifacius the Apostle of Germany, and else where.
4. The Saxons were a Nation derived from the Saca a powerfull people in Asia,Ethelwerd. Chron. l. 1. which disburthening themselves by sending our colonies abroad, a great part of them

settled themselves on the Coasts of Germany toward the Northern Sea,A. D. 448. from the Rhene as far as the Citty Donia, now call'd Denmarc, saith Ethelwerd an ancient and Trincely Writer, Grand-child to Ethelwolf a Saxon King in the year nine hundred and fifty. So that their Territory comprehended anciently, besides the now Dutchy of Saxony, the countrey of Holsatia, and some other adjoyning Pro|vinces.
4. The Angli, saith the same Authour, came out of a Region call'd Anglia,Id. ibid. situated between the Saxons and the Iutes (Giotos:) Their Capitall Citty in the Saxon tongue is call'd Sle|swic, and by the Danes, Hattby. Therefore Brit|tany is now call'd England, from these Conque|rours: and from thence came their first Captains Hengist and Horsa. So that the ancient pre|cise seat of these our Progenitours the Angli is a small Province in Denmark at this time also call'd Angel.
5. The Iutes (call'd by Ethelwerd, Giots) whence soever they receiv'd their appella|tion, were anciently seated on the Nor|thern coast of the Cimbrian Chersonesus, called by the Danes to this day Iutland. They were probably derived from the Gutti, placed by Ptolomy in Scandia,Spartianus. Capitolinus. Trebllius Polli. and their seat is still call'd Gothland. Yet these are not to beesteem'd the same Goths or Getes which with their victo|ries anciently measured all Europe: for their habitation was neer the Euxin Sea beyond the River Ister or Danubius, as the Roman Hi|storians doe unanimously affirm. Now in what speciall Provinces of Brittany these Iutae seated themselves, it does not by any marks appear: for we doe not find any men|tion of any Principality of the Iutes in this Island, as we doe of the Saxons and Angli: So that perhaps they were mingled up and down, as accessaries to the other two. Though in the opinion of some they were Iutes which possessed themselves of the Kingdom of the South-Saxons and the Isle of Wight.
6. As touching the disposition of these three Nations, which are all comprehended under the Title of Saxons, especially by Ex|tern Writers, we have already declared from Zosimus and others, that they were esteemed the most valiant, of the most robustious bodies and most agile, of all the Germans; terrible for their sudden and violent incursions, c. There|fore Witichindus the Monk treating of them saith,Witichind. Monach. That the Franks wondred to see such men of tall stature, of invincible courage, of new ha|bits, wearing their long haire spread over their shoulders and arms: but especially they admir'd the undauntednes of their courage. They were cloath'd in short coates, and arm'd with long lances, and their posture was to lean upon their sheilds, having great daggers behind upon their reins. Moreover so impatient they were of any scorn or dishonour,Symmoch. l. 2. Epist. 46. that when Symmachus being Consul at Rome had prepared great numbers of them to fight as Gladiatours for the entertainment and delight of the peo|ple, the night before they were to be produ|ced into the Theater, twenty nine of them without any ropes strangled themselves.
7. Their principal exercise and skill was in Piracy by sea: for which purpose they contented themselves with small flat boates, (Myparones) so agile and manageble that they did so torment the coasts of Gaule, Spain and Brittany, that the Romans were oblig'd to appoint for their guards in op|portune places all along those shores sol|diers and Officers which they entitled (Comi|tes littoris Saxonici per Britanniam, Galliam, c.) Counts of the Saxon coasts through Britta|ny, Gaule, c.
8. Concerning their Religion, Adam Bremensis thus describes it:Adam. Brem. In a Temple of theirs, call'd in their Native language Vbsola, adorn'd with gold throughout, the people adore the Statues of three Gods: The most powerfull of them, called Thor, is placed in a Chappell in the midst, and on each side are set the Statues of Wodan and Fricco. The signification of which Names is this: Thor, say they, presides in the aire, and sends thunder, lightning, showers and calm seasons: so that he governs the fruits of the Earth. Then Wodan, which signifies Valiant, di|sposes of warrs, and administers courage to them against their Enemies. And the third Fricco is the God which bestows peace and pleasure on men, whose statue is fram'd with a huge Priapus. But Wodan they carve in arms, as the Romans did Mars: And Thor with a Scepter, answering to Iupiter.
9. From these three Deities they gave names to three days in the Week: For from Wodan, whom others interpret to be Mercury, Wednesday took its appellation: From Thor, Thursday: and from Fricco, or Frea suppos'd to be the Wife of Woden, Friday, Tewsday had its name from Tuisco, the founder of the German Nation, who thence are nam'd Tuitsch, or Dutch. The month of April they call'd Eoster-Monath, whence still remains the same Name for the Solemnity of our Lords Resur|rection, usually falling on that Month. Tacitus adds that generally the Nations worshipped Herthus,Tacit. de mor. Germ. as their common mother the Earth, for the same name is still in use with us, wheras the Germans now call it Arden. To Wodan they usually offred human sacrifices, chosen from among their captives.
10. Yet among all these abominations, there were in those ancient Saxons some qualities very commendable, especially their Chastity. This was of old observ'd by Tacitus, who saith, Their Mariages are severe, and cha|stity exactly observ'd among them. For they are almost the only Barbarians who content them|selves with single wives,Tacit. de rib. German. unlesse a few of their Nobles, who not for lust, but honour are sought to and even wooed by severall women, c. Their wives are confin'd to their houses, free from the sights of impure spectacles, and provocations of in|temperate Feasts, c. And afterward Salvian

gives this character of some barbarous Na|tions in his time, The Alans, saith he, are an unchast Nation but not perfidious:Salvian. The Franks are lyars, yet given to hospitality; The Saxons are savage in their cruelty, but to be ho|nour'd for their Chastity. And S. Bonifacius in times succeeding writes thus, In old Saxo|ny where is no knowledge of Christ,Bonifac. Epist. 19. if either a maid or wife be guilty of adultery, they force her to strangle her self, and then burn her body: Or else after they have cut her garments to the wast, the chast Matrons whipp her out of their confines, and there fresh woemen meet her with whips, or prick her with knives, and thus is she used till they have kill'd her.
11. Vpon this foundation of Chastity the Saxon Churches among us continued stable for many ages. Hence were derived such numberles swarms of Virgins and men con|secrated to God in a Religious Profession, despi|sing and trampling under foot all carnall tentations and pleasures. In no other Na|tion or Church were afforded such frequent Examples of Princes voluntarily and by vow abstaining from lawfull matrimonial dele|ctations, of Virgins willingly exposing their lives to preserve their purity, yea mai|ming and disfiguring themselves to appear odious to those who otherwise would have violated their Chastity. But now alas, it is call'd a Reformation of Gods Church, to for|bid'd living in such hatred of the flesh, a Reformation becoming the grand incestuous Patriark of Reformers, Luther.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. Horrible crimes of the Brit|tains.
5. Whether their Kings were annointed.
6.7. c. Shamefull depravation of the Brit|tish Clergy: and generally through all Europe.
10. Christians justly punish'd by Barbarous Nations: to the benefit of Gods Church.

1. SVCH and so qualified were the Sa|xons, Angli and Iutes when they were first call'd in to fight for the cowardly Brit|tains: but destin'd by Almighty God to root them from the Earth and possesse their Pro|vinces. In the next place therefore let us take a view of the same Brittains in that age, that it may appear that God did not forsake them till they had fill'd up the measure of their sins by all manner of crimes and im|pieties. And hereof a more convincing witnes cannot be found or desired then our Brittish Historian Gildas, who liv'd in that age, and seems to have had his penn dire|cted by God on purpose to write, like a se|cond Ieremias, the miseries of his countrey, the heavy judgments inflicted on it, and the more heavy crimes which exacted from heaven those judgments.
2. The whole Nation generally is by him acknowledg'd guilty of all manner of vices,Gildas de Excid.
joyn'd with extreme ingratitude to God. For whereas after the incursions of the Picts and Scotts there succeeded such wonderfull plen|ty of all things, as no former age could pa|rallell, the Brittains turn'd this mercy into wantonnes, abounding more then ever in all manner of uncleannes and luxury: which filthines was attended with a hatred of truth and the professours of it: Insomuch as if any one in conversation shew'd any sign of a Christian life, presently the generall hatred of the Brittains pursued and persecuted such an one as a subverter of his countrey.
3. After this contempt of Divine beni|gnity, God sought to reclaim them by his scourges of pestilence and famine, by which such multitudes perish'd, as the living were not able to bury the dead. Yet with this se|verity they were nothing amended, for as Salomon saith, The foole is scourged, and feeles it not. God call'd to mourning and baldnes and wearing of sackcloath: When behold killing of calves and ramms; behold nothing but eating and blasphemously saying, Let us eate and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.
4. Besides these enormous sins, the same Authour describes a strange savage nature in the Brittains of those times, saying,Princes were annointed, but not by our Lord: for those were made choice of to raign, who were most eminent for their cruelty: And presently after they were murdered by those who had annointed them: and in their places others more feirce and savage were elected.
5. From this testimony of Gildas it ap|pears that even in those ancient times of the Brittish Government the solemne Ceremo|ny of annointing Kings in Brittany was in use. And this is confirm'd by S. Gregory who liv'd in the following age,Gregor M. in lib. Reg. l. 4. c. 5. who discoursing on that passage in the first Book of Kings, Sa|muel took a cruse of oyle, and powr'd it on his head, sayth, The same thing is express'd by this Vnction which now in the Holy Church is mate|rially exhibited: For what soever Prince is rais'd to the supreme height of Regall Dignity, receives the Sacrament of Vnction. And the manner of administring this Vnction in those ancient times is still extant in the Book call'd Ordo Romanus.Seld. Titles of Honour. p. 1. c. 7. True it is that our learned Selden will scarce allow this custom in Brittany to have been of so great antiquity: and there|fore interprets that passage in Gildas, not li|terally, but metaphorically. However cer|tain it is that the succeeding Saxon Kings were annointed with Holy Oyle, as all Writers testify of the famous King Alfred. But to re|turn to Gildas.
6. To shew the universall depravednes of the Brittish Nation,Gildas de Excid. and an utter despaire of

amendment, he further charges the Eccle|siasticks of those times, which should have been the correctours of others, to have been yet more corrupted then the Laity: For thus he writes, These enormous sins were not only committed by secular men, but Gods own flock and the Pastors therof. Those who ought to have been examples of piety to the people, were most of them dissolved with wine and all manner of excesse: animosities, contentions, envy against one another tore them into factions and partiali|ties, neither did they in their iudgments discern between good and evill: So that according to the expression of the Psalmist, Contention was powred forth on the Princes of the Clergy, who made the people to wander out of the way.
7. So desperate were the disorders of the Ecclesiasticks of that age that besides the sharp invectives which Gildas makes against them in his historicall Discourse of the Destruction of Brittany, which he especially imputes to their crimes, he compil'd ano|ther Treatise purposely to reprove them, call'd The Correction of the Clergy, which be|gins thus,Gildas in Correct. Cleri Brittany has Preists, but many of them impudent: It has Clergy-men, but great numbers of them ravenous oppressours, deceitfull Pastors, call'd indeed Pastors, but who are rather wolves watchfull to destroy the soules of their flock having no regard to the Spirituall good of the people, but seeking only to fill their own bellies: They possesse the houses of the Church, but they come to them only for lucres sake: If they teach the people, yet by the ill example of their vicious lives they render their teaching fruitles. They seldome Sacrifise, and more rarely approach to the Altars with pure hearts. They have not the con|fidence to reprove the people for their sins, being more guilty themselves c.
8. Such a Character Gildas gives of the Cler|gy in his times, which he enlarges by an addition in his Rhetoricall way of allmost all kinds of vices with which he charges them, particularly most horrible and open Simony publickly purchasing with money Ecclesia|sticall Cures and Bishopricks of the then ruling Tyrants: Which having done they were notwithstanding ordain'd by other Bishops, by which means Traytours like Iudas were placed in S. Peters chaire, and impure persons like Nicholas, were Successours of the Holy Martyr Steven c.
9. Thus doth Gildas expose to his own age and to posterity likewise, the depraved con|dition of those times:Baron ad A. D. 2 4. Which Baronius having recited, elegantly and iustly adds these words, Hence we may perceive and even with our hands feele the iust and equall iudgment of God upon the nation, why the inhabitants there|of for their crimes were deliver'd over to the sword, and the barbarous nations which punish'd them, were for a reward call'd to embracing of the Christian Faith.
10. Neither was Brittany alone thus pu|nish'd: But almost all the Provinces of Eu|rope were overrun and desolated by innu|merable Armies of Barbarous people from the Northern parts. By which means though the Church of God was then miserably affli|cted, so that our Lord may seem to have cast off all care of his flock: yet if we reflect on the future effects and consequents of this di|vine iudgment, wee shall find that the Ca|tholick Church did indeed receive thereby a great increase both in numbers of Professours and zeale of Christian Profession. For though those barbarous Nations for a while persecu|ted the Truth: yet ere long our Lord subdued their minds thereto: and then those strong naturall passions of theirs were employ'd in advancing Gods Church: Insomuch as the Apostles time and Primitive age could scarce afford such Heroicall examples of Christian zeale, magnanimity and contempt of the earth, as these barbarous people once con|verted, manifested to the world: So healthfull is the severity of God toward his people.


III. CHAP.III. CH.

1.2. c. The Saxons invited by publick consent, as Auxiliaries against the Scotts, c.
6. c. They land in Kent: encouraged by a Saxon-Prophecy.
9.10. They sight prosperously against the Picts, c.
11. Of Thong-Castle.

1. HAving shewd how unworthy the Brittains had rendred themselves of the Divine protection, and how fitt scour|ges the Saxons, Angli, and Iutes were to pu|nish such impieties, wee will consequently declare breifly the occasion, order and manner how those barbarous Nations first entred this Island, invited by the Brittains themselves as Auxiliaries, but shortly be|came the Tyrants and invaders.
2. Many Historians accuse the cowardly slouth of King Vortigern, as if he weary of the exercises of war against the Picts and Scotts, chose rather with his money to hire stipendiary strangers, then to train up his own subiects to resist them, and there|fore invited the Saxons to fight for the Brit|tains. But S. Beda shews that this was done by the common advice of the Nation,Beda lib. 1. c. 1. saying, A Meeting was assembled in which it was consul|ted from whence they should seek assistance and defence for the avoyding and repelling those so frequent and cruell incursions of the Northern nations into Brittany. And it was thought best by all, as well as by King Vortigern, to demand ayd of the Saxons, a nation seated beyond the Sea. Which resolution of theirs was doubtles ordered by the Divine Providence, to the end that

mischeif should come against the impious Brit|tains,D. A. 449. as the succeeding event of things did more evidently declare.
3. Gildas therfore reflecting on the madnes of this consultation thus exclames,Gild. de Ex|cid.
O the profound blindnes of the Brittains minds! O the desperate stupidity of their senses! Those Saxons at whose names they trembled even when they were absent, are now by the foolish Princes of Zoan invited to live as it were in their own houses: so senceles a counsel they gave to their King Pharao. But how senceles soever this counsel was, it was approved by the Brittains, saith Malmsburiensis,Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. and thereupon Embas|sadours were sent into Germany, men of the highest repute, and such as might most worthily represent their countrey.
Withind. de reb. Saxon. l. .4. Witichindus an ancient Saxon Writer doth thus describe the order of this Embas|sage: Fame loudly proclaming the prosperous victories of the Saxons, the Brittains sent an humble Embassy to begg their assistance: and the Messengers being publickly admitted, thus spoke, O Noble Saxons, our miserable countreymen the frequent incursions of their enemies, having heard of the glorious victories gained by you, have sent us to you humbly to implore your aid; in recompence of which they are ready to offer to you a Province spatious and abounding with all things. We have hitherto liv'd happily under the protection of the Romans: and after the Ro|mans we know no nation better then your selves, to whom we may have recourse. Therefore our desire is to harbour our selves under the wings of your courage: And if by your assistance we can only be freed from the rage of our ancient Ene|mies, we will be ready to submit our selves to any service you shall impose on us.
5. It may be this Historian in favour of his own countrey hath here putt into the Brittish Ambassadours mouthes a more hum|ble Oration then they ever pronounced, for they were sent to hire the Saxons by pro|mising a large stipend, not by submitting their countrey to them. However the suc|cesse of this Treaty he thus declares,d. ibid. The Saxon Senate, saith he, gave this short answer to the Brittains demands; Be assured, O Brit|tains that we Saxons will be faithfull freinds to you, ready always to assist you in all your necessi|ties, and to doe you all freindly kindnes. With which answer the Ambassadours were much reioyced, and presently returned to make their countreymen more ioyfull with so desir'd a mes|sage.
A. D. 449.6. This Message was sent and return'd in the year of our Lord four hundred forty eight, and in complyance with it the year following an army of Saxons under their Cheif Conductours Hengist and Horsa landed in Brittany. Whose coming our Historian Gildas in his angry stile thus celebrates, re|cording withall a Prophecy concerning it among the Saxons:Gild. de Ex|cid. Then, saith he, a drove of whelpes rushing out of the barbarous Lyonnesses den came hither in three ships with full sayles and an ominous course,A. D. 450. encouraged by a Prophecy certainly beleiv'd by them, that for the space of three hundred years they should possesse the coun|trey toward which they directed the prow's of their ships: and that half of that time they should often times lay it waste. They first fastned their terrible nayles, by order of the unhappy Tyrant (Vortigern) on the Eastern part of the Island, with a pretence indeed to defend the countrey, but with an intention really to sub|due it.
7. From whence soever this Prophecy came, there seems to be in it some shadow of truth: For three hundred years the Saxons possess'd the Island under the Title of Saxony-beyond-Sea: but afterward the Nation of the Angli gave their own name to it. And again after one hundred and fifty years, the half of that time, by the coming of S. Augustin the Monk they became Chri|stians, and being more civilis'd began to surcease their rude and barbarous beha|viour.
8. And wheras the said Authour addes that the Saxons aborded in the Eastern part of the Island, he intends thereby the Isle of Thanet in Kent, where Hengist and Horsa first took land: and where more happily after about one hundred and fifty yeares Divine Truth by the ministery of S. Augustin first visited this Island. The place of their landing, saith Ethelwerd,Ethelvverd was anciently call'd Hipwines-flet: And was afterward nam'd Wipped-fleet, from Wipped a Saxon-commander there slain.
9. The good service which the Saxons after their first arrivall perform'd to King Vortigern is thus declared by Mathew of Westminster,Florileg A. D. 450. In the year of Grace four hundred and fifty, saith he, the Scotts together with the Picts invaded Brittany out of the Northern parts with a mighty army, wasting the Provinces through which they pass'd. Which being told to Vortigern, he gather'd his soldiers together, and march'd beyond the River of Humber. When they came to a battell there was little need that the Brittains should fight, for the Saxons then present combatted with such courage, that the Enemies, heretofore accustomed to Victory, immediatly turn'd their backs and fled. Vor|tigern therefore having by their valour obtain'd the Victory, encreas'd his liberality to them, and gave to Hengist their captain great possessions in Lindsey (a region of Lincolnshire) sufficient to maintain him and his soldiers.
10. Huntingdom writes that this battell was fought at Stanford in the Southern parts of Lincolnshire,Huntingd. for so far the Picts and Scotts had march'd without opposition adding that they fought with darts and lances, but the Saxons with battell-axes and long swords: the weight and force of which weapons they being not able to bear, sought to save themselves by flight.
11. As touching the land given by Vorti|gern to Hengist in the same province where

the battell was fought:A. D. 451. Our Annals, saith Camden, relate it otherwise: for they declare that Hengist the Saxon having subdued the Picts,Camden. in Corintan.
besides large possessions conferr'd on him in other places, requested Vortigern to bestow on him in that Province so much ground as he could en|compasse with an oxes hide. Which having obtai|ned, he cutt it into thngs extremely thinn, with which he encompass'd a great Territory: in the midst of which he built a Castle, which by the name (For it is call'd Thong-Castle) perpetu|ates the memory hereof: and as Carthage remai|ned many ages a witnes of Dido's fraud, who by the same sleight obtain'd the seat where she built that Citty, So does this Castle still putt us is mind of the simplicity of the Brit|tains, and cunning of the Saxons.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2. Hengist sends for more forces: and his daughter.
3 c. King Vortigern's unlawfull mariage with her: He gives Kent to the Saxons.
7. The Saxons joyn with the Picts.
8. c The Brittains desert Vortigern: and set up his Son Vortimer.

1. BVT the ambition of Hengist was not satisfied with such a gift: his intention was to be master of the whole Island without obligation to any.Florilg. A. D. 450.In order to the effecting of which intention, being a subtile man, saith Mathew of Westminster, he presuming on the Kings freindship and easines thus address'd himself to him, My Lord the King, you see how your enemies disquiet you on all sides. If you please therefore we will send into our Countrey with order to encrease our numbers with new re|cruits. The King approving his design comman|ded him to doe so without delay, that so he might be freed from the fear of his enemies.A. D. 451.
Hereupon Hngist sending Messengers into Germany, they shortly return'd bringing with them eighteen ships loaden with soldiers.
2. It had been happy for Brittany if Hen|gist had been strengthned by the accession of New soldiers only. But they brought with them a fair Lady the daughter of Hengist, whose beauty and flatteries so inveigled King Vortigern, that to please her he betrayd both his faith and Kingdom too.
Malmsbur. d. Reg. l. . c. 1.3. Malmsburiensis thus breifly relates this story: We have receiv'd from our ancestors, saith he, that at this second voyage of the Saxons they conducted into Brittany a Virgin, the daughter of Hengist (called Rowena) for beauty a miracle of Nature, admir'd by all that lookd on her. Hen+gist commands a magnificent feast to be provided for the entertainment of his soldiers newly arri|ved, to which the King was invited. He gave order likewise to his daughter to perform the Of|fice of Cup-bearer to the King,A. D. 453. on purpose that he might feed his eyes with her beauty. Which de|sign had the effect which Hengist desired and ex|pected. For the King naturally a slave to beauty, was presently wounded with the gracefullnes of the maids looks, and elegancy of her gestures: nourishing in his mind a hope to enjoy her. So that without any delay he demanded her of her Father for his wife. Hengist though inwardly more willing to bestow her then the King was to receive her, yet made show of an unwillingnes, alledging that such a mariage was too mean for so great a Prince. But at last after much importu|nity he condescended: and for a reward or dowry to his daughter, he receiv'd in gift the whole Province of Kent. And this was suitable to the practise of the German Nation ob|serv'd by Tacitus,Tacit. de Morib. Ger|man. among whom, saith he, it is the custome for the Husband to give a por|tion and dowry to purchase his wife, and not the wife to the husband.
4. Other Historians adde that this Feast and mariage was celebrated at Thong-castle in Lincolnshire: and that the Virgin was in|structed by he Father to drink a health to Vortigern after the German manner. However certain it is that besides the infinite dam|mage to the Island by alienating so conside|rable a member as Kent, and so opportune to the Saxons for powring in new forces, this mariage was in a high degree criminall, both because the King had already a lawfull wife living, and likewise for that being a Chri|stian he joyn'd himself to a Pagan Idolatresse.
5. Presently after this unhappy mariage, to consummate which the King repudiated his former wife,A. D. 452. hapned the sending over|sea of S. Vrsula and her glorious Companions in Virginity and Martyrdome: whose Heroicall constancy related in the precedent Book, was sufficient to obliterate the stain which the Kings lusts and injustice had cast upon the Nation.
6. Hengist having thus prostituted his daugh|ter to the King, who in recompence prostitu|ted his countrey to Hengist, the Saxon began to entertain thoughts of ambition more vast then before, and knowing that generally the Nation of Brittany highly disapproved their Kings mariage, for which and other vices his subjects much diminished their af|fections and duty to him, he began to con|temn them, and sought occasions of quar|rells with them.
7. The Archdeacon of Huntington thus describes the first breach between the Saxons and Brittains:Huntington. l. 2. Hengist, saith he, and his army seeking an occasion of war against the Brittains,A. D. 453. ordain'd by God as a punishment of their crimes, boldly required of his Son in law King Vortigern to supply them more plentifully with provisions: threatning that otherwise they would renounce the league between them, and lay wast the whole Island. Which threatnings were presently atten|ded with dismall effects. For the Saxons entring into a new league with the Picts, gathered an

innumerable army which without any resistance spoyled the whole countrey.A. D. 454. Thus a flame kindled by the hands of those Pagans, consuming the Brit|tains, took a just revenge of the crimes of that Nation, which crimes were the lesse pardonable, because the people which committed them pro|fessed themselves to be the people of the true God. This flame raged like that which the Chal|deans kindled about Ierusalem, which utterly consumed all the walls and buildings of that Citty.
8. It was no wonder that the Saxons met not with any resistance from the Brittains, because by occasion of the Kings late mariage with an infidell Lady, his divorce from his lawfull Queen, and delivering up so conside|rable a part of his Kingdom to strangers, high discontents arose among his subjects against him. Whereupon by common consent per|sons were deputed to goe to him and be|seech him to take pitty of his countrey now ready to sink into ruine. Or if he had no care of his Kingdom and subjects, yet that he should not neglect the Church of God and his Faith in danger to be destroy'd by eathen Miscreants. Which if it should arrive by his fault, and that the Diabolicall worship of Idols should prevayle against Gods true Reli|gion, so horrid a crime would be punish'd both by his own and his peoples eternall misery.
9. But such remonstrances as these having made little or no impression in the mind of this sensuall King: The Bishops and other Clergy afterward repeated with more ear|nestnes the like admonitions to him: Which likewise producing no effect, King Vortigern was deserted generally by his subjects, A. D. 454. and the Nobility by unanimous consent rais'd into the throne his Son Vortimer, saith Florilegus.
10. There is not any of our Ancient Hi|storians affirm that Vortigern was deposed, but only deserted by his subjects, a Prince given up to his pleasures, and therefore incapable to resist the ambitious designs of Hengist, against whom they were resolved to joyn all their forces for the expelling him out of the Kingdom. Therefore Malmsburiensis re|lates this change in a more moderate stile, saying,Malmsbur. de kagib. l. 1. c. 1. Vortimer was an earnest incentour of the war against the Saxons, whose ambition and bold|nes he was resolv'd to endure no longer: And for this reason most of the Brittains follow'd him. And from hence we may take notice of the sedi|tious and truly Calvinisticall spirit of a late Hi|storian, Bishop Parker, who thus expresses this passage of the Story:Antiquit. Britann. f 7. That expostulation and complaint which with great vehemence the Brit|tains u'd to their King Vortigern for his mariage with the daughter of Hengist a Pagan, was a great argument of their perfect Faith in Christ. For which act of his the Nobles were so incens'd, that having depriv'd Vortigern of his Regall autho|rity, they created his son Vortimer King.
11. But in what manner soever this change was effected, it can not be doubted but that it wrought great partialities and divisions in the kingdom.A. D. 455. For Vortigern having the space of sixteen years enjoy'd the quiet possession of it, could not want many adherents, who would disapprove the exalting of his Son without his consent. So that the Saxons re|ceived great advantage by such disorders, which much facilitated the progresse of their ambitious designs.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2 c Vortimer fights doubtfully with the Saxons: in which battell Horsa, c. are killed.
7. c. Death of Vortimer: his vertues, c.
10. A Battell between the Brittains and Saxons, in which the Brittains are over|come.

1. VOrtimer being thus exalted either to an association with his Father in the Throne,A. D. 455. or to the Office of Generall of the Brit|tish forces, hastned to give a proof of the wisedom of his countrey men in their Ele|ction of him:Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 1. For as Malmsburiensis writes, judging it unfit and dangerous any longer to dis|semble the taking notice of the ambitious designs of the Saxons, and how by craft they had almost ruin'd the Kingdom, he bent his mind earnestly how to drive them out of the Nation, vehemently urging his Father to attempt the same. By his instigation therefore an army was raised c. This saith he, hapned in the seaventh year after the first entrance of the Saxons into Brittany.
2. Great preparations there were on both sides, and at last they came to a battell, which was fought, saith Ethelwerd, in the feild of Egelestirpe, now call'd Alesford, a town in Kent wash'd by the River Medway. On the Brittains side were three Cheif Captains, who lead each a third part of the Army: Ambro|sius Aurelianus lead the first division: Vor|timer the second; and Catigern a younger Brother of Vortimer lead the third. The Saxon army was conducted by the two Brethren, Hengist and Horsa.
3. The order and successe of this battell is thus describ'd by Huntingdon,Huntingdon. l. 2. In the seaventh year after the arrivall of the Saxons in Brittany, a Battell was fought at Alestrew. At the be|ginning whereof Horsa set upon the army of Ca|tigern with such Vigour, that it was dispers'd like dust before the wind, and Catigern the Kings son was slain. But his Brother Vortimer a Prince of ad|mirable courage, falling in sidewayes into Horsa's squadrons routed them, and kill'd Horsa, the most valorous of the Saxons, the remainder of his forces fled to Hengist, who then was fighting with invincible courage against Ambrosius. By this means the whole Weight of the combat lay upon

Hengist:D. A. 457 who being assalted and brought into great straits by the accession of Vortimers forces, after he had a good while sustain'd the impression of the whole Brittish army, was at last overcome, and compell'd to fly, which he had never done be|fore: Yet this victory cost the Brittains very deare, for great numbers of them were slain.
4. With this account given by Huntingdon agrees likewise Mathew of Westminster. Yet Wigorniensis expressly affirms that Hengist, after the death of his Brother Horsa, obtai|ned the Victory. And with him Ethelwerd seems to agree.
5. Horsa's body was buried in a place not much distant from that of the battell,Cmden. in Cantio. which to this day continues a Monument of his Me|mory, being from him called Hrsted. As for Catigern the Son of Vertigern, his body is suppos'd to have been buried at Aylsford, by the Saxons call'd Eglesford, by Henry of Huntingdom Ellestre, and by the Brittains Saissenaeg-haibail, because the Saxons were over come there. To testify which victory there still remain four great stones standing upright, over which others are crossewise layd, after the manner of Stone-heng in Wilt|shire, which from Catigern are vulgarly and imperfectly call'd Keith-coty-house. Thus writes Camden.
A. D. 456.6. Horsa being dead, the Saxons exalted Hen|gist to the Title of King of Kent, saith Mathew of Westminster. And the same year he is reported to have fought three battells against the Brittains. But being unable to resist the valour of Vortimer, he was forced to retire himself into the Isle of Thanet: where likewise he was dayly assalted by the Brittish ships. At last the Saxons leaving their wives and children in that Island, retur|ned into Germany, to call in new and greater forces.
7. The year after Hengists return into Ger|many, dyed the glorious King Vortimer,A. D. 457. in the fourth yeare after he was assumed to a participation of the regall authority. Some Writers affirm that he dyed a naturall death, by a disease. Others say he dyed by poyson administred to him by the fraud of his late Mother-in-law Rowena:Sigibert. A. D. 437. to which effect thus writes Sigebert (with whom agree Geffrey of Monmouth, Mathew Westminster, Richard White, c.) The Devill envying the goodnes of Vortimer suggested to the mind of his Step-mother to cause poyson to be given him by one of his servants. Which he having drunk, and perceiving that death approach'd, he divided his treasures among his soldiers, earnestly exhorting them to fight courageously for their countrey. Moreover he commanded a Pyramid of brasse to be made, and placed in the Haven where the Saxons usually landed: Vpon which Pyramid his body was to be layd, to the end that the Enemies seeing the Monument of so great and valorous a Prince, might be frighted back into their own coun|trey.
8. But it is more probable that it was only his statue which he intended should be so placed on the Pyramid. For being a Christian Prince, he was, no doubt, buried after the Christian manner with decent solemnity. Moreover the same Sigebert acknowledges that he was buried in the Citty of the Trinoban|tes,Id ibid. Huntingd. l. 2. now called London. And with him, saith Henry Huntingdon, was buried the flower and glory of the Brittish Nation.
9. Besides Vortimers courage, he is cele|brated by ancient Writers for his Piety and other Vertues Chamber, a Writer formerly cited by Richard White, affirms that in his war against the Saxons be bore in his Ensign the Image of our Lord Iesus Christ, to which devotion of his we may impute his Victories. In like man|ner a few years after,Rih. Vitus l. 7. ad . 21. the famous King Ar|thur yet more prosperously bore against the same Enemies the Image of our Blessed Lady. Sigebert likewise testifies of the same King Vortimer,Sigebert. bi sup. that he restored the Churches destroyed by the Saxons, and possessions wrested by them from his Subjects.
10. The same year after Vortimers death Hen|gist return'd out of Germany with greater forces, and took a firmer possession of his Kingdom of Kent: and for the better esta|blishment of his family therein he joyn'd in his regall power his son Aescae. To oppose him therin the Brittains invaded the coun|trey with a great army: the successe of which invasion is thus related by Henry of Hunting|don:Huntingd. l. 2. Hengist and his son Aesca having received auxiliary forces from their own countrey, and being more confident of victory by reason of the death of the Young Prince (Vortimer) prepar'd themselves for war at Creganford. The Brittains army consisted of four great Bodies conducted by four valiant Captains. But when the conflict was begun, they found themselves too weak for the Saxons, whose numbers were much more en|creas'd then formerly. For those that came last were chosen robustious soldiers, who with their swords and battle-axes did horribly cleave asunder the bodies of the Brittains. Yet did they not give ground till they saw their four Captains slain. But after that they were so incredibly ter|rified, that they fled from the feild of battell as far as London: and from that time never had the courage to bring an army into Kent again. So that Hengist and his son Aesca quietly enjoy'd that Kingdom, having their Palace fixed at Canterbury. Thus began this new Kingdom of Kent in the eighth year after the coming of the Saxons into Brittany.



VI. CHA.VI. CHAP.

1.2. Hengist persecutes Christians.
3 4 c. The Martyrdom of Voadinus Arch-bishop of London.

1. IT is not probable that when Vortimer was rais'd to the throne of Brittany, this was done by the deposition of his Fa|ther Vortigern: for we find that when Vor|timer was dead, his Father afterward con|tinued King for some years: and for a while gave proofs of his courage in endeavouring to represse the ambition and violence of his Father in-law Hengist: though afterward he returnd to his former slouthfull licentious manner of li|ving.
2. Now during the warrs between the Brittains and Saxons in the third year of Vortimers raign, our Ecclesiasticall monu|ments doe record extreme cruelty exercis'd by Hengist in all places where his armies came, principally in Kent, against Preists and Holy Virgins especially, great numbers of which he caused to be massacred: Altars he profaned every where and demolish'd Churches.
3 But among the Victimes of this barba|rous Princes cruelty there onely remains the memory of one illustrious Bishop, Voadinus Arch-bishop of London who dyed a glorious Martyr in this tempest. The names of all the rest are onely written in heaven.
4. Now concerning Saint Voadinus we read thus in our ancient English Marty|rologe:Martyrolog. Anglic. 3. Ij. On the third of Iuly, at London is the commemoration of Saint Voadinus Martyr, Arch-bishop of London; who being a man of great Sanctity reproved Vortigern King of Brit|tany for repudiating his lawfull wife, and marrying an nfidell. For which cause Hen|gist King of Kent, the father of Vortigerns se|cond illegitimate wife, inflam'd with fury, com|manded the said Holy Bishop, together with many other Preists and religious men to be stain. Whence may appear that all good men did execrate the Kings last and adulte|rous mariage.
Rich. Vit. l. 7. in not. 16.5. Chamber in the life of Vortigern (as Richard White relates) affirms that Saint Voadinus his admonition to King Vortigern, had two heads: The first was his unlawfull dispsall of part of the patrimony and crown of the Kingdom without the consent of the Clergy, Nobility and people. The other was his mar|rying a Pagan wife, his own being yet alive, against whom he could alledge no cause which might iustify a divorce. This double repre|hension did Hengist revenge by the death of the holy Bishop.A. D. 461. Now though both these grounds of reprehension were very iust, yet it was the latter, proceeding from a a reverence to the Sacrament of the Church vitiated by the new Bride, which principally regarded a Bishop to censure, and which for so doing, and suffring for his duty, gave him a sufficient title to Mar|tyrdom.
6. Gildas and Saint Beda, though they mention not by name this Martyrdom of Saint Voadinus, yet deliver generall expres|sions of the cruell persecution rais'd by Hengist especially against Ecclesiasticall persons, that they afford sufficient grounds to render it unquestionnable. For Gildas declares that great numbers of Bishops and Preists were massacred by that Sa|xon-King.Gild. in Excid. Beda l. 1. c 1.15. And Saint Beda relates the same in these words: The impious King after his Victory, (almighty God the iust Iudge so dispo|sing,) layd wast the Citties and provinces adjoyning, and without any resistance conti|nued the flame from the Eastern to the Western sea, covering the whole surface of the mise|rable Island with ruine. Both publick and private buildings were demolish'd: And every where the Prelats of the Church together with the people, without any regard to their dignity, were consum'd with sword and fire: neither were there any who took care to bury their bodies after they were so cruelly slain.


VII. CHAP.VII. CH.

1.2. c. Hengist at a Feast perfidiously murders the Brittish Nobles.
5. Stone-henge, a Monument of this.
6.7. Vortigern being a Prisoner, redeems himself with surrendring severall Pro|vinces to the Saxons.

1. FOR two or three years wee read nothing memorable perform'd between the Brittains and Saxons:A. D. 461. but the year of Grace four hundred sixty one is noted with an act of most horrible perfi|dious cruelty done by Hengist. For he having a resolution by any means to enlarge his bounds in Brittany, and fin|ding that by exercice of war the Brittish courages encreased, turnd his thoughts to invent some stratagem by which without any hazard he might compasse his end.
2. For this purpose insinuating him|selfe into the minds of Vortigern and the Brittish Nobility, as if he were desirous

of amity and peace which if they would grant he would turn his arms against the Picts and Scotts, and drive them quite out of the Island. He quickly obtain'd beleif from the easy nature of Vortigern, as if his intentions were sincere. Where|upon a Meeting is ordain'd between the Brit|tains and Saxons, with this caution, that each King should be attended with only three hundred, and those unarm'd: at which Meeting they were to treat of the conditions of peace.
3. The place appointed for this fatall Assembl was a plain neer Sorbiodunum (or Old Salsbury) a Citty seated in the Province of the Belgae, in which still remains a mo|nument of a dismall Tragedy. For these being mett on both sides, a great Feast was prepared for the Brittains, at which the articles of agreement were to be ratified by mutuall promises and oathes.
4. But toward the end of the Feast, when they were dissolv'd in wine, Hengist on a sudden calld aloud, To arms: which was the watchword agreed on among the Saxons. Whereupon they immediately drew out short swords which they had conceald under their cloathes,lfr. Mo|numet. and quickly slew their unarmed guests the Brittains. Yet in that Tragedy one memorable example of cou|rage was perform'd by a Brittish Noble man, if Geffrey of Monmouth may be beleived. For Eldol the valiant Governour (Consul) of Glocester (Claudiocestriae) snatching up a stake by chance lying near, slew seaventy of the Saxons with it.
5. A Monument, not long after rais'd by the Brittains, continues to this day the memory of this most barbarous and per|fidious Tragedy. This is that which is Vul|garly calld Stone-henge on Salsbury plains, where in a space of ground compass'd with a ditch, are placed as in a threefold crown, stones of an incredible vastnes, some of them twenty eight feet in height, and seaven in breadth, over many of which other great stones are placed a crosse. The report is,Camden. in Belgis. saith Camden, that Ambrosius Aurelianus, or his brother Vther Pendragon by the help and art of Merlin the famous Magi|cian, rais'd this Monument in memory of the Brittains treacherously slain by the Saxons at a conference. Though others deliver that this was a magnificent Sepulcher rais'd to Ambrosius Aurelianus himself slain near this place: from whom likewise the town of Ambresbury, not far distant, took its name.
6. In this slaughter the Saxons took Vor|tigern prisoner,Florileg. ad A. D. 462. and the year following, saith Mathew of Westminster, threatning him with death they bound him in chains, and for his life requir'd of him to deliver up severall of his Citties and munitions. Who quickly granted whatsoever they demanded, so he might scape with his life. This being con|firm'd by oath, they gave him his liberty: and first of all they seys'd on the Citty of London: then Yorck and Lincoln, likewise Winchester: all which Provinces they wasted, killing the miserable Brittains like Sheep. They destroyed to the ground all Churches and buildings belonging to Ecclesiasticall persons: they killd the Preists near the Altars: they burnt with fire all Books of Holy Scripture: and heaped earth on the sepulchers of Mar|tyrs. Such religious men as could scape their fury repaired to desarts, woods and rocks, carying with them the Relicks of Saints. Vortigern therfore seing so horrible destruction, retir'd into the parts f Wales (Cambria) and there inclos'd himself in a town calld Geno|rium.
7. But the three Provinces with which Vortigern redeem'd his life,Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2 are thus better sett down by Mamlsburiensis, Of old time, saith he, the Eastern and Southern Saxons, and the Eastern Angli were subjects to the King of Kent. For those Provinces Hengist who first raign'd in Kent obtain'd of Vorti|gern King of the Brittains, not by open warr but treachery. These Provinces contain Essex, Sussex, Surrey, Norfolk and Sufflk, inhabited by the people which in the Ro|mans time were calld Trinobantes, Regni and Iceni.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. c. The Birth of the glorious Saint David: His Child-hood c, Pro|phecies of his Sanctity by S. Patrick, and Gildas Badonicus.

1. THE same year in which Brittany was thus dismembred,A. D. 462. God recompen|ced that losse to the Brittish Church by the Birth of Saint David, afterward Bishop of Menevia, one of the greatest lights that ever that Church enjoyed, both in regard of the Sanctity of his life, the vigour of his authority, and zeale in re|pressing Heresy, and exalting Ecclesiasticall Discipline.
2. His nativity was attended and pre|vented by severall wonders denoting the eminency of his future Sanctity. For Saint Patrick a little before his going into Ireland,Capgrav. in S. David. being in the Province of the Dimetae (or North-West wales, in a valley calld Rosina) meditating on his Mission thither, had a revelation by an Angell, that after thirty yers a child should be born in that countrey, which should give a great luster thereto.To which Prophecy regard was had in this Collect of the ancient Church of Sarum repeated

anniversarily on S. Davids Feast, O God, who by an Angell didst foretell the Nativi|ty of thy Blessed Confessour Saint David,. Eccl. . thirty years before he was born; Grant unto us, wee beseech thee, that celebrating his Me|mory, we may by his intercession attain to ioyes everlasting.
3. The manner of his Birth is thus conse|quently related by the Authour of his Life in Capgrave:Capgrav. ib. Thirty years being finish'd after the foresaid prediction, saith he, the King of the region call'd Ceretica travelling to Demetia, mett by the way a Religious Virgin nam'd Nonnita, of great beauty, which he lusting after, by violence deflour'd her. Hereby she conceiv'd a Son, and neither before nor after ever had knowledge of any man: but persevering in cha|stity both of mind and body, and sustaining her self only with bread and water from the time of her Conception, she lead a most holy life. The King who was father to S. David, is by our ancient Writers call'd Xanthus: and his Mother Nonnita is by some named Mela|ria.
4. The eminent sanctity of this holy Child, the fruit of his holy Mothers fasting, chasti|ty and prayer, was by a new divine Oracle a little before his birth, foretold: For when Gildas Albanius was from the pulpit teaching a great congregation, on a sudden he became dumb and unable to speak.But afterward broke forth into these words, re|lated by Caradoc of Lancarvan, A holy woman call'd Nonnita now present in this Church, is great with Child, and shall shortly be brought in bed of a Son full replenish'd with Grace. It was with regard to him that I was hindred from speaking by a divine Power restraining my tongue. This child shall be of so eminent sanctity that name in these our parts shall be comparable to him, I will surrender this Region to him: who will from his infancy by degrees encrease in Sanctity and Grace. An Angell Gods messager hath reveald this to mee.
Pits. is Da|vid.5. He was baptis'd, saith Pits from Giraldus Cambrensis, by Relveus Bishop of Menevia, in a place calld ortcleis: Which Bishop by Divine Pro|vidence arriv'd there the same hower. And du|ring his childhood, he was educated in a place calld the Old Bush, by the Cambrians, Henmenen, and by the Latins, Menevia. He grew every day more replenish'd with Grace, and being of a per|spicacious witt he made progresse in the study of learning far beyond all other children of his age. This is that S. David, afterwards the most Holy Bishop of Menevia, (calld from him S. Davids) for his learning, Sanctity and miracles so celebrated in all future ages by the Brittish Churches. His admirable Gests shall in their due place be declared hereafter.
6. But wheras in this forecited passage out of Giraldus Cambrensis he is sayd to have been baptised by an Irish Bishop calld Relveus Bishop of Menevia: it is certain there is an errour in the Copy. For S. David himself was the first Bishop of Menevia,A. D. 464 to which place he transla|ted the Bishoprick of Carleon. Therfore in|stead of Relveus Menevensium Episcopus it is not to be doubted but the Authour wrote Albeus Mumonensium Episcopus: and this is that S. Albeus Bishop of Munster, or Cassel in Ireland, of whose Gests wee treated in the foregoing Book of this History, concerning whom we related from Bishop Vsher,Vsser. in Pri+mord. f. 789 that he went to Rome, and there was instructed in the knowledge of Holy Scriptures by S. Hilary the famous Bishop of Poictiers.
7. As touching Gildas Albanius men|tioned in this Chapter, who in a Sermon foretold the Sanctity of S. David a little before his birth, and who was a holy person distinct from the well known Hi|storian Gildas, sirnamed Badonicus, who liv'd likewise in this same age, though younger then the other; Of both these we shall hereafter treat in their due Season.


IX. CHAP.IX. CH.

1.2. Vortigern fortifies himself in Wales.
3.4. c. Aur. Ambrosius sent for to be Generall.
7. His terrible battell against Hen|gist.

1.A. D. 453. WHilst Vortigern lurk'd ingloriouslly among the steep innaccessible Mountains of the countrey now calld Cambria and Walliae, busy in building a Castle for his greater security, the middle Pro|vinces of Brittany being left without any Defender, were expos'd to the fury of the Saxons.
2. The Castle built by Vortigern was call'd Genorium, and afterward Caer-Guortigern. It is plac'd,Camden in Radnor. saith Camden, in a Vast solitude, fearfull for the horrour of mountains, and narrow turnings of the passages to it. To that place, Vortigern, the plague of his countrey, withdrew himself, to seek a refuge for his own person. And there, saith Richard White,R. Vilus hist l. 7. he spent his time in con|sulting Sooth-sayers, and especially the Magician Merlin.
3. Hereupon the Brittains being deser|ted by their King, were compell'd to seek one abroad. And therefore, saith Mathew of Westminster,Florileg. A. D. 464. they directed messengers into lesser Britanny beyond sea to Aurelius Ambro|sius and his Brother Vter-pendragon, who for feare of Vortigern were retir'd thither, besee|ching them with all speed to quitt that countrey, and repair into their own to the end that expel|ling both the Saxons and their hated King Vor|tigern, they might receive the crown of Brittany

They therefore being now of ripe age prosecuted their journey,A. D. 465. attended with ships and armed soldiers.
4. Concerning this Ambrosius, some|times call'd Aurelius, sometimes Aurelia|nus, and his extraction, Gilda and from him S. Beda speak breifly and in generall terms, that he was a modest prince, and who alone of the Roman race had remained alive after so great a tempest of warrs and changes, in which his pa|rents, who had worn the Royall Purple, were slain. Now though in these two ancient Au|thours the name of his parents be not ex|tant, it may be probably affirm'd that he was the Son of Constantin, who fifty years before had pretended to the Roman Empire, and in the attempt was slain in Gaule. For that Con|stantin, besides his Son Constans also slain, had other children, appears by the expres|sion of Sozomen,Sozom. l. 9. c. 11. who calls the said Constans, sirnamed also Iulianus, the Elder Son of Con|stantin.
5. That he was born and bred up in Brit|tany seems to appear, because, as severall Writers affirm, in the competition for the Crown when Vortigern was chosen, Ambrosius being a pretender, was compell'd to quitt both his right and the countrey, and to re|tire himself into lesser Brittany. Fro~ whence notwithstanding, during the raign of the generous King Vortimer, he return'd, and assisted him courageously against the Saxons, as hath been related: and, it seems, after his death retir'd again to his former re|fuge.
6. The return of these two Princes was more formidable to Vortigern, then any thing he could apprehend from the Saxons: who therefore fortified himself more care|fully in his new Castle. I will not here trouble the reader with any large descri|ption of that prodigious omen of two dra|gons,Mat. Westm. A. D. 463. one red and the other white, which issuing out of a lake whilst Vortigern sate on the bank, began a terrible combat, in which at last the White was conquerour. By which two Dragons, according to Merlins interpre|tation, were meant the Brittains and Saxons: and the successe of their fight was the flight and destruction of the Brittains. These seem to be inventions of the old Bards easily com|posed after the event, and foolishly colle|cted by Geffrey of Monmouth, to signalize the expiring of the Brittish Kingdome.
7. Hengist being inform'd of the coming of Aurelius Ambrosius with considerable forces in aid of the Brittains, endeavoured to come to a battell with him, before the uniting of their Armies: but was not able to effect his intention. So that a main bat|tell was fought by the two Nations in Kent neer the ancient famous port of Roch borow:Huntingd. l. 2. which is thus describ'd by Henry of Hunting|don: A while after that auxiliary forces were come, King Hengist and his Son Esca gathered an invincible army, in the seaventeenth year after the coming of the Saxons into Brittany,A. D. 466 which was the year of Grace four hundred sixty five. On the other side the Brittains uniting all their forces oppos'd them with an Army gallant|ly ranged into twelve Bodies. The fight continued long, and with little advantage. But at last Hengist having slain the twelve Leaders, and cast down their Ensigns, forc'd the Brittains to flye. He himself likewise lost great numbers of his soldiers and principall Officers, and particu|larly a certain great Prince of his Nation call'd Wipped: in whose memory the place of the battell was call'd Wippeds-stede. So that this Victory was much bewayld by the Saxons themselves: and therefore after that time neither did he take the confidence to enter into the Brittains Borders, nor the Brittains into Kent.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1. King Vortigern consumed by fire.
2.3. A. Ambrosius, King: his Character.
5.6.7. Death of S. Patrick and place of his buriall.

1. THE year following was free from an extern war against the Saxons:A. D. 466. which gave Aurelius Ambrosius an oppor|tunity to convert his arms against the prin|cipall Authour of all the miseries of Britta|ny, the unhappy King Vortigern. Therefore he march'd to the Castle Genorium, which he beseiged, but found him so strongly forti|fied there, that by no force or cunning he could expugn it At last by fire, whether cast by Ambrosius, or coming from heaven, is uncertain, both the King and his Castle were consum'd,Huntingd. l. 2. so as, saith Huntingdon, his body never appear'd.
2. Vortigern being thus removed, the whole power and authority of the Kingdom was devolv'd on Ambrosius, not after a tu|multuary manner, or by the factious suffra|ges of the Army: but by an unanimous Election of the Clergy, Nobility and Commons of the Nation: For which purpose, saith S. H. Spelman,Spelm. . Concil. D. D. 465. a Council or Assembly was call'd in Cambria, about the Mountains of Erir in the Province of the Ordovices, or Northwales, in which he was exalted to the Regal Dignity: This he says was done in the year four hun|dred sixty five, following the account of Ma|thew of Westminster: But other Historians, as Stow, Speed, c. more probably place this Election the year following, after the death of Vortigern.
3. How happy an exchange the Brittains made of their King, will appear from this Character given to Aurelius Ambrosius by Matthew of Westminster,M. Wst A. D. 465. far unlike that which all writers ascribe to Vortigern: Ambrosius, saith he, assoon as he was placed on the throne

of Brittany employed himself to the utmost of his power in repairing Churches which had been ruind.A. D. 472. He was a Prince magnificent in his gifts, sedulous in the worship of God, modest, averse from flattery, a valiant soldier on foot, yet more valiant on hors-back, and very skilfull in condu|cting an army. For which vertues and endow|ments his fame was spread through far distant regions.
4. Being so worthy a Prince, it is not altogether unlikely that this is the same Ambrosius mention'd by Eugypius in the life of S. Severin,Egip in vita S. Severini. who writes thus. Odoacer King of the Erul having subdued Italy wrote kind and familiar letters to S. Severin, desiring him to ask of him whatsoever he pleased. This he did in consideration that the same holy Bishop had fore|told him that he should raign there. The Holy man encouraged with so kind an offer, requested him to free from banishment a certain person call'd Ambrosius, who had been thereto condem|ned by the said King. Which passage being cited by Baronius, he thus adds, As concerning this Ambrosius,Baron. A. D. 476. my opinion is that he is the same who afterward going into Brittany, with great courage attempted, and in some degree effected the freeing of that Island from the oppres|sion of the barbarous Saxons. Thus writes the learned Cardinal, though he erroneously places the beginning of Odoacers raign in Italy too late.
5. Severall years pass'd, after the Election of Ambrosius, either in peace, or not consi|derable war between the Brittains and Saxons: The occurrents of which time is thus descri|b'd by S. Beda:Beda de  in . The Brittains, under the conduct of Ambrosius Aurelianus a modest Prince, and who alone of the Roman race had remain'd after the slaughter made by the Saxons, in which his parents who had worn the Regall Purple were slain, provoking at last that Victorious Nation to combat, gave them an overthrow: And from that time now the Brittains, and now the Saxons gott the better in small encounters, till at last new forces of strangers arriving the Saxons gott possession of the whole Island.
A. D. 47.6. During this lesse disturbed time it was that S. Patrick, many years before return'd out of Ireland, dyed in his solitary retreat at Glastenbury,Lib. cap. as already hath been declared before the proper time, because wee would not too distractedly sett down the Gests of that glorious Apostolicall Saint. Concerning whom thus wee read in the antiquities of Glastenbury:Antiq. Glasten. in Patrici. In these days after the death of Vorigern, Aurelius Ambrosius raigned ver the Brittains: And the Saxons grew strong, multiplying exceedingly. Then it was that S. Patrick the Apostle of Ireland, and first Abbot in the Isle Avallonia, after he had sufficiently instructed the foresaid Brethren in Regular Disciplines, and competently enrich'd that Monastery with posses|sions procured from Kings and Princes, at last yeilded to nature in the thirty ninth year after his return to the said Island: And was buried in the Old Church on the right hand of the Altar by direction of an Angell,A. D. 477. a great flame likewise in the sight of all breaking forth in the same place.
7. The Irish Writers eagerly contend against this and other Brittish testimonies concer|ning S. Patrick's being buried in Brittany: confidently affirming that his Body reposes in the Church of Downpatrick in Ireland: Whose assertion likewise seems to be con|firm'd by S. Bernard who in the life of S. Malachias a Holy Irish Bishop writes that S. Patricks body rests in the See of Armagh: accom|panied with those of S. Colombanus and S. Bri|gide. But this controversy may be commo|diously enough composed, as many of the like nature have been, by replying, that some considerable Relicks of his Sacred Body have been requested by the Irish from the Brittains and deposited at Down: Which Relicks have after by mistake been reputed his entire Body: a world of examples of the like errour being exstant in Ecclesiasticall History.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1. Hengists victory.
2.3. c. Ella a Saxon invades Sussex: where he erects the Kingdom of the South-saxons.
6.7. c. King Ambrosius marches North|ward against Hengist: His pious vow: and Victory.
10 11. c. Hengist a Prisoner: sentenced to death by the cruell sentence of a Bi|shop.
13. Hengists son Aesca succeeds in the Kingdom of Kent.

1. AFter some years cessation,A. D. 473. or at least sleight incursions occasionally exer|cis'd between the Brittains and Saxons, in the year four hundred seaventy three Hengist obtain'd an important Victory against the Brittains,Ethelvvard. l. 1. for thus we read in Ethelwerd a Noble Saxon Writer: The space of eight years being compleat (after the Battell at Wippedflet) Hengist together with his son Esca took up arms against the Brittains once more: whose army they discomfited, and caried away immense spoyles. This Victory is not expressly mention'd by any other Historians: but may be conceiv'd to be in generall words intended by Gildas and S. Beda in this expression, From that time sometimes the Brittains,Beda l. 1. c. 16. and sometimes their Enemies had the Victory, till the year wherin the Mountain of Bath (Mons Badonicus) was beseig'd: which was ten years after this combat.
2. In the year of Christ four hundred seaventy seaven,A. D. 477. Hengist perceiving that with his present forces he could make no progres

against so valiant a Captain as Ambrosius,A. D. 487. nor yet maintain the Provinces lately given him by Vortigern for his redemption, sent for new and greater supplies out of Germany. Where|upon a famous Saxon captain calld Ella, with his three sons Cymen, Pleting and Cissa, atten|ded with a numerous army and strong fleet took sea, and by Hengists directions bended their course to the Southern shore of Sussex.
3. The order and successe of this expedi|tion is thus describ'd by Henry of Hunting|don:Huntingd. l. 2. The great Saxon Commander Elle with his Sons and navy furnish'd with a strong and well orderd army landed in Brittany at a place call'd Cymen-shore (from the name of Ella's eldest Son:) And while the Saxons were landing from their ships, the Brittains rais'd a loud crye, at which a world of people repaired to them from the places adiacent: And streight a combat began. The Saxons men of high stature and cou|rage receiv'd them politickly, and the Brittains most imprudently sett upon their enemies, for coming in loose companies, one after another, they were easily slain by the Saxons who kep'd them|selves together in close bodies. Thus the Brittains which still came in to ayd their countreymen, were suddenly discouraged by the noyse they heard of the defeat of the former. They were all there|fore putt to flight as far as the next wood called Andredesbeige. And the Saxons possess'd them|selves of the coasts of Sussex lying toward the Sea, every day by little and little enlarging their limits, till the ninth year after their co|ming.
Id. ibid. A. D. 485.4. In which ninth year whilst Ella and his sons boldly entred further into the countrey: The Princes and Nobles of the Brittains mett in arms together at a place call'd Mercredeburn, and fought against the Saxons. The Victory was doubtfull: for on both sides the Armies were much empaired and broken: So that each of them retired back to their own quarters.
5. Mathew of Westminster addes that Ella
with his Sons were forced to forsake the feild. So that perceiving that he had not strength enough to make good his present conquests, much lesse to enlarge them, he sent into Germany for new supplies: till the coming of which he lay still upon the de|fensive. But after their arrivall he coura|geously continued his progresse in gaining more territories, till he establish'd a new Kingdom of the South-Saxons in those parts.
6. Whilst King Ambrosius employ'd his forces to represse the Saxons in these Sou|thern regions,A. D. 487. Hengist having well fortified his Kindom of Kent, took a journey into the Northern Provinces: where joyning him|self with the Picts and Scots, he took many Citties and towns, before the Brittains could oppose him: and for the security of his new Conquests he built many Castles and strong holds: and wheresoever he came he demolish'd all Churches. Of which King Ambrosius being informed, he with great courage, as in Gods cause, march'd after him: And, saith Richard white, whilst he pas|sed on his journey,R. Vitus l 7. beholding the towns layd wast, the lamentable ruines of Churches, and miseries of the poore people, he could not refrain weeping: Whereupon by Vow he promised Almighty God, that if he would grant him the Victory over the impious Saxons, he would restore and rebuild all the Churches destroyed.
7. How his pious Vow was approved by God the successe demonstrates,M. Westm. A. D. 487. thus rela|ted by Mathew of Westminster: In the year of Grace four hundred eighty seaven Aurelius Ambrosius having gathered a great Army of Brittains resolved to provoke the Saxons to a combat. Marching therefore with his army to the North, he found Hengist with his forces beyond Humber. Who being inform'd of his approaching, boldly went to meet him, with an intention to sett upon his army unawares, in a feild call'd Maisbely through which Ambrosius was to passe, whom he hoped to find unprovided. But the Brit|tish King had notice of his design, which hindred him to march to the same feild. At last the two Armies meeting in good military order, a feirce battell was begun, and much blood shed on both sides. But at last Hengist perceiving his army to give ground, and that the Brittains began to prevayle, he presently fled to a town call'd Car-conan, now Cuningbury. But considering the weaknes of the town to resist, he knew his only safety consisted in the swords and spears of his followers. Ambrosius pursued him, and by the way putt to the sword all the Saxons he found. Thus having obtaind the Victory, he with great zeale and devotion gave praise to the God of heaven.
8. As for Hengist,A. D. 488. Camden. in Brigant. he fortified his camp as well as he could neer the said town: But after a few days, saith Camden, he was forc'd to come to a battell before his camp, which was fatall to him and his: for the greatest part of his army was cutt in peices, and himself, being taken prisoner, was beheaded by the Brittains.
9. This battell,Florileg. A. D. 489. saith Florilegus, was fought on the banks of the River Don. And the man|ner how Hengist was taken prisoner was this: The valiant Eldot Duke or Consul of Glocester (Clau|diocestriae) had an earnest desire to cope with Hengist. Therefore with the forces under his command furiously peircing through the Enemies squadrons, he at last found him: and laying hold on the fore part of his helmet, with main force he drew him in among his own troops: saying,God at last hath fullfilld my desire: It is he who hath given us the Victory.
Presently after this the Saxons fled, every one his own way: whom Am|brosius pursuing, manfully slew. Octa the Son of Hengist with the greatest numbers fled to York: But Esca and not a few with him betook them|selves to another Citty call'd Aclud. After this Victory Ambrosius took the Citty Car-conan, which he entred triumphantly, staying there onely three days.
10. The same Author consequently relates the manner how Hengist was sen|tenced and executed after the fight. After

the,A D. 488. saith he, Ambrosius calling his Captains together, commanded them to decreet what should becom of Hengist.I.  Whereupon Eldad Bi|shop of Glocester, who was also Brother of Eldot, impos'd silence on them all: and gnashing his teeth for rage, he thus said, Though all here present had a desire to set him free, I my self would cutt him in peices. Why doe you delay, O effeminat Brittains? Did not Samul a Pro|phet having taken the King of Amalec prisoner in a battell, cutt him in peices, one limme after another, saying, As thou hast made many Mothers childles, so will I make thy mother childles this day? Doe you therefore deale in the same manner with this barbarous King, who is another Agag, and has depriv'd a world of Brittish Mothers of their children. When he had thus sayd, Eldad drew his sword, and leading him out of the Citty cutt off his head, sending his soule into hell.
11. If this relation be true, Eldad shew'd himself an unmercifull man, and one who forgott the duty of a Christian Bishop, who ought rather to have mitigated the rigour of other mens sentences, then to pronounce so cruell a iudgment, whilst others, who were soldiers too, held their peace. He therefore little deserves the commendation given him by Pits for his piety and prudence,Pits in . which he ill express'd when gnashing his teeth for rage, he extorted a Captive Kings death from an Assembly of soldiers.Id. ibid. The Book of Invective Orations for which the same Authour likewise reckons him among the ancient Brittish Writers, probably procee|ding from the same spirit, deserved rather to be forgotten, then recorded as in honour of our Ancestors.
12. After this so signall a Victory Ambro|sius mindfull of his Vow, call'd together work|men,Florilg. vbi supr. Masons and Carpenters, and took care to repaire the Houses of God which had been destroy|ed: and placing in them Preists and other Clergy-men, he reduc'd the Divine service to the pristine order. And wheresoever he found any Idols or Temples of false Gods, he defac'd them utterly out of the memory of men. He was studious to observe iustice and peace especially to Eccle|siasticall persons: and confer'd on them liberall revenews, enjoyning them all to pray for the King|dom and state of Gods Church.
13. Hengist being thus dead, his Son Aesca succeeded him in the Kingdom of Kent. He is call'd Oisc by S. Beda,Beda l. 2. c. 5. who addes that from him the succeeding Kings of Kent were call'd Oiskings. As for his other Son Otta, in the former narration of Florilegus said to have fled to York, nothing can be found of him among the Ancient Writers. So that small credit is to be given to what Modern Histo|rians relate concerning him, that King Am|brosius bestow'd on him the Province of Galloway in Scotland: since in those days that Province was not in the disposall of the Brittains.


XII. CHAP.A. D. 490.
XII. CH.

1.2. S. Brigit comes out of Ireland into Brittany, for Relicks: and returns.

1. THE same year in which Hengist was slain the Holy Virgin S. Brigit came out of Ireland into Brittany,A. D. 488. as we find re|corded in the Antiquities of Glastonbury,Antiquit. Glasten. and her busines was to obtain some Relicks of her most dear and honour'd Patron S. Patrick: for she had been his Disciple, and a great ad|mirer of his sanctity, which she zealously imitated. Being in Brittany, she pass'd some years in a certain small Island near Glastonbury, where there was an Oratory consecrated to the honour of S. Mary Magdalen: The Island
was called Bekery, or the Little Island. After|ward, having left behind her scripp, chain, bell, and other vestments of her own wea|ving, which for the memory of her Sancti|ty are there expos'd, she return'd into Ireland, where not long after she rested in our Lord, and was buried in the Citty of Down.
2. This is that famous Virgin for her Sanctity and miracles venerated by Gods Church on the first day of February: On which day we read in the Martyrologes of Rome,Martyrolog. Rom. c. 1. Febr. S. Beda and Ado these words, This day is celebrated the Memory of S. Brigid a Virgin, who in testimony of her virginity having touch'd the Wood of an Altar, it became presently green. Her death is frequently assign'd by writers to the eighteenth year of the following Century.Vsher. Pro|mord. 884.  901. But trur Chronology, saith Bishop Vsher, makes her to out live S. Patrick, only thirty years,


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. c. S. Sophias a Brittish Martyr, and Bishop of Beneventum.

1. IN our English Martyrologe on the four and twentieth of Ianuary there is a commemoration of a Brittish Saint and Martyr call'd S. Sophias:A. D. 498. Martyrolog. Anglic. 24. Ianvar. whose death is assi|gned to the four hundred and ninetieth year of our Lord.
2. This S. Sophias was the Son of Guil|leicus
Prince of the Ordovices, or Northwales.
He undertook a Monasticall Profession in a Monastery built by himself in the same Province. It is written of him that he had such devotion to our Lords Passion, that he made three pilgrimages to Ierusalem to visit the marks and footsteps of it. He had like|wise a great Veneration to Rome, and those

places which had been consecrated by the blood and Martyrdom of the two Princes of the Apostles.
3. At his being there S. Felix, or his Pre|decessour S. Simplicius sate in the Apostles Chair: By whom he was consecrated Bishop of Beneventum. Which See he governed with prudence and Sanctity, till at last he was slain by an impious Pagan whilst he was at the holy Altar celebrating the Mystery of our Redemption.
4. This Saint Sophias, was by another name call'd Cadocus,Sup. l. c. being the same who gave advice to Saint Iltutus to forsake a secular life, as hath been already declared. And he is to be distinguish'd from another Saint Cadocus, who was an Abbot: concer|ning whom we shall treat in the year of Grace five hundred.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of Saint Keyna daugher of Braganus Prince of Brecknock: and of her Brothers and sisters.
4. c. The Gests of S. Keyna.

1. NO lesse famous at the same time was the Holy Brittish Virgin Saint Keyna, whose death in our Martyrologe is likewise placed in the same year four hun|dred and Ninety. Illustrious she was for her
Birth, being the Daughter of Braganus Prince of that Province in Wales which from him was afterward called Brecknock|shire: but more illustrious for her zeale to preserve her Chastity, for which reason she was call'd in the Brittish language Keyn|vayre, that is, Keyna the Virgin
Antiquit. Glaston.2. This Prince Braganus, or Brachanus, the Father of Saint Keyna is said to have had twelve sons and twelve daughters by his Lady call'd Marcella daughter of Theodoric son of Teth|phalt Prince of Garthmatrin, the same region call'd afterward Brecnock. Their first born Son was Saint Canoc, of whom we shall speak ere long, And their eldest daughter was Gladus who was mother of Cadocus by Saint Gunley a Holy King of the Southern Britons. The second daughter was Melaria the Mother of the Holy Arch-Bishop Saint David. Thus writes Capgrave, neither doth he men|tion any other of their children besides S. Keyna.
Girald. Cam|br. l. 1. c. 2. D. Povvel in Annotat. ad Girald.3. But in Giraldus Cambrensis another daughter is commemorated call'd Saint Al|medha, of whom more will be said present|ly. And David Powel makes mention of a fifth named Tydval, who was the wife of ongen the Son of Cadel Prince of Powis-land; and mother of Brochmal sirnamed Scithroc, who slew Ethelfred King of the Northumbers.
4. Concerning the Holy Virgin Saint Keyna we find this Narration in the Au|thour of her life extant in Capgrave:Capgrav. in. S. Keyna She was of Royal blood being daughter of Braganus Prince of Brecknockshire. When she came to ripe years, many Noble persons sought her in mariage. But she utterly refused that state, having consecrated her virginity to our Lord by a perpetuall vow. For which cause she was afterward by the Brittains called Keyn-wri, that is, Keyna the Virgin.
5. At length she determined to forsake her countrey, and find out some desart place where she might attend to Contemplation. Therefore directing her journey beyond Severn, and there meeting with certain wooddy places, she made her request to the Prince of that countrey that she might be permitted to serve God in that solitude. His answer was that he was very willing to grant her request: but that the place did so swarm with serpents, that neither men nor beasts could inhabite in it. But she constantly replyed, that her firm trust was in the name and assistance of Al|mighty God, to drive all that poysonnous brood out of that region.
6. Hereupon the place was granted to the Holy Virgin: who presently prostrating her self in fervent prayer to God, obtaind of him to change all the serpents and vipers there into stones. And to this day the stones in that Region doe resemble the windings of Serpents through all the feilds and villages, as if they had been framed so by the hand of the engraver.
7. Our learned Camden in his diligent search after Antiquities seems to have vi|sited this countrey, being a part of So|mersetshire, though he is willing to dis|parage the miracle: His words are, On the western bank of Avon is seen the town of Cainsham.Camden. in Somerset. Some are of opinion that it was named so from Keyna a most holy Brittish Virgin who according to the credulous perswa|sion of former ages is beleived to have turn'd serpents into stones: because such like mira|cles of sporting nature are there sometimes found in the Quarries. I my self saw a stone brought from thence representing a serpent rolled up into a spire: The head of it stuck out in the outward surface, and the end of the tayle terminated in the Center.
8. But let us prosecute the life of this
Holy Virgin.Capgrav. vbi supr. Many years being spent by her in this solitary place, and the fame of her Sanctity every where divulged, and many Oratories built by her, her Nephew Saint Cadoc performing a pilgrimage to the Mount of Saint Michal, mett there with his bles|sed Aunt Saint Keyna: at whose sight he was replenish'd with great ioy. And being desi|rous to bring her back to her own countrey, the inhabitants of that region would not per|mitt him. But afterward by the admonition of an Angel the holy Mayd returned to the place of her Nativity: Where on the topp of a

hillock seated at the foot of a high mountain she made a little habitation for her self: and by her prayers to God obtaind a spring there to flow out of the earth: which by the merits of the Holy Virgin afforded health to divers in|firmities.
9. But when the time of her consumma|tion approached, one night she by the reve|lation of the holy Ghost saw in a vision, as it were a fiery pillar, the base whereof was fixed on her bed: Now her bed was the pave|ment strow'd over with a few branches of trees. And in this Vision two Angels appear'd to her: One of which approaching respectfully to her, seem'd to take off the sack cloath with which she was covered, and instead thereof to putt on her a smock of fine linnen, and over that a tunick of purple, and last of all a mantell all woven with gold. Which having done, he thus sayd to her. Prepare your self to come with us, that we may lead you into your heavenly Fa|thers Kingdom. Hereupon she wept with ex|cesse of joy and endeavouring to follow the An|gels she awak'd, and found her body inflamed with a feaver, so that she perceiv'd her end was near.
10. Therefore sending for her Nephew Saint Cadocus, she sayd to him: This is the place above all others beloved by mee: Here my memory shall be perpetuated. This place I will often visit in spirit if it may be permitted mee: And I am assured it shall be permitted mee, because our Lord has granted mee this place as a certain inheritance. The time will come when this place shall be inhabited by a sinfull people, which notwithstanding I will violently root out of this seat. My Tomb shall lye a long time unknown: till the coming of other people whom by my prayers I shall bring hither: them will I protect and defend, and in this place shall the name of our Lord be blessed for ever.
11. After this, her soule being ready to de|part out of her body, she saw standing before her a troop of heavenly Angels, ready ioyfully to receive her soule, and to transport it without any fear or danger from her spirituall Enemies. Which having told to those who stood by, her blessed soule was freed from the prison of her body on the eighth day before the Ides of October, In her dissolution her face smiled, and was all of a rosy colour: and so sweet a fragrancy proceeded from her Sacred Virgin-body, that those who were present thought themselves in the ioy of Paradice. S. Cadocus buried her in her own Ora|tory, where for many years she had lead a most holy mortified life, very acceptable to God.


XV. CHAP.XV. CHA.

1.2. Of S. Almedha sister to S Keyna: and strange things hapning on her solemnity.
3. Of her Brother Saint Canoc: and his wreath.
4. Of Saint Clitanc King of Brecknock: and Martyr.

1. TO the Gests of this Holy Virgin Saint Kyna we will here adjoyn what remains in ancient Monuments concerning her sister Saint Almedha,  her Brother Saint Canocus.Girald. Cam|b tm. l. 1. c . There are, saith Giraldus Cam|brensis, dispersed through severall Provinces of Cambria many Churches illustrated by the names of the Children of Braganu Of these there is one seated on the top of a certain hill in the region of Brecknock, not far distant from the principall Castle of Aberhodni; which is called the Church of Saint Almedha: who re|iecting the mariage of an Earthly Prince, and espousing her self to the Eternall King consum|mated her life by a triumphant Martyrdom. The day of her solemnity is every year celebrated in the same place the first of August: Whereto great numbers of devout people from far distant parts use to assemble, and by the merits of that Holy Virgin receive their desired health from divers infirmities.
2. One especiall thing usually hapning on the solemnity of this Blessed Virgin, seems to mee very remarkable. For you may oftimes see there young men and maids sometimes in the Church, sometimes in the Church-yard, and sometimes whilst they are dancing in an even ground en|compassing it, to fall down on a sudden to the ground at first they lye quiet, as if they were rapt in an Extasy: but presently after they will leap up, as if possess'd with a frenzy, and both with their hands and feet before the people they will represent whatsoever servile works they unlawful|ly performed upon Feast-dayes of the Church. One will walk as if he was holding the plow: ano|ther as if he were driving the Oxen with a goad, and both of them in the mean time singing some rude tune, as if to ease their toyle One will act the trade of a Shoomaker, another of a tanner, a third of one that were spinning. Here you may see a mayd busily weaving, and expressing all the post|ures usuall in that work. After all which being brought with Offrings unto the Altar, you would be astonish'd to see how suddenly they will return to their senses again. Hereby, through Gods mercy, who rejoyces rather in the conversion then destru|ction of Sinners, it is certain that very many have been corrected and induced to observe the Holy Feasts with great devotion.
3. As touching their Brother Saint Canoc, the fame of his Sanctity was most eminent among the Silues.. Angl. 11. Feb. His name is consign'd in our English Martyrologe on the eleaventh o

February:A. D. 491. where likewise he is sayd to have flourish'd in all vertues about the year of Christ four hundred ninety two. To him most probably is to be referd that which is reported of the Wreath (Torques) of S. Canauc (for so he calls him:) Which the inhabitants of that countrey esteem to be a pre|cious Relick and of wonderfull vertue: insomuch as when any one is to give a testimony by Oath, if that Wreath be placed in fight, he dares not presume to commit periury.
4. Our Martyrologe also among other Saints of this time commemorates the death and Martyrdom of a King of Brecknock in South|wales calld Clitanc or Clintanc,Martyrol. Angl. 19. Aug on the nine|teeth day of August, in the year of Grace four hundred nity two. Concerning whom we read in Capgrave that he was a Prince very observant of peace and iustice among his Subiects: and that in the end he became a Martyr adorn'd with a celestiall crown for his vertues and merits,Ap. Capgr. in Clitanc. and particularly his Chastity and purity from carnall delectations. For he was murdred by treason of a certain impious wretch, whose name is perished with him But to return to the publick affairs of these times between the Brittains and Saxons.


XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

1.2.3. The erection of the Kingdom of the South-Saxons.
4. Of the Citty Anderida.
5. Two Metropolitans constituted.

A. D. 491.1. IN the year of Grace four hundred ninety one is placed by our best Hi|storians the beginning of the Kingdom of the South-Saxons: which as it began on a sudden and more timely then the rest, so was it likewise the first that fayled, and the last which embraced the Christian Faith. The manner how this New Kingdom was erected is thus described by Henry of Hun|tingdon:Huntingd. l. 22. Then began, saith he, the Kingdom of Sussex, which Ella a long time held, and admi|nistred with great power. He had received great recruits out of Germany, so that being confident of his forces, he in the third year after the death of Hengist, the Roman Emperour Anastasius then raigning, layd siege to the Strong Citty of Andredecester. Whereupon the Brittains were gatherd together in infinite numbers to raise this siege, and both day and night vexed the be|siegers with ambushes and incursions. But they nothing discouraged, gave continuall assaults on the Citty, and in every assault the Brittains sett on their backs, showrng arrows and darts upon them. So that they were forc'd to give over the assault, and turn their forces against them. But the Brittains being more nimble, quickly ran into the woods:A. D. 493. and when the Saxons re|turnd to the walls, they follow'd them at their bac'ks.
3. By this means the Saxons were a long time extremely harass'd, and great slaughters were made of them: Till at last they were compell'd to divide their Army into two parts, that whilst one was employed in expugning the Citty, the other part might be in a readines to fight with the Brittons from without. Than indeed the besieged being weakned with famine, could no longer resist the Saxons, by whom they were all consum'd with the sword, so that not one escaped. And moreover in revenge of the great losses sustain'd by the Saxons during this Siege, they demolish'd the Citty utterly, so that it was never built again. Onely the marks of the place where a most Noble Citty had been seated, might be seen by passengers.
4. The Citty here called Andredecester was by the Romans call'd Anderida. Guido Pancirolus discoursing on the Officers subor|dinate to the Count of the Saxon-shore in Brittany makes mention of a Provost of a company of soldiers call'd Abulci at An|derida, no doubt placed in this Citty near the Sea, to defend the Coasts from the Saxon Pirats. But when the Romans who main|tain'd these garrisons, had quitted the Island, the shores were left unguarded, and so expos'd to the invasions of the Germans. There now only remains a great forest, call'd by the Saxons Andraedswald, and by the Brit|tains Coid Andred, which continues the name of Anderida, anciently seated near it, saith Camden.
5.Martyrolog. Aug. 19. Ang. About this time King Ambrosius is said to have come to the Mount of Am|bri near Caer-carec (Now called Sa|lisbury) where Hengist had treacherously slaughtered so many Princes:Capgrav. i Clitace. for whom he intended to raise a famous Monu|ment. There also he is sayd to have constituted two Metropolitans, Saint Sampson at Yorck, and Saint Dubricius at Caer-leon.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

1.2.3. A Victory of the Brittains at the Hill Badonicus: Where that hill was seated.
4.5.6. Prince Arthur was in this Battell: he confides in the protection of our B. Lady.

1. THE second year after the erection of this New Kingdom of the South-Saxons,A. D. 493. was illustrious for a great Victory obtain'd by the Brittains against

the Saxons at the Hill call'd Badonicus. Con|cerning which Saint Beda thus writes:eda l. 1. c. 6. The Brittains conducted by their famous King Am|brosius take courage, and provoking the Victo|rious Saxons to combat, by the Divine favour obtaind a Victory over them. After which sometimes the Brittains, sometimes the Saxons gott the upper hand, till the year forty four after their arrivall in Brittany, in which the Saxons were beseig'd on the Mountain call'd Ba|donicus, and a great slaughter made of them. This passage Saint Beda transcribes out of our Brittish Historian Gildas,Gildas de Ex|cid. who in the end of it addes these words, This was the year of my Nativity.
Polyd. Virg. l. 3.2. This Mountain is by Polydor Virgil in|terpreted to be Blackmore, through which the River Tese (Athesis) runs, between Yorkshire and the Bishoprick of Durham: Where the Sa|xons were assembled, expecting great supplies out of Germany: But being encompass'd by the Brittains, by whom also the Sea-coasts were strongly guarded, the Saxons press'd with want of provisions were forced to come to a battell, in which they were with great slaughter putt to flight.
Huntingd. l. 2.3. Henry of Huntingdon acknowledges in|genuously that he was utterly ignorant where this Mountain Badonicus was seated.Camden in Somersetshire. But Camden with very great probability makes the territory of the ancient Citty of Bath in Somersetshire the Scene of this battell and victory which Citty saith he is by Ptolo|my call'd () Hott Waters, by An|toninus (Aquae Solis) Waters of the Sun, by the Brittains Car-Badon, by Stephanus Badiza, in Latin Bathonia, and at this day by us Bathe. This Citty about the forty fourth year after the coming of the Saxons was by them beseig'd. But the Warlick Prince Arthur coming upon them, they were forced to retire to the Mountain Bado|nicus, where after a long and desperate fight they were overcom, and great numbers of them slain. This seems to be that Mountain which is now cal|led Bannesown, at the foot whereof is seated a little village called Bathestone, where to this day are seen rampires and trenches the Marks of a Camp.
4. We are not yet so to ascribe this victo|ry to Arthur, as to exclude Ambrosius from his share, to who~ S. Beda principally ascribes it. Kinz Ambrosius was the Conductour in cheif of the Brittish Army, under whom Arthur his Nephew, being Son to his Brother Vther-pendragon, was a Captain  principall Officer.Malmsbur. d Regib. l. 1. For thus writes Malmsburensis of the present Brittish affaires, King Vortimer being fatally taken away, the strength of the Brittains withred away, and their hopes were diminis'hd. And they had assuredly falln to ruine had not Ambrosius succeeded, who alone remaind of the Roman stock, and after Vortigern was Monark of the Kingdom. He by the assistance of the warlick Prince Arthur repress'd the haughty Saxons swelling with pride of their conquests.
Id. ib.5. This is that Arthur, saith the same Au|thour, concerning whom the Brittains to this day report and write so many trifling fables. A Prince surely worthy to be magnified by true History, and not to be made the subject of idle dreamers: since he alone by his admirable courage sustain'd his declining countrey, and incited the minds of the Brittains broken with many calamities, to resume new courage.
6. One particular concerning this Prince, is related by the same Historian, and most pertinent to the design of our History. In the seige of the Mountain Badonicus, Prince Arthur,d. ib. considing in the protection of our Blessed Lady, whose Image he cared sow'd in his arms putt to flight and slew no fewer then nine hundred Sa|xons. And that it was his custom afterwards to make use of these Spirituall arms is con|firmed by other ancient Writers; For Henry of Huntingdon testifies that in a combat neer the Castle Guinnion the same Prince cared the image of the Blessed Mary Virgin-mother of our Lord on his shoulders:Huntingd. l 2 and that whole day, by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ and his holy Mo|ther Mary, the Saxons were putt to flight,. A. D. 524. and great numbers of them persnd. Flortiegus like|wise says that Prince Arthurs sheild, in which was painted the Image of our Lady, whom he often call'd to mind, was named Fridwen. Lastly the same Writer addes, that in a certain battell Arthur drawing forth his sword Caliburn,Id. ib. vo|ked the name of the Blessed Virgin; and with great violence peircing into the midst of the Enemies troops, at one blow slew whomsoever he touch'd with it: Neither did he give over till he had slain eight hundred and forty of his enemies with his sword alone.


XVIII. CHAP.XVIII. C.

1. The Apparition of S Michael on Mount Garganus.
2 3 c. Of S Richard the first converted Saxon: His voyage into Italy: where he is made Bishop of Andria His Gests: He was present at the Consecration of the Church built to S Michael.

1. ABout this time there was a wonder|full Apparition of the glorious Archangel S. Michael on the Mountain Gar|ganus in Calabria,A. D. 493. the Memory whereof is ce|lebrated anniversarily by the Catholick Church on the eighth of May. The comme|moration whereof challenges a place in this History, because a Holy Bishp born in Britta|ny was present at the consecration of a Church built by occasion of the said Appa|rition. The name of this Saint was Richard, Bishop of Andria a Citty of the same Re|gion.
2. His name shows him not to have been a Brittain, though born in this Island. For he was descended of Saxon parents, having

been the first of that Nation recorded in our Ecclesiasticall Monuments to have been gained to Christ, not long after their en|trance into Brittany, before, an open hosti|lity broke forth between the Nations.
3. Concerning him we read thus in the Ecclesiasticall Office of his Solemnity in the Church of Andria:Offic. Ecclesia And in est. S. Richardi. Richard, by Nation an En|glishman, was born in that Island of illustrious parents in the year of Grace four hundred fifty five, at which time S. Leo the first governed the Church, and Marcian the Roman Empire, when Ateila infested Italy. He is here improperly call'd an Englishman: for though the Angli were at that time in Brittany, and probably S. Richard was descended of a family of that particular Nation, yet many yeares pass'd before the Island received from them the ap|pellation of England.
4. The said Office further prosecutes the Narration of the piety and innocence expres|sed by this Saint even in his tender years: how a verse he was from wantonnes and lu|xury incident to that age, wholly giving himself to reading of Holy Scripture, con|versing with men of learning and vertue, c. insomuch as he gained not only fer|vent love from his parents, but veneration from his companions and strangers.
5 But because the following wars, and especially the Idolatrous Rites of his countrey|men the Saxons, furious enemies of the Re|ligion to which our Lord had call'd him, were a hindrance to his free progress in piety, there we further read how he was miracu|lously invited to forsake his countrey, and to depart ino Italy: For thus it follows in the said Office,Ibid. Whilst the Blessed S. Richard was assiduously intent on his devotions and prayers to God, there appear'd to him in sleep the glorious Apostle S. Peter, commanding him in the name of Almighty God to take a journey into Apulia, and there to preach the word of God to the An|drians: That he should not apprehend the length of the way, or the threatnings of Infidels, because our Lord would be present to assist him. Having said this, the Apostle vanish'd. And S. Richard being awak'd from sleep immediatly rose, and cas|ting himself before a Crucifix gave humble thanks to God and S. Peter for this Visitation. The day following he forsook his Brethren, who were persons of power and eminence, and taking leave of his dearest freinds, began his journey notwith|standing their importunity to detain him. Being arrived at Rome, he address'd himself to the Holy Pape Gelasius, and declar'd what com|mands had been in a Vision impos'd on him by the Holy Apostle; thereupon beseeching him that with his permission and blessing, he might goe to Andria, there to fullfull the Ministery enjoyn'd him. Gelasius hearing this did greatly rejoyce, and observing the venerable aspect of S. Richard, together with his gravity, ordained him Bishop of the Church of Andria, and commanded him that whither soever he went, he should preach the Gospell of Christ: and this done, kis|sing the holy man, he gave him his beneiction.
6. Through the whole course of his journey S. Richard accordingly preach'd the word of God,Ibid. and by many miracles and cures wrought on the sick converted many to the Faith and worship of the true God: till at length he arrived at An|dria. There before the gate of the Citty he saw a blind man, and a woman bowd and contracted together, both which begg'd an Alms of him. Whereupon he began to expound to them the Word of God, c. and perceiving the blind man to be devoutly attentive to his speeches, he said to him: If thou wilt beleive in Iesus Christ and be baptis'd, thou shalt receive thy sight. Who answer'd, I believe in Iesus Christ whom thou preachest, and I beg that I may be baptis'd. As|soon as this was said, the Holy man with his hands making the sign of the Crosse upon the blind mans eyes, he immediatly recover'd his sight, and casting away the staves which had help'd him in walking, he gave due thanks to God and to S. Richard, by whom he had been enlightned. As for the woman, when she saw this miracle, she likewise was converted: and S. Richard seeing her Faith, took her by the hand, whereupon she presently rose up streight, and walking cryed with a loud voyce, There is onely one most high God, who by his good servant hath made mee whole. At these clamours of the woman the greatest part of the Citty met together, and attending to the Holy Bisphops preaching were in a short time converted, God working many other Miracles by him: and having broken down all their Idols, were baptis'd by him.
7. Not long after this there follow'd the foresayd Apparition of S. Michael to the people of Sipont,Ibid. who commanded them to erect a Chap|pell there to his name: This they signified to their Bishop Laurentius, and he to Pope Gelasius, de|siring his advice, what was to be done. His an|swer was, that such being the will of the Blessed Archangel, a Church should forthwith be built. And that this should be executed by the Holy Bishops, Laurentius of Siponto, Sabinus of Car|nusium, Pelagius of Salapia, Roger of Cannae, and Richard of Andria.
8. Then follows a Narration how the two Holy Bishops Roger of Cannae, and Richard of Andria performed their journey to Siponto on foot with dayly fasting, toylsome labour, and incommodity from the burning heat of the Sun. Which incommodity on their prayers was miraculously remedied by the flying of a mighty Eagle over their heads, which shadow'd them during all their jour|ney to Siponto. At their arrivall they exe|cuted what had been enjoyn'd them, as we read in the publick Office of the Church.
To conclude, no more doe we find recorded of this Holy Bishop, but his holy and happy death,Martyrolog. Angl 9. apt. commemorated in our Martyrologe on the Ninth of April.



A. D. 494.
XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2.3. The coming of Cerdic the Saxon, founder of the West-Saxon Kingdom.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred nine|ty four a third Noble German call'd Cerdic arriv'd in Brittany. For having heard how by the valour of the Saxons two King|doms had been there erected, he resolv'd to pretend likewise for a share in the spoiles; being a man of high spirits, and noble des|cent, as having proceeded from the stock of Woden, one of the German Gods.
2. His coming is thus describ'd by Henry of Huntingdon: In the forty seaventh year after the first coming of the Angli,Huntingd. l. 2 Cerdic and his Son Cenric, attended with five ships, arriv'd in Brit|tany, and landed at a place afterward call'd Cerdic-shore. The same day great multituds of the Brittains meeting, fought with them. The Saxons having ranged their forces in order stood immoveable before their ships. The Brittains boldly set on them, and then retired, but were not pursued by the enemy, who resolved not to quit their place. Thus was continued the fight, the Brittains sometimes charging, and then re|treating, till the nights darknes sever'd them. After which the Brittains having experience of the feicenes of these new-come strangers, depar|ted: so that neither side could boast of a Victory. Yet this advantage the Saxons had, that they took possession of their enemies shore, and by little and little enlarg'd their conquests along the Sea coasts.
3. Their landing was in the Province of the Ieus, comprehending Suffolk and Nor|folk: yet there they setled not. But mar|ching through the Island, they came into the Western parts, where in time they erected the New powerfull Kingdom of the West-Saxons.


XX. CH.XX. CHAP.

1.2. c. Pascentius a Son of K. Vortigern comes with forces into Brittany: And contrives the murder of K. A. Ambro|sius. But is slain by K. Vther.
6. Vther overcomes the Saxons.

1. THE Brittains though they had seen their Island thus dismembred, and on all sides oppress'd by barbarous enemies, yet sustained a greater dammage by civill dis|sensions, rais'd by a Son of the late King Vor|tigern call'd Pascentius, who in the end trea|cherously depriv'd them of their Noble King Ambrosius.
2. This Pascentius after the death of his Father Vortigern seing the minds of the Brit|tains,A. D. 498. out of hatred to his Father, inclin'd to Ambrosius,A. D. 496. fled into Germany: where he re|mained severall years endeavouring to ga|ther forces sufficient to place himself in the throne of his Ancestors. At length in the year four hundred ninety six he came, saith Florilegus, with a powerfull and well furnish'd Army, and landed in the Northern parts of the Island, intending to revenge his own and his fa|thers injuries upon. Ambrosius. Who upon news hereof gathered likewise an Army, and march'd speedily to meet him. Shortly they came to a bat|tell: in which Pascentius was overcom and forc'd to fly.
3. His refuge was into the countrey of the Scotts,A. D. 497. where again recruiting his army, he return'd to try his fortune once more against the Brittains. But hearing that Am|brosius lay sick in the Citty of Winchester, he thought it best to work his revenge by trea|son, rather then open force. Therefore by gifts and promises he hired a certain Saxon, call'd Eopa, to fain himself a Physicion and a Brittain, and by that means to attempt the murder. Who under this feigned shew, and with a pretence of great piety and affection to the King being admitted, mingled poy|son in a potion administred to him, of which Ambrosius presently dyed in the one and thirtieth year of his raign.
4. But Pascentius did not long enjoy the fruit of his Treason: For Vther-pendragon the Brother of Ambrosius, who during his Sicknes was Generall of the Brittish forces, marching against Pascentius, in a battell slew him and all his Captains that came along with him, over whom he obtain'd a signall Victory.
5. The year following,A. D. 398. Florileg. hc. saith Florilegus, Vther the Brother of the late King Ambrosius came with hast to Winchester, and calling an As|sembly of the people and Clergy of the Kingdom, took on him the Crown of Brittany, which is said to have been set on his head by the Holy Bishop Dubritius. And calling to mind how the year be|fore a Comet had appear'd of a wonderfull magni|tude, darting forth onely one beam, at the end whereof was seen a globe of fire shaped like a dra|gon, out of whose mouth proceeded two beames, one reaching to Gaule, and the other shooting towards Ireland, which ended in seaven lesser beames: For this reason he commanded two Dra|gons to be made of gold like to that which had ap|pear'd: One of them he gave in oblation to the Church of Winchester: the other he caried with him, placing it in every combat in his Ensign: And from that time he was call'd in the Brittish language Vther-pendragon. And hence it is that to this day our Kings in their warlick expeditions cary the like Ensign.
6. But Vther had no sooner put on his crown, but he was forc'd to exchange it for a Head-peice:Id ibid. for as the same Authour relates, Eska the Successour of Hengist and his

Son Octa attended with a mighty army of Saxons invaded the Northern Provinces of Brittany,A. D. 500. and destroyd all the Munitions between Albany and York. At last when they attempted the seige of a Citty call'd Alcluid, Vther-pendragon came upon them with all the strength of the countrey, and entred battell against them. The Saxons manfully resisted, and in the end compell'd the Brittains to fly as far as to a mountain calld Danet, which they seis'd upon, as a place of refuge, being so dismay'd, that they scarce knew what they did. But at last they resolv'd upon a prudent exploit, which was to sett courageously upon the enemies by night. This design they executed prosperously. For the Saxons being thus unexpectedly invaded, scarce rendred any combat at all, but were utterly routed: and Octa and Eska were taken prisoners, whom the King caried with him to London, where he caus'd them to be kept safe.
7. That which follows in Florilegus tou|ching King Vthers love to Igerna wife to Gorlo Duke of Cornwall, on whom he is sayd to have begott Arthur, with many other Fables repugnant to all order of time, are not worth the exscribing: In the narration of the Gests of Arthur wee shall follow William of Malmsbury, a far more authentick Guide then Geffrey of Monmouth. By him we are informed that Arthur at this time was of a full ripe age, and by his assistance King Ambrosius had repress'd the Saxons.


XXI. CH.XXI. CHAP.

1.2. c Of S. Gunlus, a Brittish Prince and Hermite: and of his Son S. Cadoc, and his Tutour S. Tathai.
9. Of S. Dogmael: and S. Bernach, Brittish Saints.
10. Of S. Finguar, an Irish Saint in Cornwall.

1. THE year of Grace five hundred is in our Ecclesiasticall monuments mark'd with the death of S. Cadoc, not the Martyr sirnamed Sophias, but the holy Abbot, Son of Gunlaeus Prince of the Southern Brittains, and of Gladus, or Gundalus a daughter of Braghan who gave the name to the Province of Brecknock of whom we have already treated.
2. His Father Gunleus by divine vocation, growing weary of the world,Capgrav. in vit. S. loci. built a Church, saith Capgrave, where he began to live in great abstinence and purity of conversation. His cloa|thing was sack-cloath, his dyet barley bread mingled with ashes, and his drink water. He usually rose at midnight, and to abate carnall de|sires, cast himself into cold water. He received nothing from any, but sustained himself with the Labour of his hands.
3. This retirement of his Father begun during the child-hood of S. Cadoc: who when he came to years of understanding, chose rather to imitate his Fathers devo|tion, then enjoying his Principality to be ex|pos'd to the tentations and vicissitudes of the world.
4. He had for his Master and directour in the way of Piety a learned and holy man, famous in that age, called Tathai, who liv'd a solitary life in all austerity among the mountains in Southwales, till he was invited by Caradoc Prince of that Province to live coenobitically, and to institure young men in learning and piety, at a Citty calld Venta Silurum in the Province of Monmouth: Which Region,Camden. in Monumoh. saith Camden, from that Citty Venta was by the Brittains calld Guent: And as wee read in the life of Tathai a Brittish Saint, it was as an Academy, dedicated to the studies of litterature, over which was President the said Tathai, invited from his solitude to that employ|ment by King Caradoc the Son of Inirius. This Office Tathai executed with great commenda|tion, and there built a Church.
5. Vnder so worthy a Master S. Cadoc made wonderfull progresse in vertue and piety: and himself became a Guide in a spirituall life and Father of Monks. For which purpose he also built a Monastery, which was calld Lancarvan, from an admirable accident in the building of it, in which (saith Harpsfeild) he employ'd will Harts,Harpf. c. 7. in 6.  which became familiar, obedient and serviceable to him.
6. Thus both the Father and Son contem|ning the world, liv'd in it to God only, and dyed happily, And as touching the death of S. Gunlaeus the Father, wee read thus in Capgrave: When the end of his dayes approch'd,Capgrav. in S. :. he sent to S. Dubricius who had been Bishop of Landaff, (but now had translated the Bi|shoprick to another place) and to his Son Cadoc, desiring the charity of a visit from them. Who came and comforted him: and after he had receiv'd the Holy Communion for a Viaticum and defence of his soule, he departed to our Lord the fourth day before the Calends of April. He was honourably buried: and at his sepulcher Angels were often seen. Sick persons of all infirmities coming thither, and imploring his intercession, were healed, and glorified God in his Saint. The day of his consummation is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the twenty ninth of March.Martyrol. Angl. 19. Mart. bid.
7. Concerning his Son S. Cadocus, it is further related there, That he dayly sustain'd a hundred Ecclesiasticall persons, as many Widows, and as many other poor people, besides strangers which frequently visited him. For though he was an Abbot, and had many Monks under his Government, yet he reserved a portion of his Fa|thers Principality, to be charitably distributed to such as had need. Now we are not to iudge that hereby this Holy Abbot did trangresse a Monasticall Profession, which forbids Propriety in temporall goods: for in the distribution of them he only exercised a pious Procura|tion, as he did in other Goods of his Monastery.
A. D. 501.8. He dyed with a great opinion of San|ctity in the Province of the Ordovices, and there was held in high veneration among the Brittains.Harpsf. vbi sup.  For Harpseild testifies that a Church was erected to his honour among the Dan|monij: at a place call'd Corinia which to this day conserves his memory. The year wherin he dyed is uncertain: But since S. Dubritius is recorded to have been present at it, it could not happen so late as Harpsfeild places it. In he ancient English Martyrologe he is comme|morated on the four and twentieth of Fe|bruary.Martyrolog. Anglic. 24. Febr.
9. In the same Martyrologe are recorded the names of other Brittish Saints who dyed about the year of Grace five hundred: Among the rest is named S. Dogmael, called also by the Brittains, S. Tegwel, illustrious for his great vertues, his Sanctity and Miracles. A famous Abbey in Penbrockshire took its name rom him His memory is celebrated on the four-teenth of Iune.Ib. 14. Iun. There likewise on the seaventh of the Ides of April is a comme|moration of S. Bernach Abbot,Ib. a man of ad|mirable Sanity: Who in devotion made a journey to Rome, and from thence retur|ning into Brittany, fill'd all places with the fame of his piety and miracles.
10. The same year likewise a famous Irish Saint and Martyr, call'd S. Finguar is recor|ded to have dyed. He was the Son of Clion a Prince in Ireland: Who to enjoy a com|modious vacancy for contemplation, is said to have retir'd into Cornwall, where together with many others he was slain by Theodorick a Prince of that Countrey. His life is found written by S. Anselm Arch-bishop of Can|terbury.


XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1. Aesca King of Kent, escapes out of prison
2. New forces arrive from Germany to Cer|dic at Portsmouth.
3. The Scottish Kingdom of Albania ere|cted.

1. Aesca the Son of Hengist who had been taken prisoner by Vther-pendragon, was confind at London: Who yet shortly after escap'd out of prison, and return'd to his kingdom of Kent: Where being not like his Father, of a stirring spirit, he contented himself with what his Father had conque|red, enjoying quietly the fruits of his la|bours.
2. As for Cerdicius who landed in North|folk, after some years stay in those parts, he in the year five hundred sought a more com+modious Seat in the Western parts of Britta|ny. And being with his present forces un|able to establish a kingdom there, he sent into Germany for new supplies:A. D. 50 so the year fol|lowing there arrived a German captain call'd Port,A D. 58. Westmonast. hc. with his two sons Bleda and Magla in two great ships furnish'd with souldiers who landed at a haven from him call'd Ports|mouth, though Ptolomy affirms that the an|cient Name of it, was () the Great haven or port. Thus writes Mathew of Westmin|ster. And Henry of Huntingdon adds,Huntingd. l. 2 that this hapned in the seaventh year after Cerdicius his first coming. Moreover that upon his landing, a great clamour fill'd the whole Province: Inso|much as the Brittish Governour and the whole multitude with great boldnes, but without order set upon the Saxons, and were presently dispers'd by them.
3. This year likewise whilst the Saxons dayly made a progresse in the Southern and more fertile Provinces of Brittany, the Scotts in the North layd a foundation of their New kingdom at the foot of the Mountain Gram|pius, which was call'd the Kingdom of Al|bany.p Vsser. in f. 60. am en. in Scot. For so we read in the Annals of Tigernac an is Writer, cited by Bishop Vsher, where it is sayd, that Fergus the Son of Eric, with a Nation call'd Dalraids (or Dalreudins) possess'd them|selves of a part of Brittany. And Camden like|wise writes, That Fergus the Son of Eric of the seed of Chonare was the first who took on him the Title of King of Albany from Brun Albain to the Irish Sea. And the following Kings of the Seed of Fergus to Alpin the Son of Eochal raign' in Brun Albain. This Nation, saith S. Beda, were call'd Dalreudini, from Reuda, under whose conduct they first came out of Ireland.


XXIV. CHAP.XXIV. C.

1 2. c Of S. Petroc: His Gests: And of S Coemgen.
8.9 Translation of the Relicks of S. Petroc of S. Meven.

1. AS from Ireland many Holy men sought a retreat for their devotions in Brittany:Vsser in In|dic. hron. ad A. D. 505. so there were not wanting some who from the same motives were in|duced, especially in these tumultuous times, to retire out of Brittany into Ireland. Among which Bishop Vsher exemplifies in S. Petroc, who being a stranger born in Brittany lived in Ireland, where there was recommended to his care and instruction a youth of seaven years old call'd Comgen or Kegnius; to be by him educated in learning and piety. Which Comgen was afterward Abbot of Glindelac.
2. S, Petroc was by Nation a Cambrian (not a Cimbrian, as by mistake is set down in the Gallican Martyrologe.) He was born of Princely parentage in Wales: and saith the authour of his life in Capgrave, from his infancy he did so well imitate the Faith and vertues of Saint Peter the Prince of the Apostles, that his name

may seem to have been given him by Divine in|spiration,A. D. 505. as if God had destin'd him also to be a Rock (Petra) upon which Truth would build the Church of Brittany. When the Prince his Fa|ther was dead, the Nobles of the Countrey with the consent of the whole people were desirous he should succeed in the Royalty. But he neglecting worldly pomp, assum'd with him sixty companions and with them entred into a Monastery, there undertaking a Monasticall Profession. After some years spent there, he went into Ireland, where for the space of twenty years he addicted himself to the studies of litterature and the holy Scrip|tures (There and then it was that the foresaid S. Coemgen was recommended by his parents to be instructed by him.)
3. Having in this space,Ap. Vssr. f 564. saith Leland, heap'd a great treasure of learning under the most perfect Teachers of that Island, he return'd into Brittany, and in the Province of Corinia, or Cornwall intended to employ for the benefit of others also that treasure. And to shew that he had not all this while forgotten, much lesse deserted his Rligious profession, he built there a Monastery, not many miles distant from the Severn shore neer a town in those days call'd Loderic, and Laffenac, and after|wards from his name Petrocstow, at this day more contractedly Padstow.
4. At this time the Saxons under Cerdic had possess'd themselves of that Province: And hence it is that the Narration of his gests follows thus in Capgrave: Assoon as S. Petroc with his Disciplis had left their ship and were landed there,Cagrav. in Proco. certain Reapers then at work spoke rudely and bitterly to them: and among other contumelious speeches requir'd them that their conductour S. Petroc should for the asswaging of their thirst cause a spring of fresh water to issue out of a rock there adjoyning. This they said either in derision of them being strangers, or for a tryall whether their sanctity was answerable to their Profession. Hereupon S. Petroc, who never refused those that ask'd any thing in his power, address'd his prayers to our Mercifull Lord, and with his staffe smiting the rock, immediatly there gush'd forth a spring of clear sweet water, which flows there to this day.
5. Those barbarous Pagans, utterly ignorant of Christian Religion, were astonish'd at this Miracle. And when the Holy servant of God ask'd them whether there were in that Province any one who profess'd the Christian Faith, they directed him to a certain Holy man call'd Samson, concerning whom they acquainted him, that he lead a solitary life, and exercis'd himself in corporall labours, fasting, watching and Prayers: and that he sustain'd life with no other thing but a small por|tion dayly of barley bread. This it that Samson who first succeeded S. David in the See of Mersevia, and afterward was Bishop of Dole in Lesser Brittany: concerning whom we shall treat in due place.
Vsser . Int. Chronol. ad A. D. 542.6. After thirty years aboad in this solitude, in which he is sayd to have instructed Credan, Medan and Dachant three of his principal Disci|ples illustrious for their learning and piety, he left his Monastery of Lodoric, and undertook a forrain pilgrimage, visiting Rome, and after that Hierusalem: From whence he is said to have pro|ceeded as far as India, and to have spent seaven years in the exercises of a contemplative life in a certain unknown Island of the Eastern Ocean. From which tedious voyage he at last re|turn'd home: and with twelve companions retir'd himself into a dry and barren solitude. The Prince of that part of Cornwal was called Tendur, a man of a feirce and savage na|ture.
7. His death in our Ecclesiasticall monu|ments is referr'd to the year of Grace five hundred sixty four: And he was buried in the place now call'd Petrocstow or Padstow. In which town anciently was placed an Episco|pall See: which was afterward translated to another town calld Bodmin. The reason wherof seems to have been because the Body of S. Petroc which had first been simply and meanly buried at Padstow, was afterward transfer'd and honourably repos'd at Bodnun. To which purpose we find this passage in Mathew of Westminster,W.  4.. 905. Vssr  Hapis.c 27  The Bishops of Cornwal had their See at S. Petroc's of Bodmin (apud Sanctum Petrocum de Bodmini) for so the words are to be corrected, saith Bishop Vher And the same place was meant by Harpsfeild thus writing: The Monument of S. Petroc is in the Citty Bosuenna, the most noted town of Mer|chandise (Emporium) of Cornwal.
8. But the Relicks of S. Petroc did not always rest at Bodmin: for from thence they wre stolln, conveyd over sea into Lesser Brittany, and reverently plac'd in the Monastery of S. Meven: but in the time of King Henry the second restor'd. Thus writes Roger Hove|den: Martin a Canon Regular of the Church of Bodmin by stealth took away the Body of S. Petroc,Hvd A.  and fled with it into Brittany to the Abbey of S. Meven. Which theft having been discovered, Roger Priour of that Cathedrall Church with the more ancient Canons of the Chapter address'd themselves to King Henry the Father, (for at that time he had made his son likewise King:) And from him they obtained a strict command to the Abbot and Convent of Saint Meven that without delay they should restore to Roger Priour of Bodmin the said Body of S. Petroc: Which if they refus'd, the King gave order to Roland of Dinant the Governour of Brittany to take away the sacred Body by force, and give it to the said Roger. Assoon as the Abbot and Monks of S. Meven heard of these things, to prevent any dammage to their Church, they restor'd the said Body entire and without any diminution to the foresaid Priour swearing withall upon the Holy Gospels and upon the Relicks of certain Saints there, that it was the very same Body, unchan|ged and unempair'd.
9. The reason why the Convent of S. Meven in lesser Brittany were so desirous of the Relicks of S. Petroc, was because S. Meven himself the Patron of that Monastery was

born in our Brittany,A. D. 508. as many other Saints besides from hence had fled thither, and were with great veneration honour'd in the territory of S. Malo. Where likewise Iudicael Prince of the Armorici (or Lesser Brittany) who was descended from our Brittany, built the said Monastery.


XXV. CH.XXV. CHAP.

1.2. c. The battell between the Saxons and Brittains: and death of King Vther|pendragon, or Natanleod.

A D. 508.1. THE five hundred and eighth year of our Lord was fatall to the Brittains by the death of their valiant King, slain in a battell against the West-Saxons. For thus writes the Noble Historian Ethelwerd, In the seaventh year afteir their arrivall, Cerdic and his son Cenric slew Natan-leod King of the Brittains, and with him five thousand of his soldiers.
2. Mathew of Westminster relates the same somewhat more expresly,M. Westm. A. D. 508. and withall signi|fies who this Natan-leod was: for thus he writer, In the year of Grace five hundred and eight Cerdic and Kenric provok'd the Brittains to a battell. At that time Vther King of the Brit|tains was sick in such extremity that he could not turn himself from one side to another in his bed. Wherfore he ordain'd Nathanlioth to be Ge|nerall of the Brittish Army. Hence we may observe that Natanleod whom Ethelwerd calls King of the Brittains (and Henry of Huntingdon the great King (maximum Regem) is by Ma|thew of Westminster stiled a Generall only, in the present exigency sett over the Army.
3. In this uncertainty it seems most rea|sonable to prefer the authority of Ethelwerd, a more ancient Historian, who liv'd near these times, before that of Matthew of Westminster, grounded probably on the partiality of for|mer Brittish Writers, who were loath that posterity should know that their valiant King was slain by the Saxons, and therefore make him to overlive this battel eight years, and then to have dyed by poyson.
4. The Coniecture therefore of the learned Bishop Vsher deserves to be subscrib'd unto, who conceives this Natanleod to be no other then Vther-pendragon: For thus he frames his discourse upon this subject: If in clearing the perplex'd accounts of these ancient times,Vsser in Pri|mord. f. 466. it may be permitted us to give our coniecture, since this Natanleod is by Fabius, Ethelwerd, Floren|tius of Worcester and all the Saxon Annals stiled a King, it deserves to be considered whether any other can be meant here besides the then King of the Brittains Vther: whose proper Brittish name was Natanleod, but afterward for his valiant ex|ploits obtain'd the sirname Vther, which in the Brittish tongue signifies, terrible or admirable. In like manner in the Annotations added to Niniu we read concerning his Son and successour Arthur that he was call'd Mab-Vther, which signifies the son of the terrible Prince, because from his child|hood he was feirce and cruell. And the name Arthur being out of the Brittish language inter|preted, imports a terrible Beare, or, an iron mall, the which breaks the Lyons iawes.
5. And herewith well agrees the narration given by Henry of Huntingdom of this great battell:Huntingd. l. 2 which he thus describes: I am now to relate the battell sought by Nazaleod (so he calls Natanleod) the greatest King of the Brittains against Certic and Cinric his son, in the sixtieth year after the first coming of the Saxons. Naza|leod was a Prince of great fame, and withall of great pride: from whom that Province was call'd Nazaleoli, which afterward had the name of Certichs-ford. Nazaleod then gatherd an Army out of all Brittany: and Certic with his Son to enable themselves to encounter him had in so great danger obtain'd aid from Esca King of Kent, and Ella the potent King of the South-Saxons, as likewise from Port and his Son lately arriv'd: all which forces they divided into two main bodies, one of which was lead by Certic, and the other by his son Cinric.
6. When the Armies were joyn'd in battell, King Nazaleod perceiving that the right wing of the Enemies army conducted by Certic was much stronger then the other, he turn'd all his for|ces against it, conceiving it safest to destroy that which was strongest. He set upon them therefore with such violence, that he broke quite through them, threw down their Ensigns, forc'd Certic to fly, and made a great slaughter of his army: all which was done in a very short time. But Cinri who conducted the left wing, seing his Fathers army routed, rushed vehemently on the backs of the Brittains whilst they pursued their ene|mies flying. By this means the combat became furious, insomuch as King Nazaleod was slain, and the Brittains forc'd to fly, of whom there fell five thousand: the rest saving themselves with their swiftnes. Thus the Saxons obtain'd a great victory: so that for some years they were not disturb'd by the Brittains: And moreover great multitudes of valiant soldiers came out of Germany to joyn with them.
7. This famous battell, as it were by agree|ment, fought between the entire forces of all the Saxons and Brittains for the Mastery, had utterly ruin'd the Brittish state, had Na|tanleod or Vther-pendragon left behind him a Successour of a courage lesse Heroicall then his Son the famous King Arthur was: whose glo|rious Exploits we shall successively relate. The place of this combat was in the Pro|vince of the Belgae, now called Hampshire.





THE ELEAVENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER BRITTISH KINGS.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. Brittish fables of K. Arthur.

1. _BEING to treat of the Suc|cessour of Nantaleod, or Vther|pendragon, such mists are raised by the Writers of those times,A. D. 508. such diversity of conjectures are found in succeeding Historians concerning not the Gests only, but even the person of King Ar|thur, that I find my self unable to deliver any thing touching him which may satisfy my self, much lesse an intelligent and wary Reader. Now this difficulty and per|plexity proceeds not for want, but excesse of matter recorded of him, but recorded by Writers so impudently addicted to lying, and moved thereto out of a desire to perpetuate his fame, that they have almost extinguish'd his memory, and obliged posterity to con|sider him as a meer phantosime, created by the brainsick imaginations of ignorant Brittish Bards, who endeavoured to recreate the minds of their miserable countreymen with singing the exploits of their famous Ancestours, not considering that those very Songs cast a lasting blot upon the Hearers, shewing the Brittains of those times to have been of so mean and lost spirits, that being conducted by such Heros, they were yet unable to resist their Enemies.
2. That there was such a Prince as Arthur, cannot reasonably be questioned, as neither that in defence of his countrey he became illustrious by many victories against the Sa|xons: But as touching his Exploits pretended to be perform'd by him out of Brittany, his conquering of Provinces and Kingdoms abroad, his Round Table, and faigned Knights belonging to it, these and the like impos|sible fables we leave to the dreaming Bards the inventours, and their credulous be|lievers the ignorant Brittains.
3. But that this Arthur was not succes|sour of Vther,Malbranc. in Morin. l. . c. 36. a learned French Antiquary Malbranc confidently enough affirms, and from a wrong transcribed passage of Gildas, will needs confound him with Aurelius Ambrosius, whose Father, not Brother, accor|ding to him was Vther-pendragon.
4. Notwithstanding the consent of our ancient Historians, and those the most

prudent and faithfull in their Narrations putts it out of question that Arthur was the Son of Vther,A. D. 508. and Nephew of Ambrosius, and that after the death of his Father slain by the Weste Saxons he succeeded his Father in the Throne of Brittany.
5. As touching his Birth and descent, some Writers report that his Father Vther falling in love with the Wife of Gorlois Duke of Cornwall call'd Igerna, and by flat|teries and subtilty having gaind her affe|ction, for say they, by Merlins Magicall skill he was transform'd into the shape of her husband, of her he begot Arthur. But his vertues, piety and courage, wonderfully prosper'd by Almighty God, are strong proofs that his birth was not so infamous.
6. A more sober account is given of him in the Antiquities of Glastonbury writ|ten by Iohn a Monk and Adam of Domerham, where we read this passage, Vther-Pen|dragon the Brother of Ambrosius dying by poyson in the tenth year after the coming of Cerdic the West-Saxon,Antiq. Glst. his Son Arthur, a youth of fifteen years began to rule over the Brittains. His Mothers name was Igerna, and he was born in a Castle of Cornwall call'd Tintagel. In which Narration we find no aspersion cast on his Birth: Though it be not very credibile which follows in the same Antiquities that by his Mother he was descended from a Nephew of Saint Ioseph of Arimathea call'd Heanis. And whereas he is savd to be no more then fifteen years of age when his Father dyed, that suits not with what was before related from Malms|buriensis, That Ambrosius repress'd the inso|lence of the Saxons by the courageous exploits of Warlick Prince Arthur. So that he could be no lesse then twenty years old at the year of Grace four hundred ninety three: By which account since generally our Writers assign twenty six years to his Raign, and agree that he dyed in the year five hundred forty two, his death will happen when he was seaventy years old.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2.3. Prince Arthur fights against the Picts: and kills Huel.

1. ARthur was not present in the Army when his Father Vther was slain: For at the same time he had employment enough to oppose the irruptions of the Picts in the Northern parts of Brittany. And for this reason probably it is that in the Annals of the Saxons there is no mention of him: the design of which Annals being to relate the encounters between them and the Brittains, and their own almost uninterrupted con|quests, they neglected the affaires interve|ning betwen the Brittains and Picts.A. D. 503.
2. Now at that time liv'd a King of the Picts, by some writers call'd Navu, by others Can, happy in a fruitfull offspring, for he had four and twenty children. Of which the Eldest was call'd Howel or Huel, a Prince of invincible courage, who would by no means acknowledge any subjection to Brittany: into which faction he drew all the rest of his Bre|thren, excepting only S. Gildas sirnam'd Al|banius, who was one of them, and bore a particular affection to Prince Arthur.
3. The sayd Huel being of a restles spirit,Caradoc. in vit. S. Gilaae. made frequent inroads into Brittany, as we read in the life of S. Gildas, written by Cara|doc a considerable Brittish Historian: And so cruelly did he wast the Countrey that the Brittish King sent Prince Arthur with a nu|merous Army, who began a most furious war against the bold young man: And after many defeats given him, he never left pur|suing him till at last compelling him to fight in a certain Island call'd Mynau, he slew him.


III. CHAP.III. CHA.

1.2. c. Of S. Gildas Albanius: and his Gests.
7.6. Melvas a Brittish Prince steales away K. Arthurs wife.

1. HAving upon occasion of King Ar|thurs war against the Picts made mention of S. Gildas Albanius, it will be seasonable in this place to relate breifly his Gests, as we find them sprinckled in severall ancient Monuments. We have already signi|fied that he is to be distinguish'd from ano|ther of that name, call'd Gildas Sapiens, and Gildas Historicus, who was younger then he, though contemporary to him, of whom we shall treat hereafter. Yet their agreement in the same name, and in severall good quali|ties hath been the cause that in some Writers they are confounded together, and the titles of Sapiens and Historicus have been at|tributed also to this elder Saint Gildas, who likewise by the testimony of Pits did write the life and Gests of S. German and S. Lupus, and also a History of the Brittish Kings, and other Treatises besides, which are now lost.
2. This Elder S. Gildas,Capgrv. in S. Gild. as we read in his life conserved by Capgrave, was the Son of Can King of Albania. In his childhood being of an excellent disposition, he was carefully instructed in litterature, wherein he proffited wonderfully. Afterward he was sent into Gaule, that there having greater advantages for encreasing in knowledge, he might attain to higher perfection. There he aboad seaven years, after which he retur|ned into Brittany, furnish'd not only with

earning,A. D. 510. but abundance of Books also, a re treasure in his rude countrey. And the report of his eminent learning being spread abroad, many flock'd to him from all quar|ters, to be instructed by him.
3. But he was more diligent to enrich himself with vertue and piety, then know|ledge: So that none could be found in all those regions comparable to him, in assi|duous prayers, mortifications, fasting and wearing sack-cloath. He wholly abstaind from flesh, contenting himself with barley bread and herbes, with which he mix'd ashes to abate the pleasure which his tast might take in his food: and his drink was pure water from the fountain. He would ordi|narily at midnight plunge himself in the river for mortification, and spend the rest of the night in Prayer. By these austerities he became so lean, that he look'd as if he had been in a feaver. Whatsoever was be|stowed on him by rich men, he presently distributed to the poore.
4. Being thus qualified his Charity drew him out of his own countrey into Ireland, where the Gospel of Christ was not so well sett|led. There he spent many years in instru|cting that Nation. But being informed that in the more Northern parts of his own coun|trey Gentilism was generally profess'd, and those few Christians which lived there were poyson'd with many Heresies, he return'd thither. And being throughly furnish'd with the Spirituall Armour of God, he de|monstrated to the Pagans that the supposed Deities worship'd by them were nothing but the inventions of impious men: and to the Hereticks, that what they beleived was contrary to Divine Truth revealed to Gods Church. By these means he brought the Pagans to destroy their Idols and prophane Temples, to receive Baptism, and erect Chur|ches to the Honour of the true God: and the Hereticks he reduced into the bosom of the Catholick Church Now to make his prea|ching more effectuall, our Lord gave him a plentifull Grace to heale the sick, to give light to the blind, to cure the deaf, to cleanse the leaprous and such as were possess'd by the Devill, and to make the lame to walk, c. Thus by his preaching confirmed with frequent miracles the true Faith was spread through all those Provinces, to the unexpres|sible ioy of S. Gildas, who ceased not to give thanks to our Lord for his infinite mercies to those poor people.
5. The Authour of his life in Capgrave relates how after this he travelled to Rome. But such a iourney not suiting with his old age, it is more probable that it was under|taken in his younger years when he lived in Gaule. Others write more reasonably that after this employment he was invited by the Holy Abbot Saint Cadocus to take care and preside over the Studies of many young Schollars in the Academy of Lancar-van, where he continued only one year,A. D. 512. leaving there, saith Bishop Vsher, Chronolog. A. D. 58. a Book of the four Evangelists transcrib'd by himself.
6. Saint Gildas having ended the year of his President-ship,A D. 509. Id. bid. Cradocan vit. S. Cado. when his Schollars also re|tired from their studies, withdrew himsel into a certain Island; as the Holy Abbot Ca|docus likewise did into another: the Islands names were Ronech and Echni. Whilst Saint Gildas there attended to Prayer and Mortifi|cation, certain Pirats from the Isles of Orkney rob'd him of his Vtensiles, and caried captive away those which attended him. For which cause in great affliction he pass'd over to Glastonbury.
7. At this time Melvas a Brittish Prince raigned in the Province of Somerset (in Aesti|va regione) called by the Brittains Glad-ar|haf.A. D. 510. This Melvas had stolln away Guinivera, wife to King Arthur, concealing her in the Isle of Glastonbury, esteemed most secure, both for the fenny situation and Religion also of the place. Hereupon King Arthur assembled a mighty army out of Cornwal and Devonshire. (Dibuenum) and encompass'd the Island. The two Kings being ready to a battell, the Abbot of Glastonbury, attended by S. Gildas and all the Clergy came between the two Armies, and by perswasions indu|ced Melvas to restore Queen Guinevera to her husband. Which being performed, peace ensued, and both the Kings bestowed great immunities and possessions on the Mona|stery.
8. After this Saint Gildas, with the Abbots permission, retired again to an Eremitical solitude on the bank of the River Axus, neer Glastonbury, where he built a Church, consecrating it to the Blessed Trinity, and there spent his time in Prayer, Fasting and other austerities. Whose Sanctity was so exemplar, that many came from the farthest parts of Brittany to visit him, and take Spi|rituall counsel from him.
9. Two years being thus devoutly employ|ed,A. D. 512. Ap. Cgrav. in S. Gild. he fell into a sicknes (saith Iohn of Tin|mouth) and knowing that his death approached, he called to him the Abbot of Glastonbury, and requesied of him that his body might be buried in the Church of his Monastery. To which the Abbot readily condescended So the Holy man dying on the fourth day before the Calends of Fe|bruary, many saw an Angelicall splendour about his Sacred Body, which yeilded a most pleasant odour. And after a solemne recommendation of his soule with many teares of the Religious, his Sacred body was caried with great honour to the Church, and there buried in the midst of the pave|ment of the ancient Church, in the year of Grace five hundred and twelve,
10. What is here related, agrees to the Ancient Monuments also of Glastonbury, where he is stiled Historicus neque insulsus neque infacetus, for the causes before decla|red. And most of these particulars of his life are confirm'd by a large Character given

of him in the Gallican Martyrologe: Where is declar'd that being during his childhood sent into France, he was recommended to the instructions of S. Iltutus,Martyr. Gal. 9. Ianu. a Disciple of S. German of Paris (or rather of Auxerre.) And again that his voyage into Ireland was to root out many heresies sprung up among the late converted Christians, and to reform many vices and unlawfull customs. Also that the Heresy oppos'd by him in the most Northern parts of Brittany was that of Pe|lagianism especially. But whereas it is there added, that in his old age he went over into Lesser Brittany, and dyed there in the territory of Ruy, and was honoura|bly buried in the Church of Vannes: this contradicts generally our Brittish Authours. Most probable it is, that when the Saxons infested our Western Provinces, his Sacred Re|licks were translated into Lesser Brittany, and repos'd in the Geat Church of the Citty of Vannes, where he is to this day venerated as Patron of that Citty.
11. There seems to be an Errour in our English Martyrologe, which on the same day with that of the Gallican commemorats S. Gildas Confessour and Abbot of Bangor in North-wales: whose Character exactly agrees with the same here describ'd: and there|fore probably by mistake is confounded with this S. Gildas Albanius. But whereas that pretended Gildas Abbot of Bangor is said to have dyed in the year of our Lord five-hundred eighty and one, which is likewise affirm'd of the younger Gildas the Historian, sirnamed Badonicus; this argues a second errour and confusion. The like whereof is found in the Authour of S. Gildas his life, late publish'd out of ancient Manuscripts be|longing to the Monastery of Fleury in France, by Ioannes  Bosco.
12. To conclude, out of the same ancient Manuscripts we may collect the precise Ter|ritory in which S. Gildas Albanius was born. For as they are quoted by Bishop Vsher, we there read this passage, Blessed S. Gildas was born in the most fruitfull Region call'd Arecluta. His Father was named Caun, a most Noble and Catholick person. From his very childhood he de|sired with the whole affection of his mind to follow Christ. Now this Region Arecluta being a part of Brittany, took its name from a certain River named Clut, by which the greatest part of it is watered. By which description it appears that the Region dignified with the birth of S. Gildas is the same which is call'd Argyle (Argathelia,) and that the River Clut is that which anciently was called Glotta and Clui|da, which Northward was the bound of the Brittish Provinces under the Roman Iurisdi|ction, beyond which lived the Caledonians, c.


IV. CHAP.A. D. 515.
IV. CHAP.

1. New supplies of Saxons: their Victory over the Brittains.
2.3. Ella King of the South-Saxons dying: his Son Cissa Succeeds: the founder of Chichester, c.

1. IN the sixth year after the battell, wherin Nazaleod,A. D. 514. Huntingd. l. 2 or Vther, was slain, saith Henry of Huntingdon, new supplies out of Germany came to the Saxons in Brittany, for Stuff and Whitgar Nephews of Cerdic, with three ships landed at Certic-shore. And very early in the morning the Brittains ranged their armies in very good order against them. The Sun then ari|sing cast its beames upon their armour, and re|flecting thence partly from the mountains, and partly from below in the valleys, strook a great terrour into the Saxons. But when they came to fight, the Brittains were quickly put to flight, be cause God despis'd them. By this victory the Saxons gained a great extent of land, and Cerdic became terrible to them, insomuch as he marched whithersoever he pleased without controule.
2. The year following Ella King of the South-Saxons dying,A. D. 515. his Son Cissa succeeded. Ella whilst he lived, though his territories were narrow, yet was for his courage estee|med the most potent of all the Saxon Princes, insomuch as according to Huntingdon, he held in his power all the rights of the Angli:Id. ib. and their Princes, Nobles and Military officers had a dependance on him. But this lasted no long time, for it was shortly after transfer'd on Cerdic the West-Saxon, whose Kingdom though not yet begun, yet the foundations of it were layd by his last Victory.
3. Cissa the Son of Ella, being of a milder spirit, contented himself with enjoying his own little Kingdom, without extending his power abroad. He employ'd his time in exercises of peace, especially building and fortifying of Citties. In two of which he left the memory and footsteps of his own name, Chichester and Cisbury in the Province of Sussex. Concerning which Camden thus writes,Camden. in ussex. Chichester is a large Citty compass'd with walls by Cissa the second Saxon Prince of that Province, who succeeded his Father Ella. From this Cissa it takes its name. So likewise did ano|ther town call'd Cisbury. Now this Cissa together with his Father Ella and Brother Cimen, landed in a port of that Province call'd therefore Cimen|shore.



A. D. 514.
V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Kentigern, his Birth, c.

A. D. 514.1. THE same year in which Cerdic ob|tained an illustrious Victory against the Brittains, was yet more signalized with the Birth of the famous Brittish Bishop Saint Kentigern. Whose Nativity, admirable for the strangenes of it, since it is celebrated by many ancient Writers, must not here be omitted. This year is assigned thereto by Bi|shop Vsher in his Chronologicall Index,Vsher in Iud. Chronolog. where his Mother is sayd to have been Thenis the daughter of Loth King of Pict-land, and of Anna the daughter of Vther Pendragon: Whence it follows that he was Nephew to King Arthur by his Sister. It is not known who was his Father: yet some suppose Eugenius the third of that name King of the Scotts.
2. Iohn of Tinmouth an Ancient Historian cited by Capgrave thus relates his originall.Ap. Capgrav. in vit Kn|gern. A certain King in the Northern parts of Britta|ny, who was a Pagan, begot of his wife a very beautifull daughter. She having frequently been a hearer of Sermons preached by the servants of God, obtain'd the Grace to beleive his Truth, and renounce the worshipping of Idols. And though she had not yet been purified with the Sacrament of Baptism, yet she was diligent in observing Gods commandements with an humble and de|vout mind, being much addicted to prayer and Almsgiving and other Duties of Ecclesiasticall Discipline, as much as the fear of incensing her Father would permit. She bore so great devotion to the fruitfull Virginity and integrity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, that mov'd with a woma|nish presumption she begg'd of our Lord that she might in some measure imitate her in her Conception and birth. At length as she thought she obtain'd her desire, for she found her self with child. Now it is not to be conceiv'd that this hapned without the embrace: of a man: notwith|standing who that man was, or in what manner and when this was done, she oft protested, and with oaths confirmed it that she was utterly ignorant.
3. Her Father perceiving this, and not being able either by fair speeches or threatnings to wrest from her who was the Father of the Child, for she seriously protested that she had never suffred the unlawfull embraces of any man: hereupon in a great rage he determined to execute upon her the law establish'd by his ancestours, by which it was enacted that whatsoever young maid should be with child by fornication in her fathers house should be thrown down headlong from the top of a high mountain, and the person corrupting her, should loose his head.
4. In conformity therefore to this Law the young woman was placed on the highest point of a Mountain in that countrey called Dunpelder, from thence to be thrown down and torn in peices.A. D. 515 She therefore with deep sighs, looking up to hea|ven implored the mercy and help of her Redee|mer, holding up her hands and shedding many tears. After this she was cast down: but by the fall was neither bruised, nor received the least harm: but sliding down easily and slowly came safe to the bottom.
5. The Pagans who were present ascribed this deliverance  magicall enchantments of Christians, and therefore with the Kings con|sent they caried her severall miles into the Sea, and there left her destitute of all human help in a small Boat made of leather and without any oares. But he who commands the winds and the Sea was her Protectour: for by his power the Boat was caried streight to a far distant haven with greater swiftnes, then either rowers or sayles could have driven her. Being arrived there, the young Lady went out of the Boat, and presently after in a place called Collenros her throws of child-birth co|ming upon her, she without the assistance of a Midwife was safely delivered of a Son. Now the place here called Colenros is probably the same which Saint Beda calls Coludi, and Pto|lomy Colania in the Province of Laudon. So that Pits, from I know not what Authour, erroneously makes the place of S. Kentigern's birth to have been S. Asaph's in Flintshire, for|merly called Elqua. The ground of which Errour seems to have been, because afterward he was Bishop and built a Monastery there, from whence he is by the Centuriators of Magdeburg called Elicius.
6. But whatsoever his Sirname was, his proper name was given him by S. Servanus: For thus it follows in Tinmouths narration: The next morning Saint Servanus came to the place,Ibid. and seing the desolate Mother with her infant, he said in his countreys language, Mochohe, Mochohe, that is, my beloved child, my beloved child, Blessed art thou who art come in the name of our Lord. He took them therefore into his care, nourish'd and baptised them, cal|ling the Mother Thanen, and the child Kientern, that is, Cheif Lord. The child being of a toward|ly disposition proffited much in learning and vertue, and was beloved by S. Servanus beyond all his companions, insomuch as usually he call'd him Munghu, which signifies one dearly beloved. By which name to this day,Vsher in Pri|mord. f. 684. saith Bishop Vsher, the Scots call S. Kentigern. Thus far the Nati|vity and Name of this Holy man. After five and twenty years, when he was consecra|ted Bishop of Glasco, more will be sayd of him.



A. D. 516.
VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1. King Arthur crowned.
2.3. Of the Isle of Berdesey.
4.5. c. Twelve Victories gained by K. Arthur.

1. THE continuall troubles caused by the Saxons through all the quarters of Brittany, would not alow King Arthur to so|lemnise his Coronation till eight years after his Fathers death. Which Ceremony was ma|gnificently perform'd in the year of Grace five hundred and sixteen in a generall As|sembly of the Bishops and Nobles at the Citty Car-leon. And S. Dubricius Bishop of that Citty set the Crown on his head.
2. After this the said Holy Bishop being very aged retired into a certain Island in Northwales call'd by Ptolomy, Edri, by Pliny, Adros,Camden. de nsis Brit. in Berdsey. by the Brittains, Enhly, and by the English, Berdsey. Which Island, saith Camden, was inhabited by so many Saints, that besides Du|bricius and Merlin the Caledonian, no fewer then twenty thousand holy men were buried there, as ancient Records inform us.
3. Concerning this Island we read in the Life of Aelgar, saith Bishop Vsher, that it was call'd by the Brittains the Rome of Brittany,Vsser. in Pri|mod. f. 527. for the di|stance of it, the difficulty of the passage, likewise the Sanctity and security of it: the Sanctity, since twenty thousand bodies of Saints are there vene|rated as Martyrs: And the security, it being on all sides compass'd with the Sea. Whence ap|pears the esteem that the Brittains had then of Rome, which argues that between them there was an agreement in Religion.
4. The Exploits of King Arthur after his Coronation are thus recorded by Florilegus: At that time,Florilg ad A. D. 516. saith he, the Saxons invited more of their Countreymen out of Germany: And under the Conduct of Colgrin they subdued all that part reaches of Brittany which from Humber ( Mar Cantanensium) to the Sea of Cathanes. Whereof as soon as King Arthur was inform'd he march'd with an Army toward York, which was then held by the Saxons. Colgrin assoon as he heard of King Arthurs approach met him with a great multitude near the River Duglus (in Lan|cashire) and coming to a battell, Colgrin was put to flight, and was pursued by King Arthur to York. Now Baldulph the Brother of Colgrin at the same time lay with some forces toward the Sea, expecting the coming of the Saxons. He in|tended to make an irruption by night upon King Arthurs Army. But the King being admonish'd hereof by Spies, sent Cador Duke of Cornwall with six hundred horse and three thousand foot to intercept the Saxons: Who setting on them unexpectedly, kill'd great numbers of them, and compell'd the rest to fly.
5. Whilst King Arthur diligently pursued the siege of York,A. D. 58. there arrived the next year in the Northern parts a famous German Captain call'd Cheldric with seaven hundred boats,Idm.  A. D. 517. who landed in Albania. The Brittains therefore were afraid to encounter such great multitudes. Whereupon King Arthur was compelled to leave the Siege of York, and retired with his army to London. Where taking counsell of his freinds, he sent messengers into Lesser brittany to King Hoel to inform him of the calamity of this Island. Now Hoel was Nephew of King Arthur by his sister. Therefore hearing of his Vncles danger, he commanded a great Army to be gathered, and with fifteen thousand men, having a prosperous wind, he landed safely in the haven of Hamon: where with great honour and ioy he was receiv'd by King Arthur.
6. With these new forces encourag'd he gaind the next year two famous victories against the Saxons.Huntingd. l 2 The former, saith Hun|tingdon, near the River call'd Bassas: The latter in the wood of Chelidon. Both these battells were fought in Lincolnshire, near to the chei Citty whereof Ninius places the wood call'd Cathcoit Calidon.Westmon. l. . And Mathew of West|minster writing of this second victory, saith that the Brittains made near Lincoln a great slaughter of the Saxons, of whom no fewer then six thousand were slain: And the remainders flying to the forrest of Caledon were pursued by King Arthur, who commanded the trees to be hewd down, and layd athwart to hinder their escape: By which means the Saxons being en|closed, and reduced to extreme famine, begg'd leave to depart the Kingdom, leaving all their spoyles behind them. By this Exploit of King Arthur the Saxons were expell'd out of the middle Provinces of Brittany: Whereas in the Western parts they grew more powerfull, insomuch as the year following Cerdicius fram'd there an establish'd Kingdom.
7. Those Historians who relate the Heroi|call Gests of King Arthur, to equall him with Hercules, mention principally twelve great Battells fought, and as many victories gaind by him upon the Saxons: Of which these two last are accounted the sixth and sea|venth. It suffices as to my present design, though I be not curiously exact in adhe|ring to that computation, and assigning the proper time and manner of each in order.
8. Another Victory, call'd by Huntingdon the eighth, though the year be not men|tion'd, was gaind against those barbarous Ene|mies neer the Castle call'd Guinnion.Huntingd. l. . In that bat|tell King Arthur caried upon his shoulders the Image of the Blessed Virgin-Mother of God: and all that day by the vertue and power of our Lord Iesus Christ and S. Mary his Mother the Saxons were compell'd to fly, and perish'd with a great slaughter. The succeeding exploits of this famous King shall breifly follow in their due place.



A. D. 516.
VII. CH.VII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of Saints in Wales: of S Daniel Bishop of Bangor.

1. WHilst most of the Provinces of that part of Brittany afterward call'd En|gland, were thus miserably disquietted, the Western parts, since call'd Wales, enjoyd great repose, and were illustrated by far more glo|rious Exploits of great numbers of Saints who flourish'd there: Such were S. Dubri|cius, S. Sampson, S. David, S. Thelian, S. Kined, S. Paternus, S. Daniel, S. Iustinian. c. Some of these have been already mention'd, and more of their Gests will follow.
2. As touching S. Daniel he is reported by Bishop Vsher from Bale to have instituted a Colledge or Monastery of the Apostolick order for the sacred Exercices of learned and pious men.Vsser. in Ind. Chronol. A. D. 516. The place where this Colledge was founded was in Arvonia the countrey of the Venedati, not far from the streit where men passe into the Isle of Anglesey out of Wales: which Colledge he call'd the Port or Haven. And the time of this new Erection was the year of our Lord five hundred and Sixteen. In the same place not long after Malgo Conan built a Citty, which for the beauty of its situation he called Bancor, or Bangor, where likewise was the seat of a Bishop, in which this S. Daniel was the first who sate. So that it is a mistake in B. Godwin affirming that before the times of the Normans there had been no Bishop there.
3. This Citty of Bangor was a place distinct from the famous Monastery of that name, though Malmsburiensis confounds them to|gether. True it is that in both places there was a Monastery: But this was seated in the Province call'd Arvonia, now Caernarvon upon the River Menai dividing it from An|glesey: Wheras the other was in Flintshire. Again this Monastery was first erected by S. Daniel; wheras the other was extant even in the infancy of Christianity under King Lu|cius, as hath been shewn. In both of them there lived Monks, called by Bale (Apostolici ordinis viri) men of the Order Apostolicall, be|cause in imitation of the Apostles they pra|ctis'd self-abnegation and a renouncing of temporall possessions.
4. This Holy man Daniel, saith Pits from Leland, was joynd with S. Dubricius and Da|vid in confuting and condemning the Pela|gian Heresy, for which purpose he was present at the Synod of Brevi. He dyed in the same year of Grace five hundred forty four in which the holy Bishop S. David dyed. And he was buried in the Isle of Berdesey, calld the Rome of Brittany, for the multitude of Saints there liuing and buried in which regard, saith B. Vsher, it is still in the Welsh language calld Yr ugain mil Saint.Martyrol. Augl. 10. Decemb. He is commemorated in our ancient Martyrologe on the tenth of De|cember. Who succeeded him in that Bishop|rick it does not appeare.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. c. Of S. Iustinian: his Gests

1. THere were at this time two other Saints, which though by birth stran|gers, yet challenge a place in this History, be|cause they illustrated Brittany with their mi|racles and Sanctity: those were S. Iustinian, ad S. Patern.
2. As touching S. Iustinian, Iohn of Tin|mouth who wrote his life extant in Capgrave,Ap. Capgrav. in Iustiniano. relates that he took his Original from a Noble family in Lesser Brittany, where having spent his youth in the study of Learning, he received the Order of Preisthood: and by a divine Oracle was commanded to forsake his countrey. Wherupon ta|king with him certain companions they adventu|red to sea in a boat covered with leather, praying earnestly to God that he would so direct their course that they might come to a solitude commodious for the Exercises of a Spirituall life. At length they landed in a Province calld Cormer: Where they aboad a certain time, during which many began to repair to the Holy man, desirous to partake of his Instructions. Not long after he received a se|cond command from God to reliquish that place. Whereupon entring his boat and committing him|self to the Sea and winds, he landed in an Island then calld Lemeney, in which Honorious a devout son of King Thefriauc then lived a mortified holy life, having preferd poverty, and a free attendance on God before all worldly contentments. By him S. Iustinian was received with great benignity, who seing the fervour of his piety, offred the same mansion to him, to the end he might without any distraction be vigilant in gaining soules to our Lord. But this offer S. Iustinian would not accept, but upon this condition, that S. Honorius his sister and a mayd attending on her might no longer abide in the same Island. This scrupulousnes of the holy man was derided by certain unbeleivers there, but S. Honorius to enjoy his devout instru|ctions and conversation complied with his desire, and sent his Sister away into a remote region.
3. After this very many repaird to him to be instructed in the Christian Faith and piety, who return'd sufficiently enlightned both to find the way of salvation themselves, and to teach it to others. Now when the same of so great a Saint came to the knowledge of S. David, he sent Mes|sengers to him, earnestly and humbly entreating him to come to him. To whom he condescended without delay, and was with great honour received by him. Being come S. David chose him for his Conessour, and under God the cheif directour of his soule: and withall granted to him and the devout Brethren who lived with him the man|sions which he had chosen both in the Island and adjoyning continent.
4. In consequence hereto the Authour of his life relates at large the envy and malice

with which the Enemy of mankind impugn'd the devout and mortified life of this Holy man seeking to interrupt it by severall and fre|quent illusions,  by suggesting scandalous lyes concerning him. But in conclusion, saith he, when the Devill saw himself every way vanquish'd by the Holy man, and that neither by violent assaults, nor malicious suggestions he could withdraw him from the service of God: he attempted other arts and guilefull machinations: For he infus'd the poyson of his malice into the hearts of three of the Holy mans servants. Inso|much as they having been reprov'd by him for their idlenes and mispending the time, they were sta'd with fury against him, insomuch as  upon him they threw him to the ground, and most cruelly cutt off his head. But in the place where the sacred Head fell to the ground a fountain of pure water presently flowd, by drinking of which in following times many were miracu|lously restore to health.
5 But Mracles greater then these immediatly suceeded his death. For the Body of the Blessed Martyr presently rose, and taking the head between the two arms, went down to the sea|hore, and walking thence on the sea pass'd over to the port call'd by his name: and being arriv'd in the place where a Church is now built to his Memory, it fell down, and was there buried by Saint David with spirituall Hymns and Can|ticles. In which Church our Lord vouchsafes frequently to attest the sanctity of his servant by many miracles.Martyrol. Angl. 23. Ag. His Commemoration is on the three and twentieth of August.
6. The Island in this Narration call'd Lemency is the same,Camden. in Insul. Britan saith Camden, which Pliny calls Silimnum, and Ptolomy Lims: and which in English hath obtain'd a new Name being calld Ramsey. It lyes opposite and in sight of Menevia the Episcopall seat of Saint David: and it was in former ages famous by the death of a Holy man calld Iustinian, who arri|ving there from Lesser Brittany in this age aboun|ding with Saints, lived many years a solitary life continually united to God: but was at last murdred by his servants, and inscrib'd in the Catalogue of Martyrs.


IX. CH.IX. CHAP.

1.2 c. Of Saint Paternus, Abbot and Bishop.

A. D. 516.1. THE sanctity of S. Dubricius and S. David, c. drew into Brittany from forrein parts also Saint Paternus a devout young man in the year of Grace five hun|dred and sixteen,Vsser. in Ind Chronol. Ap. apgrav in S. Paterno. saith B. Vsher, together with eight hundred forty seaven Monks, which accompanied him: These fixed them|selves in a place calld Mauritania: and there S. Patern built a Church and Monastery, in which he placed the Monks under an Oeconomus a Provost and a Deane:A. D. 518 Thus we read in the life of S. Paternus extant in Capgrave.
2. But in what part of Brittany may we find a place calld Mauritania? In all proba|bility that name proceeds from the Writers mistake, being putt for that Church which in the Province of the Dimetae, or West Wales was dedicated to the honour of Saint Paternus, and is calld Llan Patern Vaur, or as the Brittains pronounce it, Llan Patern Maur, from which last word seems to be derived the Name Mauritania.
3. The Monastery planted there by S. Paternus seems to have sent abroad many Colonies of Religious men into the Province: for we read in Capgrave that S. Paternus built Monasteries and Churches through all the Region calld Cere|tica, now Cardigan-shire. As for the Church here calld Mauritania, it was also an Episcopal See,Ibid. in which S. Paternus himself first sate, as we find in the life of S. Sulgen born there and describ'd in verse,Ap. Vss. in Primord   Veant. . l. 7 Epig.   l. . pig 52. cited by B. Vsher. Ve|nantius Fortunatus likewise a famous Poet of this age celebrates the memory of S. Paternus in both qualities, both as an Abbot and a Bishop.
4. After one and twenty years spent by S. Paternus in governing the See erected by himself, and from him named Paternensis, he was by Prince Caradoc recalld into his own Native countrey of Lesser Brittany, where he was made Bishop of the Church of Vannes, having left his Successour in his former Bishoprick one named Kinoc. There was also another Saint Paternus Bishop of Auvranches in France (Abrincae Ecclesiae) many of whose Gests are by our Historians ascribed to this S. Paternus. The Memory the former is celebrated in the Gallican Martyrologe on the sixteenth of May: wheras that of our present Saint is comme|morated the day preceding. Some doubt may be made whether this were the same Paternus who subscribed the Synod of Paris assembled in the year of Grace five hundred fifty nine.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1. c. Of S. Darerca Sister to S. Patrick: And her children S. Rioch, S. Menni, S. Sechnal, and S. Auxilius.

1. THE Irish Historians refer to the year of Grace five hundred and eighteen the death of S. Darerca sister of S. Patrick,A. D. 518. and born likewise in Brittany, from whence she repaired to her Brother in Ireland. She was by another name calld Monynni, and erro|neously confounded by some Writers with S. Moduenna a Holy Virgin, of whom here|after.
2. S. Darerca was a maried woman, and by two husbands enrich'd the Church with a numerous and holy off spring. By her husband named Conis she is sayd to have brought forth three children,Ap. Vsser. in Primor. . 525. Mel, Rioch and Menni all which accompanied S. Patrick in his journeys and preaching: and in severall places were exalted to the Episcopall function.
3. Concerning S. Rioch we read in Iocelin, that he was by Nation a Brittain,Iocelin. in vi. S. Patricij. near kinsman to the Holy Bishop S. Patrick: that he was a Deacon (when he attended S. Patrick into Ireland) and that in beauty and comeines of body he ex|cell'd all others of that Nation. But the beauty of his soule was much more valuable. He seems to have been ordain'd Bishop by S. Pa|trick, and to have fixed his Seat in a small Island,Bed. l. 4. c. 4. which according to S Beda's descri|ption is situated at some good distance from the Western coasts of Ireland, and in the Scottish (that is, Irish) tongue is called Inis-bounide, or The Isle of the White Calfe In this Island S Col|man in succeeding times bilt a Monastery, inhabited in common both by English and Scotts and vainly sought for in modern Scotland by Dempster.
4. In the Ecclesiasticall Annals of Ireland many things are related touching other Sons of S. Darerca famous for their San|ctity But in this place we will only take notice of two, more illustrious then the rest. The former is vulgarly called Sechnallus, in Latin Secundinus: And he it was who wrote the Alphabeticall Hymn in praise of S. Pa|trick. The others name was Auxilius, who was by S. Patrick ordained Bishop of the Pro|vince of Leinster (Laginensium:) and who (as we read in the Tripartite Work quoted by B Vsher) after many miracles wrought by him,Ap. Vser. l. Primor. . 827. ended his holy life in his own Citty, call'd Ceal|usalli, seated in the plains of Leinster.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2. c. A Welsh Synod: to which S. Da|vid is brought: who preaches.
5 c. S Davids Monasteries: his Mo|nasticall Instituts.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred and nineteen there was assembled a Brittish Synod: the occasion and order whereof is thus describ'd by Giraldus Cambrensis in the life of Saint David:Ap. Vsser. in Prim. f. 474. The detestable He|resy of the elagians which by S. Germanus Bi|shop of Auxerre and Saint Lupus Bishop of Troyes had been extinguish'd, now again being revived to the ruine of the Catholick Faith, gave occasion of collecting a generall Synod of all Cam|bria. An Assembly therefore being gathered at Brevy in the Province of Cardigan (in Ceretica Regione) of Bishops, Abbots, and other Reli|gious men of severall Orders, at which were pre|sent likewise diverse Noble men and other Lay|persons out of the whole countrey,A. D. 519. many Exhor|tations and Sermons were made by severall per|sons in the pullick audience to conute the  Heresy. But the people were so deeply and mia|bly poysond generally there with, that no reasons or perswasions could reduce them to the right path of Catholick Faith. At length therefore Paulin a Bishop, with whom S. David had in his youth studied the literall Sciences, earnestly perswaded the Fathers there present that some persons should be sent in the name of the Synod to the said aint David lately consecrated. Bishop by the Patrark, a , discreet and eloquent man, to desire him to afford his presence and assistance to Gods Church now in danger to be corrupted by He|resy. Hereupon Messengers were sent accordingly, once and again: but could not perswade him to come. For the Holy man was so  taken up with Contemplation, that he could not attend to externall or secular matters, unles some very |gent necessity compell'd him. At last therefore there were sent to him two Holy men of greatest authority, to wit, Daniel and Dubricius.
2. By the entreaties or command of these two Holy Bishops S. David was at last brought to the Synod:Ap. Capgrav. in vita . David And what follow'd is thus re|lated by Capgrave: When all the Fathers assem|bled enjoyned S. David to preach, he comman|ded a child which attended him and had lately been restor'd to life by him, spread a Napkin under his feet: And standing upon it, he began to expound the Gospell and the Law to the Au|ditory. All the while that his oration continued, a snow-white Dove descending from heaven sate upon his shoulders: and moreover the earth on which he stood rais'd it selfe under him, till it became a hill, from whence his voyce like a trum|pet was clearly eard and understood by all, both near and farr off. On the top of which  a Church was afterward built, which remains to this day.
3. Now what effect his Sermon, accompa+nied with these Miracles, had,. Vsser. b supa. is thus decla|red by the foremention'd Giraldus Cambien|sis: When the Sermon was finish'd, so powefull was the Divine Grace cooperating, that he said Heresy presently vanish'd and was extinguish'd. And the Holy Bishop David by the generall Election and acclamation both of the Clergy and peo|ple was exalted to be the Arch-bishop of all Cambria.
4. It is much to be lamented that by rea|son of the mseries and confusions of those times the Decrees of that and other Synods are lost: for by them we might have been more perfectly informed of the then State of the Church in Brittany. By reason of which defect, the summe of what may be jdg'd of that age is contain'd in these generall words of the Authour of S. Davids life in Capgrave Heresy being thus expell'd,Ap. Capgrav in S. David. all the Churches of Brittany receiv'd their order and Re from the authority of the Roman Church. Whence ap|pears how great the Errour of some late Pro|testant Writers is, who will needs affirm that

the Brittish Churches before the Conversion of the Saxons in their Faith and Discipline were framed according to the Model of the Eastern Church.
5 Moreover to secure and establish the wholesom Roman Order settled by this Synod (which Spelman calls Pan-britannicam) the foresayd Authour addes immediately,Ibid. Then were Monasteries built in severall places, and the Holy Bishop David became the cheif Protectour and Preacher, from whom all men receiv'd a rule and form of holy living. This expedient the Holy Spirit suggested to the ancient Fathers, wherby to fortify and promote the Catholick Faith once establish'd, namely to build Monasteries, out of which did proceed Lights to instruct beleivers in Faith and Holines of Life: And consequently wee may iudge what Spirit it was that suggested to Diocletian, to the Infidel Saxons, and of late to Luther and Calvin the destroying of Monasteries, as an assured means to destroy true Faith also.
6. It will not be unproffitable to describe on this occasion the form of a Monastick life instituted by S. David,Ibid. as we find in the foresayd Authour: S. David, saith he, having built a Monastery neer Menevia in a place call the Rosey-valley (Vallis Rosina) gave this strict rule of Monasticall Profession: viz. That every Monk should labour dayly with his hands, for the common good of the Monastery, according to the Apostles saying, He that doth not labour, let him not eat. For those who spend their time in idlenes, debase their minds, which become untable, and bring forth impure thoughts, which restlesly disquiet them. The Monks there refus'd all gifts or possessions offred by uniust men: they detested riches: they had no care to ease their labours by the use of oxen or other Cattell; for every one was instead of riches and oxen to him|ef and his brethren. They never conver'd toge|ther by talkin, but when necessity required: but each one perform'd the labour enioyn'd him, oyning thereto prayer or Holy Meditations on Di|vine things. And having finish'd their coun|trey-work, they return'd to the Monastery, where they spent the remainder of the day till even in reading or Writing. At even, upon the sounding of a bell they all leave their work, and immediatly repair to the Church: where they remain till the Starrs appear, and goe all together to their Rese|ction, eating sparingly and not to satiety: For any excesse in eating, though it be only of bread, generates Luxury. Their fod is bread toge|ther with roots or hearbs seasond with salt: and their thirst they quenched with a mixture of water and milk. Supper being ended, they conti|nued about three howers in watching, prayers and genu-flexions. As long as they were in the Church it was not permitted to any either to slumber, or sneeze or cast forth spittle. After this they went to rest: and at cock-crowing they rose and conti|nued at Prayers till day appeard. All their inward tentations and thoughts they discovered to their Superiour: and from him they demanded permission in all things, even when they were urged to the necessities of Nature. Their cloathing was of skins of beasts. Whosoever was desirous to adioyn himself to their holy conversation, he was obliged to remain ten days at the dore of the Mo|nastery, as a reprobate, unworthy to be admitted to their society, and there he was expos'd to rude and opprobrious scorns. But if all that time he pa|tiently suffred all mortifications, he was received by the Religious Seniour who had care of the gate, whom he served, and was by him instructed. In which condition he remaind a long time, exerci|sed in painfull labours, and greivous mortifica|tions, and at last was admitted to the fellowship of the Brethren.
7. Our learned Camden makes mention of the foresaid Synod,Camden in Cardgav. the place where it was celebrated, and the miracle wrought in it, saying Lan-Devi Brevi (that is, the Church of S David neer the River Brevi) was built to the memory of S. David Bishop of Menevia in the place where he, during the sitting of a full Synod, confuted and repress'd the Pelagian Heresy revi|ving in Brittany, by the Holy scriptures and Mi|racles likewise, for, as the fame is, the earth on which he preached, swelld up under his feet till it became a hill. And from hence it appears that this Synod was celebrated, not in any house or town, but in the open feilds: as after ward S. Augustin the Monk held a Councill in a place from thence call'd S. Augustins Oake: And anciently Theophilus assembled a Synod in the cause of S. Anathasius, which for the like reason was call'd (Ad quereum) At the Oake.


XII. CHAP.XII. CH.

1.2. c. Of S. Dubricius: his Gests.

WHeras in this Synod there were pre|sent many great Saints, and Holy Bi|shops, the Lights of the Brittish Churches, as S. Dubricius, S. Daniel, S. David, S. Telia, S Paulin and others: Of most of whom some mention hath been already made, and some of their actions related: It will be seasona|ble and expedient to adioyn in this place and occasion a summary of their respective Gests. For if they should be sett down particularly and severally in the times when they hapned, they would be found so scattered and intermix'd, that the Readers memory would therby be too much confounded, especially considering the wonderfull length of time that most of them lived.
2. Concerning S. Daniel we have already treated sufficiently. Wee will therfore here begin with S. Dubricius. Of whom the Cen|turiators of Magdeburg afford us this mali|cious Character,Magdb. Cen|tur. 5. in Du|briio. Dubricius Gainius of Vaga, so call'd from his Native soyle, was the son perhaps of a Monke by Euedila a Noble young maid: He became very famous among the English. But the folly of these Historians is too apparent, for

Luther had not yet by writing and his exam|ple taught Monks to get children on young woemen.
3. More credit ought therefore to be given to our ancient Authours who generally agree that S. Dubricius was a Brittain taking his originall in the Province of the Demetae, or West-wales; and was sirnamed Guanius from the River Guain neer which he was born.Pits in Dubri|cio. B. l. ibd. D. Povvel in Ann in l. 2. c . Ii. Cambr. The name of his Father is not mention'd by our Writers, but his Mother was call'd Euedyla, a woman of wonderfull vertue and piety. Thus much is testified by Pits, Bale, David Powel, and the Authour of his life in Capgrave, from the ancient Brittish Monu|ments.
4. During his child hood he was committed to the care of Teachers to be instructed in learning suitable to that age:Ap Capgrav. in Dubriio. and coming to a more ripe age he made such progresse in science that very many, not only among the ignorant, but more skilfull also repaired to him to receive instru|ctions. Among which was S. Theliau, S. Sampson, S. Aidan and many others. He made choice of a place in his own Countrey neer the River Vaga proper to receive the great Number of Schollars which came to him: and there for severall years he directed their studies. In the same place ha|ving built, a Church by command of an Angel he there taught the people, and by imposing his hands cured frequently the sick of divers infirmities: so that those who came to him feeble and full of anguish returned ioyfull and in perfect health
5. The year of his birth is not declared by any: But he was taken from his employ|ment of Teaching by S. Germanus Bishop of Auxerre in his second voyage to Brittany, and with the consent of King Mauricus, and all the Clergy consecrated Bishop of Landaff (as hath been said) in the year of Grace four hundred thirty six: By which account since he out lived the time of the foresaid Synod of Brevy, it is manifest that the length of his life was wonderfull, for at that time he had continued a Bishop more then fourscore years.
ileg. A. D. 490.6. Afterward in the year four hundred nine|ty two, saith Florilegus, King Aurelius Ambro|sius coming to the mountain of Ambri, neer to Caer-carec (now call'd Salisbury) where the Brittish Princes, treacherously murdred by Hen|gist, lay, he there appointed Pastours over two Metropolitan Churches, granting York to S. Sampson an illustrious person, and Car-leon to Dubricius: Which last See was now become vacant by the death of Threminius.Glfrid. l. 9. c. 12. Geffrey of Monmouth adds, That he was Primat of Brittany, and Legat of the Apostolick See: which digni|ty it seems was annexed to that Church by S. Germanus by vertue of the authority, in his Mission hither, received from Rome.
7. In the year five hundred and sixteen he solemnly crowned King Arthur: After which, being very aged, he is sayd to have relin|quish'd his See and retir'd into the Isle of Enhly or Berdesy, there to attend to his De|votions, and more perfectly to prepare him|self for death. From which quiet repose and solitude notwithstanding his zeale to the Catholick Faith drew him to the Synod of Brevy, there to defend it against the renewd Heresy of the Pelagians, In which Synod he obtained that S. David should be placed governour of the Church which a little be|fore he had relinquish'd.
8. At last three years after, full of sancti|ty and age he gave up his soule into the hands of his Creatour in the foresaid Isle of Berdsey, where among a great multitude o Saints he chose his place of buriall. And there his Sacred Body reposed till the year o Grace one thousand one hundred and twenty:Godvvin. in Episc. Mone|vens. at which time it was translated from thence on the Nones of May, and on the fourth before the Calends of Iune by Vrbanus Bishop of Landaff with great honour buried in the Cathedrall Church on the Northside of the Altar of our Blessed Lady, saith B Godwin. At which time, saith the Authour of his life in Capgrave,Ap. Cagrav in Dubicio. the whole countrey of Glamorgan was afflicted with a great drouth, for for many weeks before no rain had falln there: But at the time when these Sacred Relicks were transported great store of rain fell to the comfort of the inha|bitants.


XIII. CHAP.XIII CH.

1.2. c. Of S. Theliau: his Gests.
6. c. Of S. Pauleus.

1. ONE of the most illustrious Disciples of S. Dubricius was S. Theliau, call'd by the Centuriators of Magdeburg Thelesinus Helius, against whom they in like manner vomit their poyson, saying that he was (An|glicus Vaes ex genere Baraorum) an English Soothsayer of the stock of the Bards: Wheras he neither was an English man, nor Bard: but descended from a Noble Brittish family,Ap. Capgrav in Thelia. as the Authour of his Life declares: Adding further, that from his infancy he was addicted to Devotion, Prayer and contempt of secular plea|sures. And being come to a riper age he was for his piety and Wisedom by wise men Sirnamed He|lios, because with his doctrine he enlightned the hearts of the faithfull, as the Sun doth the world. He was instructed in holy scriptures by S. Dubri|cius, till he was enabled to clear the most difficult places therein. Then having heard the fame of a certain wise man called Paulinus, he went to him, to confer with him of the most abstruse My|steries of Gods Word. There he contracted freind|ship with S. David, a man of great Perfection in sanctity, insomuch as their hearts were so firmly knitt together by charity and the Grace of Gods holy Spirit, that in all things they had but one Will.
2. When S. Dubricius was translated from the See of Landaff to the Metropolitan Church of Car-leon, S. Theliau succeeded him in that of Landaff, in which he sate very many years, and if the authority of the English Martyro|loge ayle not, he dyed not till the coming of S. Augustin the Monk into Brittany, by whom his successour S. Oudoceus was conse|crated.
3 When a certain plague call'd the Yellow plague infested Brittany, raging both against men and beasts, by a divine admonition he departed into a far remote countrey accompanied with man Disciples, where he abode till by the same authority he was recalled. Neither did he cease by dayly prayers and fasting to pacify Gods wrath. At  gathering together all his devout com|panions he returned, and all his life after exerci|sed sueme jurisdiction over all the Churches of Western Brittany. At last S. Theliau being re|plenish'd with all vertues dyed in a good old age on the fifth day before the Ies of February. Thus write the Authour of his life. Therefore it is difficult to find out the grounds upon which in ou Martyrologe he is commemo|rated on the twenty sixth of November by the Title of a Martyr, murdred by a certain Brittain named Gueddant: since all our rtes, Pits, Harpsfeild, Capgrave, B. Godwin and . Vsher make no mention that he dyed a violent death.
4. Many Miracles are recorded as done by him both before and after his death: which I wiingly omit. Onely one, which B. Godwin thought good not to passe over in si|ence shll be nre related, and the rather becaue,Godvvin. in  p. . as he says, there is mention of it in the Prayer inserted in the Liturgy of his Feast: whih was this After he was dead the inha|bitants of three severall places contended earnest|ly which of them should enjoy his Body: those of Penalum where his Ancestours had been buried; those of Lantelio-vaur, where he dyed, and those of Landaff, among whom he had been Bishop. When therefore no agreement could be made amongst them, there appeared presently three Bodies so like to one another, that three egg could not more perfectly resemble. So each of thse people took one of them, and by that means the controversy ended. Thus writes that Au|thour, and in conclusion for his own Church of Landaff he addes. That by frequent miracles at his Tomb it appear'd that the inha|bitants of Landaff possess'd the true Body.
5. Now whereas both in the life of S. Thliau there is mention of Paulinus, said to be i, Instrur, and likewise in the Acts o the nod of Brevy, Paulinus was the man by whose exhortation Messengers were de|prted by the Synod to call thither S. David: it any deserve our inquiry who this Pauli|nus was, who was a Bishop before S. David, consideing that in the Catalogue of our Bshops none is found of that name before the ime of the Holy Monk S. Augustin. Most probable therefore it is that this is the same which in the life of S. David is said to have been a Disciple of Saint Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, and is sometimes sayd to have been S. Davids Teacher, and elsewhere to have studied together with him, and whose true name seems to have been Paulens.
6. Concerning this Paulens we find this passage related by the Authour of S. Davids life in Capgrave:Ap. Capgrav. in v S. David. S. David assoon as he was pro|moted to Preisthood went to Paulens a Disciple of S. Germanus, who in a certain Island lead a holy life acceptable to God. With him S. David lived many years, and in his practise fullfilld the In|structions which he mett with in reading. Now it fell out that his Master Paulens with extreme pains falling on his eyes lost the use of them. Here|upon calling his Disciples together he desired that one after another they would look upon his eyes, and say a prayer or benediction on them. When they had done this, and that he receiv'd no ease or remedy, David said thus to him: Father, I pray you, doe not command mee to look you in the face: for ten years are pass'd since I studied the Scripture with you, and in all that time I never had the boldnes to look you in the face. Paulens admiring his humility, said, since it is so, it will suffise if by touching my eyes thou pronounce a be|nediction on them. Presently therefore assoon as he touched them, sight was restored to them.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. CH.

1.2. The Westsaxon Kingdom founded.
3.4. Priviledges given to Cornwall, c.
5.6. A second combat at Mon Bado|nicus.
7. c. Fables of King Arthurs con|quests.

1. THE same year in which the Synod of Brevi was celebrated,A. D. 19. Hunting. l.  Cerdic began the Kingdom of the West-Saxons, that is, saith Huntingdom, in the seaventy first year after the first coming of the Saxons, and in the raign of the Emperour Iustin the Elder of that name. With him agrees Ethelwerd, Malmsbury and others.Rudburn. l.  c. 1. And Thomas Rudburn in his greater Chronicle addes, that he was crowned with Pagan Ceremonies at Winchester, in the place which once had been the Church of the true God, but which those barbarous heathens had changed into a Temple of Dagon, having slain all the Monks who served God there.
2. The raising of this New Kingdom sufficiently disproves the Fables of Geffrey of Monmouth, who reports great and frequent Victories of King Arthur in these dayes. Whereas Huntingdon expresly declares that this year a terrible battell was fought between Cerdic and the Brittains,Hntingd ib. and that on both sides the Captains fought magnanimously till even, but then the Saxons gott the victory, which would

have been more bloody to the Brittains,A. D. 50. had not the darknes hindred the pursuit. After this the fame of Cerdic and his son Kinric was largely spread through the whole land. For from that day began the Kingdom of the West-Saxons, which re|mains to our times, having swallowd all the other Principalities. And Ranulpus of Chester relates how after many battells fought betweem King Arthur and Cerdic, wherin sometimes one, some times the other had the better, at last King Ar|thur grew weary, and contenting himself with an oath of fidelity received from Cerdic, he gave to him the Provinces of Hampshire and Somer|set.
Rudburn. l. 2. c. 1.3. But Thomas Rudburn, taking no notice of any Oath of Fidelity, declares that King Arthur growing weary of renewing war against Cerdic, entred into league with him: by which Cerdic obliged himself to the inhabitants of Cornwal, to permitt them, paying an annual tribute, to enjoy the exercise of Christian Religion. And that such a speciall indulgence was allowd to that Province, appears by the great numbers of Saints which in these and the following times flourished there, whereas scarce any were to be found in other parts of Brittany subject to the Saxons. Now the ground of this Priviledge afforded particu|larly to them of Cornwal no doubt was, be|cause great multitudes of Brittains flying from the Saxons into those most distant and more defensible parts, as likewise into Wales, rendred them more capable to resist new Masters, who therefore were forced to give them better conditions.
4. Notwithstanding we are not to sup|pose that the two Provinces of Hampshire and Somerset, mentioned by Ranulphus, and Cornwall by Rudburn, were all the Provinces which made up the new Kingdom of the West-Saxons for besides them Cerdic had sub|dued the Danmonij in Devonshire, the Duro|triges in Dorsetshire, the Atrebatij in Bark|shire, and the Belgae in Wiltshire. And to these shortly after was added the Isle of Wight, which he bestowd on his late arriv'd kins|men Stuffa and Whitgar,Camden in . who, saith Camden, utterly destroy'd the Brittish inhabitants there at Whitgarn-burg, from Whitgar so call'd, but now more contractedly, Caresburg.
A. D. 20. Westminst. ic.5. Whilst Cerdic was busy establishing his new Kingdom, fresh enemies to the Brit|tains arriv'd: For, as Mathew of Westminster relates, in the year five hundred and twenty the Saxon Captains Colgrin, Baldulf and Cheldric lately subdued by King Arthur at York, and for|ced to abiure the Island, repented themselves of the Covenants made: and returning took land at Totenes: from whence passing through Cerdic's dominion, they came to the Citty of Bath, which they besieged. The fame whereof coming to King Arthur, he caused the hostages left by them to be hanged. And gathering a might army came to raise the siege: Where the armies being ioyned, he calling on the name of the Blessed Virgin Mary whose Image he wre over his armour, he slew great numbers of them, and among the rest Col|grin and his Brother Baldulph. Which Cheldric seing, fled, and by the Kings command was pur|ed by Cador Duke of Cornwal, who rested not ill he overtook them in the Isle of Thane, where e slew Cheldric, and orced the rest to yeild.
6. Though some particulars in this Nr|ation may deserve to be excepted against, is the place, which is sayd to have been the Citty o Bath, neer which is the Mountain cal|led Badonicus, where Arthur before he was King is sayd to have defeated the Saxons, long before the time mentioned by this Historian: Besides, Bath being a part of Cer|dics new Kingdom, how come the new arrived Saxons to besiege it? Notwithstan|ding it may probably be answered, that there might have been, and comparing our Writers, it is likely there were two battles fought by Arthur at this Mount Badonicus. And again the Citty of Bath being seated in the utmost extremity Westward of Cerdic's Pricipality, it might perhaps at this time have been in the possession of the Brittains.
7. As touching King Arthurs invoking our blessed Lady's assistance in the fight, it was a devotion generally practis'd by the Church in this age; For two year, before this there having been assembled two Councils in the East,A. D. 58. Ap. Ban. one at Ierusalem and another at Constantinople: the Synod of Ierusalem thus wrote to the Bishops of the other Council, O most holy Bishops, we beseech you to pray with us to our Lord for these same things: for the neces+sities of all Gods Preists ought to be common. Make your supplications likewise together with us to the most holy and glorious Virgin Mary Mother of God, that she would intercede for the peace of the holy Churches, and for the victory and long life of our most pious and most Excellent Emperour. The like practise we find else|where, of which many Examples may be given.
8. The year following King Arthur was called into the Northern parts to assist Prince Howel,. D. 521. Wstmonaster. .
who three years before was come out of Lesser Brit+tany to his aid, and was now besieged by the  and Scots in the Citty called Acluid, in which he lay sick. Vpon King Arthurs approach, saith Mathew of Westminster, the Enemies retired to a place called Mureif, whither he pursued them. But they escaping by night fled to a Lake named Lumonoy. Whereupon Arthur gathering many ships together, encompassed the Island, and in fifteen days brought them to such extreme fa|mine, that many thousands of them perish'd. In which utmost danger the Bishops of that Regio came bare-foot to the King, with teares besee|ching him to take pitty of that miserable people, and to give them some small portion of that coun|trey to inhabit, under the Yoake of perpetual ser|vitude. The King mollified with the teares of the Bishops, both pardon'd his Enemies, and granted their request.
9. Here it is that some of our Brittish and Saxn Writers ground the subjection of Scot|land

to the Crown of Brittany.A. D. 521. Particularly Walsingham relates how King Arthur having subdued Scotland,Walshing. hy|podigm. Neustriae f. 492. placed over it as King a certain person named Angulsel, who at a publick Feast in Caer-leon caried King Arthurs sword before him, and did homage to him for his Kingdom. And that successively all the Kings of Scotland were subject to the crown of Brittany. But it seems very improbable that King Arthur, at a time when his own countrey was peece|meale renting from him, should be at lea|sure to conquer forrain Nations. And how|ever, if the Scots were indeed now subdued, certain it is that they shortly shook off that yoke.


XV. CH.XV. CHAP.

1.2.3 Of the Holy Bishop Nennion: And of S. Finanus.

1. WHereas in the last recited exploit of King Arthur it is sayd, that cer|tain Pictish or Scottish Bishops were suppliants to him in behalf of their distressed coun|treymen: our inquiry must be what Bishops those probably were. That the Province of the Picts where the Citty of Acluid was sea|ted, had many years since received the Chri|stian Faith by the preaching of S. Ninianus, hath been already demonstrated. But who were his Successours till this time, we can only find by conjecture. In the Annals of Ireland there is mention of a certain Bishop call'd Nennion,A. D. 520. who is sayd to have flouri|shed in Brittany about the year five hundred and twenty, and to have had his seat in a place called the great Monastery. This man probably was the Successour of S. Ninianus, and this Great Monastery the same with Can|dida Casa, where was the Monument of that Apostolick Bishop, which by reason of fre|quent miracles wrought there invited great numbers of devout men to embrace a Coeno|biticall Life, as hath been shewd from Alcui|nus. Of this Bishop Nennion we read in the life of S. Finanus this passage, That the said S. Finanus having in his childhood been instructed by S. Colman a Bishop, was afterward recommen|ded to he care of Nennion: The words of Tin|mouth extant in Capgrave are these:Ap Capgrav. in S. Fina. Behold certain ships out of Brittany entred the said haven in Ireland, in which ships was the Holy Bishop Nennion and severall others accompany|ing him. These men being received with great ioy and honour, Coelanus Abbot of Noendrum (or as Iocelin writes, of Edrum) very diligently recom|mended young Finanus to the Venerable Bishop. Thereupon Finanus presently after returned with him into his countrey, and for severall years lear|ned from him the Rules of a Monasticall life at his ee called the great Monastery: Moreover with great proficiency he studied the Holy Scriptures: and by invoking the name of Christ, wrought many Miracles.
2. Concerning the same Finanus it is fur|ther added,A. D. 525. Having been more then ordinarily instructed in Monastick institutions and holy Scripture by S. Nennion,Ibid. Finanus determined to take a journey to the See Apostolick, to the end he might there supply whatsoever was defective in saving knowledge. At Rome therefore he con|tinued the space of seaven years, dayly studying and advancing in Sacred science. And after that he ascended to the degree of Preisthood.
3. Thus much by the way concerning the holy Bishop Nennion, who probably was one of those who interceded with King Ar|thur in behalfe of their countrey. And it was about this time that S. Finanus lived under his Discipline: Chronolg. A. D. 520. For thus B. Vsher in his Chro|nologicall Index writes in the year five hun|dred and twenty; Nennion Bishop of the See called The great Monastery flourish'd at this time in Brittany.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1.2 Fables concerning King Arthur cen|sured.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred twen|ty three King Arthur,A. D. 523. after the death of his wife Guenevera, maried a Noble Lady called Guenhumara: By occasion of which mariage his fame was spread through all countreyes.Westmonaster. hc. This is thus declared by Flo|rilegus: In the forenamed year, saith he, King Arthur having reduced the Isle of Brittany to its former state, maried a wife named Guen|humara descended from the Noble stock of the Romans. She had been brought up in the Court of the Duke of Cornwal, and in beauty excelled all the women of Brittany. To this mariage he in|vited all Princes and Noble persons in the Re|gions adjacent, and during the celebration of it such sports, and such magnificence both in fea|sting and military exploits were shewn by him, that Nations far removed did admire and emu|late him. By this means from some transmarine Kings he gained love, and in others he imprinted a fear and terrour.
2. Within little more then a year after this mariage he is sayd to have passed into Ireland,A. D. 525. Id. hic. and there to have taken Prisoners the King Gil|lamur and his Nobles, and subdued the whole Island. From thence to have sayled into Holland, Gott-land and the Isles of Orkney, all which Re|gions he brought under Tribute.
3. Such Fables as these, invented by idle and ignorant Bards, and with addition pu|blished in a Latin stile by Geffrey of Mon|mouth, have passed for true stories not only among the Brittains in succeeding times, who might be pardond if in their poverty and miseries they recreated their minds with the imagined past glory of their An|cestours: but they have imposed on forrain

Writers, and some of them otherwise not un|learned.Maibran de Morini l. 1. c. 14. ib. l. 1. c. 42 Hence it is that Malbranque a dili|gent French Antiquary has been induced to acknowledge that King Arthur after having forced Brittany from the Saxons, subdued afterward that part of France which was in|habited by his own countreymen the Mo|rini.
4. Neither hath the Brittish Fables ended here: They have sent King Arthur into Norway: and his exploits there are thus re|corded by Mathew of Westminster:Florlg ad A. D. 53. In the year of Grace five hundred thirty three King Arthur having a design to subdue all Europe, passed with a Navy into Norway. Where being arrived he found Sichelin King of that countrey dead: who had bequeathed that Kingdom to Loth sisters son to King Arthur: a Prince of great vertue and magnificence. The sayd Loth had at that time a son called Walwan, a youth twelve years old, who was recommended to Pope Vigilius to be by him brought up: from whom likewise he received the Order of Knight hood. In the end King Arthur having conquered the Norvegians, placed his Nephew Loth in the throne, and then with ioy returned into Brittany.
5. Acts of Chevalry yet more prodigious have been in a seeming sober manner re|counted especially by Geffrey of Monmouth, which in a generall manner shall be here set down in the expression, and with the Censure of Ranulphus of Chester.Ranulf. l. 5. c. 6. As touching this King Arthur, saith he, among all Historians only thus extolled by Geffrey of Monmouth, many doe wonder how any one can beleive those things to be true which are reported of him. For if there were any probability that he conquered thirty Kingdoms, if he subdued the King of the Franks, if he slew Lucius the Emperours Governour in Italy, how comes it to passe that all Historians, Romans, French,  Saxons should make no men|tion at all of such Heroicall Exploits of so great a Prince, whereas they have related far lesse acts of persons much inferiour? Geffrey tells us that his Arthur conquered Frollo King of the Franks: whereas among the French Writers such a Name as Frollo cannot be found. He says likewise that du|ring the raign of the Emperour Leo King Arthur kild Lucius an Italian Generall of the Empire: and yet according to all the Roman Historians there was no Lucius Governour in Italy: Neither did King Arthur raign, nor was so much as born in the time of Leo, but of Iustinian the fifth Em|perour after Leo. To conclude, Greffrey says he much wonders that Gildas and S. Beda should make no mention of King Arthur in their Wri|tings. Whereas we may much rather wonder that this Geffrey should so highly extoll a man whose actions have scarce been mentioned by any an|cient Historians of high esteem for their truth  sincerity. But perhaps this is the custom of eve|ry nation to exalt some one of their Princes with excessive praises: as the Grecians have enor|mously magnified their Alexander, the Romans their Octavian, the English their Richard, the French their Charles: and in like manner the Brittains their Arthur.A. D. 527. This often happens, saith Iosephus, either for the beautifying of their Hi|stories, or the delighting their Readers, or extol|ling their own blood.
6. That there was such a King of the Brit|tains as Arthur, and that he was a Prince of a most magnanimous and Heroical Spirit we are assured by Monuments of such unquestioned authority, that Geffreys lyes cannot dis|parage them. And had it not been that Al|mighty God had given up the Brittains to destruction, no hand could have been more proper  able to rescue them then King Ar|thurs: and no doubt it was to his valour that we ought to ascribe the security of the re|mains of them amo~g the Mountains of Wales. But as for his conquering so many king|doms, and driving the Saxons out of his own, these are inventions so impudently false, that in the very same years to which these Victories are assigned, our unquestioned Hi|stories inform us that the Saxons made some notable progresse in their conquests, and some new kingdom of theirs became esta|blished.
7. It may notwithstanding be allowd to Malbranque, since he will needs entitle King Arthur to the subduing his Morini, that being weary of contending in vain with the Saxons, and a surcease of arms being agreed between them, King Arthur to avoyd idle|nes might transport some forces over Sea into that Province of France, and there settle in the Principality his kinsma~ Leodegarius,Malbran. vbi supr. be|stowing on him the Strong Citty of Bouloign (Bo|nonia) with the territory adjoyning, with this con|dition that he and his Successours should hold it with acknowledgment and dependance of the Blessed Virgin, to whom we have seen before that King Arthur bore so particular devo|tion. All which, saith that Authour, is extra|cted out of the ancient Archives of that Citty.
8. Thus much may be iudged expedient to be said concerning King Arthur, of whom nothing will remain more to be related for the space of many years till we come to treat of his death: The intercurring time being to be supplyed by a few passages touching Ec|clesiasticall affaires occurring in Brittany.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

1.2.3 The Kingdoms of the East-angles, and East-Saxons erected.
4 The Isle of wight conquered: whence the name.

1.A. D. 527. ABout the year of Grace five hundred twenty seaven two new Kingdoms were erected in Brittany without any distur|bance from King Arthur. The seat of them was in the Eastern parts of the Island. The Province of the Ice, containing Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgshire, was possessed by

the Angli,A. D. 528. and made up the Kingdom of the East-angles: The Province of the Trinobantes, containing Essex Middlesex, were possessed by a Tribe of the Saxons and made up the Kingdom of the East-Saxons. But whether of these two kingdoms began first is uncer|tain in our History, because the names of their first Kings are for the unconsiderable|nes of their actions not left recorded.
West monast. a. A. D. 526.2. Mathew of Westminster fixes their begin|ning in the same year five hundred twenty sixe, when, saith he, there came out of Ger|many certain Pagans who seysed on the Eastern parts of Brittany, namely that Region which is called the Kingdom of the East-Angles. And some of the same Germans invading the Middle Provinces of the Island, fought many battles against the Brittains. But because their Lea|ders were many, and not subordinate to one, their names are forgotten. The same year the Kingdom of the East-Saxons also took its Original, in these days called Essex: the first King whereof, as is beleived, was Erkenwin the Son of Offa.
3. This Writer does not acquaint us with the name of the first King of the East-An|gles: But that defect is supplied by Ranul|phus of Chester,Ranulf Cstr. in . l 5 c. 4. though he assign the Ori|ginal of that Kingdom much sooner: For thus he writes: In the year of Grace four hun|dred ninety  the Kingdom of the East-Angles began under Vffa, from whom all the succeeding Kings were anciently called Vffings, which since we call Ficans or Fikeys. Such is the uncer|tainty about the beginning of these two Kingdoms: to discourse of which concerns not our design.
A. D. 528.4. The year following the Isle of Wight was invaded by King Cerdic and his Son Kinric, as hath been sayd But almost three years passed before they could quite subdue it. For in the year five hundred and thirty, saith Huntingdon, Certic and his Son with a numerous army fought with the Brittains in Witland (or the Isle of Wight:Huntingd. l. 2) and having overcome them took possession of the Island. In which battell they made a wonderfull slaughter of them at Whitgaresberg, in the thirteenth year of their Raign. This Island, called in Latin Vcta, they gave four years after to their Nephews uffa and Witgar. The Brittains call this Island Guith, which, saith Nennius, signifies a di|vorce or renting asunder: because is is di|vided from Brittany by so narrow a sea in|tervening, that is seems to have been once ioynd with it. The Saxons from the Brittish word called it Witland, or Vitland.


XVIII. CHAP.A. D. 529.
XVIII. C.

1.2. A Synod assembled in Wales by Saint David.
3.4. Of S Kined.
5. S. David forbidden to consecrate again the Church of Glastonbury.

1. WHilst Cerdic was busy about the in|vasion of the Isle of Wight,A. D. 529. that vi|gilant Pastour of soules Saint David Bishop of Menevia assembled a Provinciall Synod, call'd the Synod of Victory.Girald. in vi+t S. avid a. Vsher. f. 75. In which, saith Giraldus Cambrensis, the Clergy of all Cambria (or Wales) mett together, and confirmed the Decrees of the former Synod at Brevy, whereto they added new ones for the Churches benefit. From these two Synods all the Churches of Cambria received their rules and Ecclesiasticall orders, which also were confirmed by the authority of the Roman Church. The Decrees of them both, which the Holy Prelat David had first publish'd by speech, he committed also to writing with his own hand, and left them to be reserved in his own Church, and Copies of them to be communicated to other Churches in that Province. All which together with many other Treasures of that Noble Library furni'd by him have been lost partly by age, or negligence, and principally by the incursion of Pirats which almost every Sommer from the Isles of Orkney in long boats were accustomed to wast the Sea coasts of Cambria.
2. The losse of this treasure deserves in|deed to be deplored, since thereby we might have been perfectly informed of the whole state of the Brittish Churches. However we are from this ancient Historian assured that those Churches were regulated according to the Roman: So that by examining the Doctrin and Disciplin of the Roman Church in that age, we may be assured that the Brittish Churches beleived and practised the same: And consequently that S. Augustin sent afterward to convert the Saxons, brought no Novelties hither with him, as some Modern Protestants doe accuse him, since S. Gregory who sent him, was exalted to S. Peters chair not above threescore years after this Synod.
3. We read in the life of S. Kined in Cap|grave,Ap. Capgr. in S . that when S. David had publish'd his Edicts for the assembling this universall Synod of Cambria, he took care humbly to invite thereto S. Kined. But his answer was; That for his sins being become distorted and crooked in his body, he was unfitt for any society, and much more to be adioyned to the company of such holy men. Be|sides, that he had not naturall strength sufficient to enable him to undertake such a iourney. After his the same Authour relates a double Mi|racle, how S. Kined having been restored to health and streightnes by the Prayers of Saint David, by his own prayers was reduced again to his former infirmity  crookednes.
4. But I take no pleasure in exscribing the multitude of Miracles with which the following Writers of the middle age have rather obscured then illustrated the lives of Saints. It shall suffise therefore in this place to declare that this S. Kined in the time of S. David fill'd Brittany with the same of his Sanctity. He lived a solitary Anachoreticall life in the Province now called Glamorgan|shire, probably in the same place where yet remains a Chappell called S. Keneth his Chappell, left as a monument of his Sanctity.Camden in Glamorgan. Camden in his description of that Region writeth thus, Western Gower is almost an Island by reason that the Sea encompasses it every where except in one narrow space in which it is ioynd to land. It de|erves, to be mentioned in story not so much for the towns in it, as the fruits, and the memory of a famous canonised Saint called S. Kined, who there lead a solitary devout life.
5. After the dissolution of the foresaid Synod S. David accompanied with severall other Bishops took a journey to the Monastery of Glastonbury, with an intention to repaire the ruines of it,  again to consecrate it. But how he was deterred from such a design by our Lord appearing to him in sleep  forbid|ding him by a second Dedication to profane the Sacred Ceremony which himself had many years before performed: in testimony whereof he with his finger peirced a hole in the Bishops hand, which remaind open to the view of all men till the end of the next days Masse: All this hath already been large|ly related in the beginning of this History: at the year of Grace sixty four, where was treated of the first foundation of that fa|mous and most ancient Monastery of Glaston|bury: to which place I refer the Reader.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. David translates the Metro|politan See to Menevia.
7 He exercises his Pastorall Office in Ire|land.
8 9.10. Of Irish Saints: Particularly of S. Aedan.

1. THE celebrating of this Synod is the last publick action which we find recorded of S. David. Therefore we will here adioyn what remains of his Gests till his death, which followd fifteen years after, in the year of Grace five hundred forty four.
2. Concerning his Birth and the Prophe|cies foregoing it, as likewise his Education,  how in the year five hundred and nine|teen in the Synod of Brevy he was elected and consecrated Bishop, succeeding Saint Du|bricius Arch-bishop of Car-leon and Metro|politan of Cambria: which See S. Dubricius three years before had relinquished, retiring himself into solitude: All this hath been already declared.
3. Notwithstanding his Consecration, he would not accept of a Metropoliticall Iuris|diction but upon this condition that he might transferre the See from Car-leon to Menevia, a place for the remotenes, solitude and neighbourhood of many Saints and Re|ligious persons in the Islands and territory adioyning, most acceptable to him. Which Translation was approved both by King Ar|thur and the Synod then not dissolved.
4. This Menevia is seated in the Province of the Dimetae, now Penbrok-shire, adioyning to the most remote Promontory of Brittany, called by Ptolomy the Promontory of the Octo|pitae, where,Girald in l in. l. 2. c. 1. saith Giraldus, the soyle is stony and barren, neither cloathed with wood, nor interlaced with rivers, nor adorned with meadows, but ex|posed to the Sun and winds: Yet with this penury the ancient Saints and Bishops were best contented, accounting the remotenes from worldly tumults and noyse to recom|pence sufficiently all such incommodities
5. This Merevia, or, as the Brittains then called it, Menew, was in memory of this holy Bishop named by the converted Saxons Da|vid-Minster, and by the Brittains Tuy-Dewy, that is, Davds house, and at this day S. Davids. The Bishop whereof was for many ages the Metropolitan of Cambria, but at length be|came subject to Canterbury. Notwithstan|ding the Inhabitants of Wales since the Con|quest of Brittany by the Normans entred into a  of Law against the Arch-bishop of Canterbury challenging their former right and priviledge of independance: but the cause was iudged against them. How the Archie|piscopall Pall by occasion of a Plague was ca|ried over Sea into Little Britany, and left in the Church of Dole shal be shewd hereafter.
6. The Pastorall care and zeale of S David in maintaining the Catholick Faith against Heresyes, particularly Pelagianism, and Eccle|siasticall Discipline against vices and disor|ders is celebrated by all our Writers, and was signally approved by him in the Synod of Victory assembled by him ten years after his Consecration.
7. Neither was his Pastoral solicitude con|fined to his own Province: it extended it selfe abroad also, and especially into Ireland: From whnce he was often visited and con|sulted with by devout men.Girald. Cam|br it. S. David. Hence Giraldus Cambrensis speaking of this age, saith, It was among the Irishmen in those days a frequet custom to goe in pilgrimage, and their greatest devotion was to visit the monuments of the Apostles in Rome. Among the rest one Barro an Abbot in the province of Cork went thither, and in his return he pass'd by Menevia, where he stayd till he could find the commodity of a ship and wind. For such was the usuall practise of good de|vout Irishmen, that either going or returning

they would desire to enioy the conversation of the Holy Bishop David, whose name like a precious fragrant Oyntment was spread all abroad.
Vsser. in Fri|ora. . 5.8. B. Vsher has publish'd a Catalogue of Irish Saints, sorted into severall Orders accor|ding to the times wherin they liv'd. The first Order was of such as liv'd either con|temporaries to S. Patrick, or presently after him. The Second Order contain'd such Saints  about this age, such as were S. Fina| cad by the Irish, Fin, and by the Brit|tains Gain or Win. S. Brendan, c. In which  this observation is express'd, The Saints of the Second Order received the Rite of  out of Brittany from holy men  ere, such as were S. David, S. Gildas and S. Doc.
9. Moreover S. David sent over some of his Diciples into Ireland,. ap. Vsser  9. who grew famous there for their learning and sanctity. Among which one o the most illustrious as was Saint Aean: concerning whom Giraldus thus wites, S. An, call'd by the Irish S. Maidoc, fmous for his vertues and learning in Divine , having received permission from his . David and his Brethren, with their be|n  sayd into Ireland. Where after he had  fame by his piety and miracles, at  he built a Monastery near the Citty of , where having collected a good number of  Brethren he consecrated himself to the Service of God, living according to the form and ule which he had received from his Pious Father S. David at Menevia. Which Rule was the ame that was observed by the Monks in Aegypt, as we read in the Antiquities of Glastonbury.
10. This S. Aedan was afterward Bishop of Fern, and Metropolitain of Leinster, whilst S. David was yet alive, whom he used to con|sult in affairs of difficulty, as we read in the Nameles Authour of the life of S. Lugid, call'd also S. Moluca, in these terms, Saint Moedhog, nam'd otherwise S Aedan the most Holy Bishop of Leinster would needs goe bond Sea into Brittany to his Master S. David Bishop there, to demand of h whom he would recom|mend for his Spirituall Father to heare his  in Ieland The life of this S. Aedan is  in Capgrave: where notwithstanding he is tiled only Abbot, and not Bishop.


XX. CHAP.XX. CHA.

1.2. c. Of S. Davids death, and buriall: The Time, and Place: and of his Suc|cessour.

1. AFter many years spent by the Holy Bishop David at Menevia in the exer|cise of all Christian vertues, it pleased al|mighty God in love to him, and just anger to the ungratefull Brittains to translate this burning and shining Light from earth to heaven, where it now shines most glo|riously to all eternity.
2. As touching the year of his death, con|sidering the great diversity in Historians about his age, it must needs be involved in great uncertainty. For Giraldus Cambrensis, and Iohn of Tinmouth affirm S. David to have lived one hundred forty seaven years, ha|ving been bot in the year of Grace four hundred sixty two, and dying in the year six hundred and nine, when S. Gregory the Great was Pope.Pits. in S. David. Pits likewise allows one hundred forty six years to his age, and places his death in the year of Grace five hundred forty four: By which account his birth would fall in the year of Christ three hun|dred ninety eight. But both these assertions seem exorbitant: the former placing his Death much too late: and the latter his Birth as much too early.
3. It is therefore more consonant to the order of Brittish affairs and story,Vsser. saith learned B. Vsher, and better agrees with the Character of the time assign'd by Giraldus to affirm with Pits, that he dyed in the year of Grace five hundred forty four, and that at his death he was fourscore and two years old and no more: For in that year the Ca|lends of March fell on the third Feria, as Gi|raldus says they did when he dyed.
4. Let us now view what things are re|ported to have occurr'd before his death.Ap. Capgrav. in vita S. Da+vid. When the houre of his dissolution approached, saith the Authour of his life in Capgrave, the Angell of our Lord appear'd to him, and said, The day so much desir'd by thee is now at hand: Prepare thy selfe, for on the Calends of March our Lord Iesus Christ attended with a mul|titude of Angels will come to meet thee. Where|upon he answerd, O Lord, dismisse now thy ser|vant in peace. The Brethren who assisted him, having heard the sound of these words, but not well understanding the sence, fell prostrate to the ground in great feare. Then the Holy Bishop cryed with a loud voyce, Lord Iesus Christ, receive my Spirit. Whereupon when the Brethren made loud complaints, he asswaged their sorrow with mild and comfortable words, saying, My Brethren, be constant in your good Profession, and beare unani|mously

to the end that yoke which you have undergone: Observe and fulf whatsoever things you have seen and heard from mee. Ad from that houre to the day of his death, the week fol|lowing, he remained in the Church exhorting and encouraging them.
5. When the houre of his departure was come, our Lord Isus Christ vouch-safed his presence, as he had promis'd by his Angel, to the infinite consolation of our Holy Father. Who at the sight of him exulted wholly in Spirit, saying to him, O my Lord, Take mee after thee. And with these words in our Lords company he gave up his Spirit to God, on the Calends of March, which being associated to a Troop of Angells, with them mounted up to heaven, in the year of his age one hundred forty seaven.
Vit. S. Ken|grn.6. The same Authour further adds, That this Holy Bishops death, by an Angel divulging it, instantly was spread through all Brittany and Ireland. Suitable whereto is this passage in the life of S. Kentigern: Whilst the servant of God Kentigern one day continued his prayers with more then ordinary attention and devotion, his face seemd as on fire: the sight whereof fill'd the by standers with great amazement. When Prayers were ended, he began bitterly to lament: And when his Disciples humbly ask'd him the reason of his sorrow, he sate a while silent; at last he said, My dear children, know for certain that the Holy Bishop David, the glory of Brittany, the Father of his countrey is this day dead, he has escaped out of the prison of his body, and is flown to heaven. Beleive me, I my self have seen a multitude of Angels conducting him in to the joy of his Lord: and our Lord himself at the en|trance of Paradice hath crownd him with glory and honour. Know also that Brittany which is depriv'd of so great a light, will a long time mourn the absence of so powerfull a Patron. He it was who oppos'd himself to the sword of our Lord which was half drawn out for the destruction of that nation in revenge of their sins and impeni|tence. Now will God deliver up Brittany to strange Nations which know him not, and Pagans shall empty the Island of its inhabitants. Christian Re|ligion shall be utterly dissipated in it, till the time prefix'd by God be ended: But after that, it shall through the mercies of our Lord be restor'd to its former state, yea to a far better and happier. How true this Prophecy of S. Kentigern was the following Story will demonstrate.
7 S. David was buried in his own Church of Menevia, which, saith Geffrey of Monmouth,Galfrid. l. 11. cap 3. he had loved above all other Monasteries of his Diocese because S. Patrick who had prophecied of his Nativity, had been the founder of it. He adds, that it was by the command of Malgo King of the Venedotae that he was there buried: And that after five hundred years he was solemnly cano|niz'd by Pope Calixtus the second of that name. The Church in which he was buried was de|dicated to S. Andrew, but in succeeding times took S. David for the Patron, by whose name it and the whole Diocese was call'd S. Davids.
8. The Memory of his Sanctity was so pre|cious, that within a few years after his death the visiting of his Church was a great de|votion of those times.Grald. in escript. Cambr. S. Oudoceus Succes|sour of S. Theliau in the Bishoprick of Landaff after a Pilgrimage to visit the Monuments of the Holy Apostes at Rome, made another to the Church of S. David. And afterward when any one had a desire to goe in devotion to Rome and was hindred either by the diffi|culties or dangers of the iourney, he might equall the merit of such a pilgrimage by twice visiting the Church of S. Davids, as ap|pears by a Dstick common in those times expressing so much. Such was either the pious credulity of that age, or perhaps that compensation was allow'd by Popes.
9. The Successour of S. David in the Bi|shoprick of Menevia was called Kinoc or Cenac, who was translated thither from the See of S. Patern. But his and many of his Succes|sours Gests have been buried in obscurity, for the Name of Saint David did so fill the Church of Menevia for severall ages, that the mention of his successours has been omitted.


XXI. CHAP.XXI. CH.

1.2.3. Death of King Otta, and K. Cerdic.

1. BEcause we would not discontinue the Gests of the famous Bishop S. David we have pursued them severall years beyond the date and season whereto we are arrived in the Generall History of the Ecclesiasticall state of Brittany. Which disorder, hereafter also oft to be committed, especially in the lives of particular Saints, we expect will find pardon, because therby a greater disorder will be avoyded of delivering their actions peece-meale and by shreds to the Readers preju|dice. We will therefore return to the place from which we made this diversion.
2. In the year of Grace five hundred thirty two Otta King of Kent dyed,A. D. 52. leaving his Son Irmeric Successour in his Kingdom: who was illustrious for nothing more then in that he was Father to the glorious and happy King Ethelhert the first Christian King among the Saxons.
3. Two years after dyed also Cerdic King of the West-Saxons in the sixteenth year of his Raign,A. D. 54. to whom succeeded his Son Kenric in all his Dominions, except the Isle of Wight, which he left to his Sisters Son Witgar, whom he dearly lov'd, both for propinquity of blood and military skill.



A. D. 59
XXII. C.XXII. CHAP.

1.2. c Of S. Iohn a Brittish Saint, in France.
4.5 c. Of S. Mochia a Brittish Saint in Ireland.

1. IN our ancient English Martyrologe the death of a Holy Brittish Preist is as|signd to the year five hundred thirty eaven. His name was Iohn: and his fame was more celebrated in forrain Nations then his own. The great commotions of Brittany and barbarous cruelty of the Saxons compel|led great numbers to seek means of serving God abroad, which they could not find at home. Among whom this Holy Preist Iohn was one who retir'd himselfe into France, and thog he spent his lie i solitude and prayer in the Province of Tours, yet it peas'd God by a miracle after his death to  known his Sanctity Which Miracle I shld scarce have mention'd in this History, were it not that I find it related by a famous Bshop S. Gregory o Tours, in whose Provnce thi Holy Preist liv'd, and who might him|self have been an eye-witnes o it The re|lation given by him is as followeth:2. Not far from this Church of Caon rests the sacred Holy of a certain Preist named Iohn.Greg. Turon de  Con+fessor. c. 2. He was by Nation a Bittain, and living here with great devotion and piety, our Lord was pleas'd by  miraculously to restore health to many. He the better to attend to divine love, avoyded the ight of men, confining himself to a little Cell nd Oratory over against the Church of Caon: here  a little Orchard cultivated by himself he had planted a few lawrel-trees, which now are o encreased, that the boughs of them being drawn ogether arch-ise doe afford a very pleasing hade. Vnder those laurels his custom was to sit, reading or writing, as he thought fit. After his death among the said trees whose wide-stretch'd branches made a very commodious shade, there was one which through age was quite withe|red. Then he to whom the care of the place was committed dg'd up the roots of the said dry tree, and of the body of it hewed out a seat or bench, upon which when he was weary, or would seriously me|ditate on busines, he was used to sitt. After he had made such use of the said seat the space of two years or mre, a thought of remorse came into his heart, I beleive by divine Inspiration, which for|ced him to say, Alas Sinner that I am, hy doe I for mine own convenience make use of a seat fram'd of the tree which so holy a Preist planted with his on hand. Having said this, he presently took a ade and digging a dep hole in the ground presently, he putt the seat into it after he had cutt off the eet which supported it: and then cover'd it with earth Now behold a great wonder! The very next spring this dry bench, thus buried as hath been said, sprouted forth into green bran|ches, as the other treese did: which prosper'd so well that at this day there are proceeded from it severall young trees five or sixe feet high, and some higher, which every year by our Lords bles|sing doe more and more flourish.
3 The Centuriators of Magdeburg tak no|tice of this Saint and of the Orchard planted by him,Magdeb. Ce 6. but conceale this Wonder. He is likewise commemorated in the Gallcan Mar|tyrologe on the seaven and twentieth of Iune.Martyr l. Gall. c. 27. In.
4. And as the French Church doth celebrate the memory of this holy Brittish Peist Iohn, so doth the Irish that of S. Mcthas, who by B. Vshers supputation dyed also this year He in the beginning of the Saxon troubles forsook his countrey, and pass'd over into Ireland: And, according to the narration of of Iocelinus,Iocelin. in vit Patri. . 34. coming to a certain place near the sea calld Lugh (or Louth) very pleast and delicious: there he resolved to repose himself. In the same place S. Patrick had formerly had a resolution to build a Church: but was commanded by an Angel to con|sign that place to a certain Brittain named Mocthus,Vd  mord. 8 or Mocchaeus, who would shortly come thither and end his days with great sanctity: which he accordingly did. He was oftimes there visited by S. Patrick, whose Disciple he became: and withall took the care of twelve leapers recommended to him by S Patrick. He prophecied of the Holy man Columba. And was afterward consecrated Bishop of Louth by S. Patrick. As touching the censure inflicted on him by S. Patrick,Id. ibid f 87 that because he waver'd in his Faith touching the long lives attributed to the ancient Pa|triarks in Genesis, he himself should live three hundred years: so long a delay of his happines being to be his punishment; this is deservedly reiected by the learned Bishop Vsher: As likewise, that S. Patrick before his death recommended to him the care of his See of Armagh. For Records of good au|thority doe leave it out of doubt that S. Be|nignus was design'd by S. Patrick in his life|time his Successour in that See. The memory of S. Moctha is celebrated in the Annals of Vlster on the thirteenth day before the Ca|lends of September.



A. D. 539.
XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Kentigern made Bishop, being onely five and twenty years old.
5.6. c. Certain defects in his Ordination: Dispensed with by S. Gregory the Great.

A. D. 539.1. IN the year five hundred thirty nine S. Kentigern being then no more then five and twenty years old, was consecrated Bishop of Glasco. Concerning his birth in the year of Grace five hundred and fourteen, and how his Mother in his conception was de|luded by some unknown person, insomuch as he was vulgarly esteemd to have been the Son of a Virgin, as likewise how great severity was used to her by her Father when she was known to be with child, how she was first cast headlong from a high Mountain, and miraculously escaping that danger, was expos'd to the sea alone in a boat without Oares, and by a wonderfull Providence landed safely in the Northern parts among the Scotts, and there immediatly dilivered of her child, and lastly how both the Mother and Infant were nourish'd by a Holy man calld Servanus, hath already been decla|red.
2. When he was capable of learning, the same S. Servanus took great care to instruct him in knowledge and piety, wherin he proffited admirably, so that he was beloved by his Master beyond all his companions: who therore gave him the Sirname of Munghu,Vssr. in Pri|. f. 64. which signifies Dearly beloved: By which name the Scotts vulgarly call him to this day, saith B. Vsher.
3. How he came afterward to be elected Bishop,Ap. Capgrav. in Kenigern. Iohn of Tinmonth thus relates: When he was come to an age wherein he might dispose his own actions, the man of God Kentigern went from his Master to a place called Glashu, where he liv'd alone in great abstinence, untill the King and Clergy of that Region, calld then Cumbria (now Galloway) together with the other Chri|stians, who were but few chose him for their Pa|stour and Bishop, notwithstanding the utmost resistance he could make. And sending for one single Bishop out of Ireland they caused him to be consecrated after the then usuall custome among the Brittains and Scotts: For at that time a practise had gott footing to use no other Ceremo|nies in the Consecration of a Bishop, but onely the infusion of Sacred Chris on their heads with invocation of the Holy Spirit, benediction and imposition of hands. For those Islanders, remov'd as it were out of the world, by meanes of their continuall infestations by Pagans, were become ignorant in the Ecclesiasticall Canons. For which reason the Law of the Church con|descended to them, and admitted an excuse in this regard, so that Ecclesiasticall censures did not touch them. Notwithstanding S. Kentigern, as we shall declare presently, did make full satisfa|ction for the defect and errour committed in his Consecration.
4. His Diocese extended it self according to the limits of the Kingdom of Cumbria, from that fa|mous Wall from Sea to Sea which had formerly been built to hinder the Enemies incursions into the Provinces of the Brittains, as far as to the Rer Ford, or Scottish Sea, Northerly. It was in the five and twentieth year of his age that he was conse|crated Bishop.
5. In this Episcopall Consecration there were more then one defect, and transgression of the Canons: 1. First hi age, that he was made Bishop being no more then five and twenty years old, wheras in the Council of Agde (Agathensi) assembled not above three and thirty years before this time, and in which probably severall Brittish Bishops were pre|sent, a Decree was made,Concil Agath That no Metropolitan should presume to ordain any one Bishp before  was arrived to thirty years, that is, the age of a perfect man: least by reason of his youth he should, as it sometimes happens, incurre some ault an errour. 2. Again the Fathers of the first Nicen Council orderd:oncil 1. N. en. c. 6. That if any one were made a Bishop without the iudgment and conent of the Metropolitan, he was forbidden to exercise his Episcopall function. Now in this Ordination of S. Kentigern there was no consent of any Metropo|litan, nor so much as concurrence of any Bishop of the neighbouring Diocese. 3 Thirdly the first Canon of the Apostle, confirm'd by many Councils, enjoynd that every Bishop shoul be ordain'd by at least two or three Bishops:Cn. i. Apost. Whereas S. Kentigern was co~secrated by one single Bishop, and him a stranger of a orri Nation. 4 Fourthly in the consecration of Bi|shops the Ancient Fathers for the dignity o that Degree ordained many Rites to be obser|ved, besides such as belong'd to the essence o that Sacrament: as annointing the Head with Chrism with invocation of the Holy Spirit, signin the person with the Sign of the Crosse, imposition of hands, together with severall other Rites ad|joyned for the adorning the house of God, a defect wherof did not vitiate the Sacrament, but person only.
6. Now in all these points some defects there were in the Ordination of S. Kentigern, which defects when afterward he calld them to mind, caused great unquietnes and re|morse in him. But whereas the foresaid Au|thour says, That by a custom introduced among the Brittains this Sacrament of Ordination of Bishops was practis'd thus imperfectly: it appears that such a deficiency was crept in among them, and this only since the Saxons entring caused so great disturbances in the Island, that the Ecclesiasticall Canons were either for|gotten, or if remembred, could hardly be practised. Either there were no Metropolitans, or they were so far distant, that in those dan|gerous times, no accesse could be had to

them: Most places wanted Bishops, and even inhabitants; so that it was a wonder that even the Holy Chrism could be supplied, which no doubt was furnish'd out of Ireland.
7. Hence it is manifest that these disor|ders and neglect of Ecclesiasticall Canons were an Errour veniall, because unavoydable: that in former peaceable times the practise was otherwise, and the Canons were duly observed: So that the purity of the Brittains Faith was hereby nothing prejudiced. There|fore some Protestant Controvertists doe unrea|sonably collect from hence that the Brit|tains before S. Gregories time did not in their Ordinations conform themselves to the Ro|man Church, but received their Rites from I know not which Eastern Churches: Whereas no Eastern Churches can be found which ne|glected any of these Ceremonies: and as for the Roman, it is evident by what hath been formerly declared, that the Brittains in their Discipline establish'd by Councils demanded a confirmation from the Sea Apostolick.
8. But a more Authentick proof of the respect and dependance which the Brittish Churches had of the Roman, cannot be ima|gin'd, then the behaviour of S. Kentigern himself. For being afterwards afflicted in mind for the foresaid defects in his Ordina|tion, he did not seek for Counsel or remedy from any Metropolitains in Brittany, Ireland or France, but only from Rome and the Su|preme Bishop thereof, to whom the Custody of Ec|clesiasticall Canons was by the Church commit|ted, and who had authority to enjoyn the observation of them, to punish the trans|gression, and to supply or dispence with the defects either by negligence or necessity occurring in the execution of them.
Ap. Capgrav. in S. Kenti+gern.9. This is expressly declar'd by the fore|said Iohn of Tinmouth in his prosecution of the Life of S. Kentigern: where he tells us, That the Man of God went seaven severall times to Rome, where he simply and particularly layd open his whole life, his Election, Consecration and all the accidents which had befall him to S. Gregory the speciall Apostle of the English. Vpon which the Holy Pope perceiving that he was a sincere man of God and full of the Grace of Gods holy Spirit, confirm'd his Consecration, knowing that it came from God. Moreover at his often and earnest request, yet with great unwil|lingnes, he condescended to supply those small de|fects which were wanting in his Consecration: and having done this, he dismissed him to the work of the Ministery which was enjoyn'd him by the Holy Ghost.
10. Hence appears that in the Ordination of S. Kentigern nothing was omitted that was of any necessity, since it was only upon his importunity and for satisfaction of his Scrupulosity that S. Gregory supplied the omissions of certain Rites required by the Canons. The greatest fault that the Holy Bi|shop could impute to himself was his being consecrated by one onely Irish Bishop, against the Expresse Canon of a General Council.A. D. 541. But considering the unquietnes and danger of the times, and the want of Bishops, though there was a transgression of the words of the Canon, yet there was none of the mind of it, which certainly does not oblige to impossibilites. And this was the resolution of the sence of it which the same S. Gregory gave to S. Augustin, answering the like dif|ficulty, in these words: In the Church of the Angli,Greg. M. wherein at present thou art the onely Bishop, thou canst not ordain any other Bishop, but thy self alone without the concurrence of other Bishops.


XXIV. CHAP.XXIV. C.

1.2. S. Kentigern Vertues.

1. HOW S. Kentigern behav'd himself in discharge of his Episcopall Of|fice is thus further declar'd by the same Au|thour: After his Consecration,Ap. Capgrav. in S. Kenti|gern. during the whole course of his life his custom was to eat only every third day, and sometims, fourth: and his food was bread, Milk, cheese and butter. For he alway abstain'd from flesh and wine, or any other drink which could distemper. Next his skin he wore a very rough hayr-cloath, and over that a garment made of goat-shins together with a close Cowle: and his uppermost clathing was a white Albe. He always wore a Stole: and caried a Pa|storall staffe or Crosier, not sphericall, nor gilded and sett with precious stones, but of simple wood, bowing back at the toop: and in his hand he ever held a book. Thus he was always in a readines to exercise his function, whensoever necessity or reason requir'd, He lay in a stone-chest made hollow like a Biere: under his head lay a stone: and under his body were cast cinders and a Cilice of hayr: in which posture he with some unwil|lingnes admitted a short sleep: after which he would plunge himself in cold water, and so re|cite the whole Psalter. This customary practise neither snow nor rain did interrupt, nor any thing but sicknes or journeying: and then he would redeem a discontinuation of these austerities with some spirituall exercise. Thus does that Au|thour describe S. Kentigerns private life, by many other arguments showing him to be a man absolutely perfect in all vertues.
2.Id. ibid. Consequently he relates other actions of his in order to the discharge of his Epis|copall Office, saying, He fix'd his Episcopal See in the Citty of Glasco: where likewise he ordain'd a great Congregation (of Religious men) who liv'd according to the form of the Primitive Church, in community of all things. The Infidels in his Diocese he converted to the Faith. Apo|stats and Hereticks he by his sound doctrin re|call'd to the bsom of our Holy Mother the Church. He every where threw down Idols and Images of Devils, and built some Churches. He distin|guish'd

Parishes by their certain bounds.A. D. 542. He was always travelling to gain soules to God, ne|ver riding on hors-back, but in imitation of the Apostles always going a foot. And because he would not eat his bread in idlenes, his custom was to labour with his hands in agriculture. His other Gests we shall relate here after.


XXV. C.XXV. CHAP.

1.2. c. Mordred King Arthurs Nephew rebelles: He is pursued by King Ar|thur: and both slain.
7.8. King Arthur dyed, and was buried at Glastonbury.
9. His appearing again long expected by the Welsh.
10 11. c. His Monument discovered in after ages.

A. D. 540.1. ABout this time it was that our fa|mous King Arthur found at last re|pose in his grave, which he could never en|joy during life. The manner how he was brought to his end is thus related by our Historians.
2. In an expedition which upon some unknown occasion he made abroad he left the administration of his Kingdom to a Ne|phew by his Sister,Westmonast. hic. Antiquit. Glaston. and Son of Loth King of the Picts called Mordred. Who taking advantage of his Vncles absence, invaded the throne upon a pretence that King Arthur, was a bastard, as being born not in lawfull ma|riage. And to this treason he added the crime of incest, violently taking his Vncles wife Queen Guenhumara. Moreover to strengthen him self, he entred into a Confederacy with the King of the West-Saxons, to whom he quiet|ly yeilded severall Provinces.
A. D. 541.3. These infamous crimes being come to the ears of King Arthur, he presently retur|ned into Brittany, inflamed with a rage and hatred unquencheable against his abomina|ble kinsman. Mordred was prepared to hin|der his landing: at which time a cruell batell was fought between them, in which Angu|slus King of Albania, and Walwan another Nephew of King Arthur were slain. Not|withstanding at last with infinite difficulty he landed: And renewing the fight he made a great slaughter of his enemies, and compel|led Mordred to fly to Winchester. Whither he was with great fury pursued by King Arthur: where in a second batell after much blood shed Mordred was again putt to flight, which he directed towards Cornwal. But King Arthur not ceasing to follow, at last overtook him neer the River Camblan: in which place the controversy between them was ended, but fatally to them both.
4. For Mordred having ranged his army, in a desperat fury rushed among his enemies, resolved rather to dye then once more to shew his back to them. In this co~bat, which continued almost a whole day, after horri|ble blood-shed on both sides, King Arthur with the courage and fury of a lyon rushed into the troop where he knew Mordred was: and making way with his sword, at last with horrible slaughter dispersed his enemies. There fell the Traytour Mordred, and with him severall Saxon Commanders, Cheldric, Ela|phius, Egbrith and Bruning, and many thou|sands with them.
5. But this Victory cost King Arthur his life also: For in the combat he received a mortall wound: Whereupon he was conveyed into the Isle Avallonia (now Glastonbury) by the charity of a kinswoman of his, a noble Ma|tron called Morganis. This gave the foolish Brittish Bards occasion to invent the story of a Faery Goddesse called Morganis which caried the Body of King Arthur by Magical skill into Avallonia, with a promise that she would cure his wounds, and that he should return with his former courage and strength to govern his Brittains: And for this reason du|ring many years, yea ages, his return was ex|pected by them as foolshly as the coming of the Messias is by the Iewes.
6. When Queen Guenhumara heard of the return of her husband, and his war with his Nephew, she fled in great hast to the Citty Car-leon, where she took the Habit of Reli|gion among the Nunns in the Monastery of S. Iulius the Martyr.
7. The true reason why King Arthur would be caried to the Monastery of Glastonbury doubtles was, partly to prepare himself more perfectly for death in the company and by the assistance of the Holy Monks living there: and likewise that after his death he might be buried among such a world of Saints as reposed there from the beginning of Chri|stianity.Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 60. The like design we read of in Constan|tin, for he ordaind his buriall in like man|ner, to the end he might be partaker of the Suffrages of so many Saints,  of the pray|ers of such as in succeeding times should come to visit their Monuments.
8. King Arthur before his death gave unto the said Monastery Brent-march and Poulden with other lands beside:Antiquit. Glaston. Which the Pagan Angli took away, but afterward being con|verted to the Faith restored with advantage. He appointed likewise for his Successour a kinsman of his called Constantin: and having recommended himself to the Prayers of the Monks,A. D. 542. he dyed happily, and after a Christian manner, was buried with a Crosse.
9. His conveyance to Glastonbury was, it seems by own order, done with great secrecy: and by the same order his death and place of burial was studiously co~ceald. The reason is given by Mathew of Westminster in these words:Westmonast. hc. The dying King was desirous to be hidden, least his enemies should insult, and his freinds be molested for so great a calamity. And hence it is that since our Histories doe relate nothing of his

death and buriall, the Brittish Nation out of their great affection to him, doe contend that he is still alive. And on this occasion was invented the Prophecy fathered on Merlin the Magician,Malmsbur. de Regib. l. 3. f. 115. that he should appear and raign once more. Last|ly Malmsburiensis affirms that in his time (who dyed in the year of Grace one thousand one hundred forty two) the Sepulcher of King Arthur could no where be found: whereas the Monument of his Heroical Nephew Walwin Prince of a Territory called Walwerth, had lately been found in the time of King William, near the Sea|coast, and that it was fourteen foot long.
10. Notwithstanding a little while after in the raign of King Henry the Second, by the pious industry of certain devout persons King Arthurs Monument was at last found, and the expectation of his return utterly vanished among the Welsh Nation. The man|ner how it was found together with the description of it, we have in severall of our Historians,Mat. Paris. A. D. 1561. Girald. am+br. in spec Eccl ap. Vser. 119. as Mathew Paris, and Giraldus Cambrensis, who affirms that the Abbot who found it shewd him the Crosse which lay over King Arthurs body, the characters whereof he curiously read, c.
11. But the most authentick account here|of we may receive from the Great Table of Glastonbury framed on purpose to continue the memory of the said Invention,Tab. Mag. Glaston apud Vher in Pri|mord. f. 117. a copy whereof is preserved by B. Vsher, in this te|nour: In this Island Avallonia, or rather this Tomb of Saints at Glastonbury, doe rest King Arthur the flower of the Kings of Brittany, and Guenha|vera his Queen, who after their decease were honourably buried near the old Church between two stone-Pyramids, heretofore nobly engraven: And in the same place have their bodyes rested for many ages, to wit, six hundred twenty eight years, till the time of Henry de Soili, who after the burning of the said Church was Abbot of the same place. The which said Abbot after many admonitions by severall persons comman|ded men to digg between the said Piramids, to try whether they could find the Kings body: but before they began to digg, the place was all en|compassed with cortains. They digged therefore exceeding deep, and at last found a very great Biere of wood altogether shutt: which with their instruments they opened, and within it discove|red the Kings body, and a certain Crosse of Lead, of which one whole side was filled with this Inscri|ption, Here lyes buried the famous King Ar|thur in the Island Avallonia. Then they opened the Tomb of the Queen, and the hayrs of her head were spread over her body, and seemd as if she had been lately buried: but assoon as they touched them, they fell all into dust. The Abbot then and Convent with great ioy and exceeding honour transferrd their Bodies from thence, and placed them in a double Monument of stone nobly en|graven on the out side, in the great Church: to wit, the Kings body by it self at the head of the Tomb: and the Queens on the East side.
11. As touching the two Pyramids between which King Arthurs Monument was first placed, and the ancient, scarcely legible, inscriptions on them, which Malmsburien|sis has copied out, we gave our opinion of them when we treated of the first founda|tion of the Monastery of Glastonbury, suppo|sing that they were the names of certain Holy persons there anciently buried, among which King Arthur prudently desired to be placed, for the reasons afore sayd. Yet since among them there are found some names which savour of a Saxon Originall, it may therefore seem that some of those per|sons were buried, and their names inscri|bed in after times: But withall, since the Southern parts of Brittany had of ancient times been possessed by nations of a German originall, as the Belga, Arrebates, c. why might not many of their names continue after their language was changed?


XXVI. CHAP.XXVI. C.

1.2. Folly of those who deny that ever there had been such a King as Arthur.
3. The Crosse a proof of his being a Chri|stian.

1. THE foresaid testimonies and irre|fragable Monuments doe evidently declare the unreasonablenes of some late Writers assertion, that King Arthur was neither a King nor a Christian, yea that there never was any such man, but that his actions and euen his being were merely the crea|tures and fictions of idle dreaming Bards.
2. Among such censorious Writers,Genebard. Gene|brard thus positively presumes to write, Geffrey of Monmouth and Bale doe most vainly and falsely faign that their Great Arthur, who never had a being, as may be understood from Saint Beda,Beda l. 1. c. 16. did in the time of Clodoveus King of France destroy the Saxons, and performed more wonderfull Exploits through the whole world almost, then Alexander the Great: That he was a Christian, c. Indeed that many foolish stories passe concerning him it cannot be denyed. But that it may be collected from S. Beda that there was never any such man is a mistake.Id. ibid. All that he says is, That Ambrosius Aurelian a modest man was the only person of the Roman stock who overlived the miseries of the Brittains, at the time when the Saxons first raised such Tragedies in the Island. He does not deny that he had Sons and grand-chil|dren:Gild. de Ex|cid. On the contrary Gildas expressly affirms that the Off-spring of Ambrosius in the times when he wrote did degenerate from the vertue of their Ancestors.
3. It cannot therefore be denyed that such a Prince governed the Brittains, as King Ar|thur, that his raign continued the space of about three and thirty years: that in the sea|ventieth year of his age he died, and was bu|ried after the Christian manner was suffi|ciently

testified by the Crosse over his Tomb.A. D. 528. Which Crosse was from the beginning esteemed through the whole Church an assured badge of Christianity, but in the beginning of the late Change, called a Reformation of Christianity, the Crosse which testified that King Arthur was a Christian, was by a person of quality a Protestant thrown down to testify that another sort of Christia|nity began then to arise. The first degree of Apostasy declar'd by the Emperour Iulian was the casting away the sign of the Crosse, which, saith S. Cyrill,Cyrill. Ca|. 3. Atha|nas. in vit. S. Aon. is the prime and immoveable foundation of the Faith profess'd by a Chri|stian, and which, according to the testimony of S. Athanasius, hath in every age trium|phed over all Superstition and Idolatry: Wereas of late the Crosse it self is accounted at the best to be superstition, and our Vene|ration of it, Idolatry.


XXVII. C.XXVII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of S. Iltutus.
4. His Vow of Chastity: blaspemed by the Centuriators, c.

1. BEfore we apply our selves to the nar|ration of the Gests, or indeed crimes, of the degenerate Successours of King Ar|thur, it will be expedient to celebrate the vertues and Sanctity of two Holy Brittish Saints, famous in that age, S. Iltutus and S. Sampson: the former, heretofore men|tion'd, dyed during that Heroicall Kings raign, but in what year is uncertain: the other flou|rish'd then, though his life was continued severall years after.
2. S. Iltutus (in the Gallican Martyrologe call'd S. Hildutus,Ap. Capgra i  S.  by others S. Elcutus) was the Son of a Noble Soldier nam'd Rican. His mo|ther was call'd Rieneguilida, daughter to the Prince of Lesser Brittany. In his childhood he was by his parents care instructed in learning: but being arrived to more years he applied himself to Martiall affaires. And hearing the report of the magnificence of his kinsman King Arthur, he resolved to visit him, by whom he was with great honour receiv'd. Afterward he went to the Prince of the Province, now call'd Glamorgan, by whom he became so highly esteem'd, that he was ad|vanced to the highest condition in that State, and next under him governed the Court.
Ib.3. After this he was counsell'd and perswaded by S. Cadocus, sirnamed Sophias, to forsake his secular habit and profession, and to consecrate the remainder of his life to the service of God, that so he might more assuredly attain to eternall happines and rewards. Iltutus thereupon yeilding his assent and submission to the words of the Holy man, relinquish'd the world, and retiring him|self to a commodious mansion liv'd there some time a solitary devout life. He is sayd by Pits to have been a Disciple of S. German of Aux|erre:A. D. 529 Afterward he had recourse to S. Dubri|cius then Bishop of Landaff,Pits in S. Iltut.. Ap. Cap grav. ibid. who gave him the Tonsure and Crown, badges of a Religious Pro|fession, and so dismiss'd him to his place.
4. Thus,Pits ibid. saith Pits, with the consent of his wife he vowd perpetuall Chastity, which was also by his wife observed. This his signall act of contempt of sensual pleasures is so displea|sing to the Centuriators of Magdeburg,Magdeburg. Cent. 6. c. 10 that although in the beginning of their Narra|tion touching his actions they had given this Character of him, That he was above all that liv'd in his Nation most eminently skilld in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and divine Philosophy: morever that he was adorned by Almighty God with the Spirit of Prophecy and knowledge of future things: Notwithstanding in the pursuit being to mention this Vow of Chastity, they not only contradict the former Character, but invent a most blasphemous lye, adding these words, Illutus was notoriously filld with the Spirit of Anti-Christ:Ibid. insomuch as out of contempt of mariage, and in opposition to the Apostles Doctrin, he repudiated his most chast wife, and moreover pluck'd out her eyes. Which most impudent lye, reported likewise by Bale an Apostate and transgressour too of his Vow of Chastity, has not the least ground in our ancient Records touching his Gests.
5. The Memory of his learning and san|ctity is to this day preserv'd in Glamor|ganshire, where there is a town and Church calld Llan-lwit, contractedly from Llan-iltut (not far from Llan-carvan the habitation of S. Cadocus) where S. Iltutus diligently prea|ched Gods word, and moreover instituted a Colledge of Schollars, whom he instructed in learning and piety. Among whom the most illustrious was S. Sampson, of whom wee shall treat presently, and who by his Masters directions embraced likewise a Religious Pro|fession.
6. Severall fables and unsavoury Miracles reported in Capgrave touching S. Iltutus, de|serve to be omitted:Ap. Cap grav. ibid. Neither seems there to be any iust ground for this passage in the conclusion of his life: That when his last end approach'd, he return'd into lesser Brittany, and there in the Citty of Orle, after many signs and miracles wrought by him, he commended his body to the earth, and his Spirit to God, on the eight day before the Ides of November. For doubtles if he had dyed in Lesser Brittany the Gallican Martyrologe would not have been si|lent in that particular: Wheras it mentions nothing of him but that he was a Disciple of S. Germanus of Auxerre whilst he preach'd against the Pelagians in Brittany;Martyrolog. Gallican 7 November. that he was the Instru|ctour of S. Sampson Bishop of Dole and of many other illustrious Monks: and lastly that he was emi|nent for the Spirit of Prophecy and many Mira|cles. Which Martyrologe differs in one parti|cular from ours, in which he is sayd to have been the Disciple of S. Germanus Bishop of Paris, not of Auxerre.



A. D. 540.
XXVIII. CHAP.XXVIII. CHAP.

1.2. Of S. Sampson.
3.4 Of S. Piro.
5. S. Sampson an Arch-bishop in Brittany: and where.
6. c He caries the Pall to Dole in Lesser Brittany: which Church therefore pre|tended an exemption from Tours.
8. Of S. Conaid, or S. Mein.

1. AS touching S. Iltutus his Disciple, S. Sampson, he was born in Great Brittany in the Province of the Dimetae or South-wales, now calld Glamorganshire: He descended from Noble parents: His Fathers name was Amon (as we read in B. Vsher) and his Mothers,Vsser in Pri|mord. f. 531. Anne, who was born in the next Province, calld Venetica from the cheif Citty Caer-guent,Ap. Capgrav. in Sampson. or Venta Silurum. His parents ha|ving liv'd many years childlesse, at last by their frequent fasting, Alms and prayers obtained him of God.
Pitt in Sampson.2. In his younger years he became a worthy Disciple of S. Iltutus, saith Pits from Le|land, from whom he learn'd human knovledge, in|tegrity of life, and Monasticall institution in a Monastery which a little before he had founded by the assistance of a Holy man calld Piro.
3. Concerning this Holy man we read in Vincentius this testimony:Vincent. in ec. hist. c. 21. c. 109. There was, saith he, a certain Island not far distant from the Monastery of S. Iltutus in which another Monastery was built by a holy man named Piro. Thither did S. Sam|pson hasten by Gods guidance and the advice of his Master S. Iltutus: and there did he lead a perfect and Angelicall life. He was in his con|versation aiable, persevering in good works, and vigilant in prayer c. Not long after, Piro being prevented by Death, the Holy man Sampson was by the unanimous suffrages of the Convent chosen Abbot.Vsser. in Ind. Chronol. This Election by B. Vshers computa|tion was made in the year of Grace five hun|dred and thirteen. And eight years before, when S. Petroc, as hath been said, came into Cornwal, the rustick Pagans living there gave him notice of the sanctity and austere life of this Holy man, who then liv'd not far from thence a solitary life.
Id. ib. A. D. 516.4. Four years after he had been chosen Abbot, saith B. Vsher, by the permission of the Holy Bishop Dubricius, he went into Ire|land in the company of certain Scotts who in their return from Rome came thither. His stay in Ireland was not long: for he was present at the Synod of Brevy in the year of our Lord five hundred and nineteen.
5. He was afterward ordain'd and con|secrated an Arch-bishop in Brittany: but nei|ther the time, nor place can assuredly be defined. But that S. Sampson a Brittish Arch-bishop went out of this Island into Lesser Brit|tany, and caried over with him the Pall, which was the ensign of his dignity, is cer|tain beyond all controversy. A great de|bate there was in the time of Pope Innocent the third whether the Pall was tranferd from York or from Menevia, Mathew Paris declares his opinion that it was from York:Mat. Paris. A. D. 199 Girald Camb de Eccls Menev. ist. 2 But Giraldus Cambrensis in his Dialogue con|cerning the Church of Menevia relating this controversy, brings in Pope Innocent thus obiecting in the behalf of the Church of York, Yea but this Sampson Bishop of Dole, as the tradition is, had formerly been Arch-Bishop of York. Wherto Giraldus thus answers, Saving your Reverence, the case is otherwise: for the History of the Church of Dole affirms him to be ours at Menevia, and to have relation to no other Church in Brittany. Hence it is that in the Sequence sung in that Church on the Festivity of S. Sampson it is expressly said, That the Prelate of Menevia was transferd to the su|preme Dignity of the Church of Dole. As for the Advocats in behalf of the Church of York they are deceived by an equivocation of the Name, because in their Records they find the name of an Arch-bishop Sampson. And ano|ther plea which those of York had for their cause was a supposititious Prophecy of Mer|lin: That the dignity of London should adorn Canterbury; And the seaventh Pastour of York should be honour'd in Lesser Brittany.
6. The debate therfore is generally con|cluded to the advantage of the Church or Menevia, in which S. Sampson is supposed to have succeeded in the place of Kinorus who was next to S. David. Now the Church o Menevia being a Metropolitan Church, enioying all the Priviledges of the Church of Caer-leon, the Archbishop thereof by consequence wore a Pall, the Ensign of that Dignity. Which Pall was by S. Sampson caried over to Dole in esser Brittany in the year of Grace five hundred sixty six, at which time the whole Province of Menevia was almost depopulated by a raging pestilential disease, as hath been ob|served by Roger Hoveden, Harpsfeild, Sigebertus and others:Hapsf. c. 27. in 6 prim. the Holy Bishop was unwilling to avoyd the danger: But his freinds being urgent, he took ship and landed in Ar|morica.
7. Being arrived there he was admitted into great favour by Childebert then King of France:Gallican. Mart. 28. Nouemb. and with his licence and contribution founded a Monastery: where he lead a life wholly employ'd in Divine meditations: and by his most holy example and admonitions directed many Disciples in the same way. Thus we read in the Gallican Marty|rologe.
8. S. Sampson in his voyage took with him a companion of suitable holines call'd S. Conaid, vulgarly by the French named S. Mein, who probably is the same which otherwise is is stiled S. Mevennius, whose life hath been written by Roland  Nova-Villa: by whom he

is stiled the son of a Noble man of Great Brittany living in the Region of Venta (or Car-guent) in Ca~bria (S. Sampsons countrey:Roland. in vit. S. Concid.) That he receiv'd good education, having been by his parents recommended to S. Sampson of Menevia. One speciall Miracle is recorded to have been wrought by him,Martyrol. Gallic. 15. I. which was that by his prayers a fountain sprung forth in a dry soile, very effectuall for curing severall diseases, and specially the Scurvey (Psora) which therefore is vulgarly call'd the Disease of S. Mein. This is related in the Gallican Martyrologe on the fifteenth of Iune. He is suppos'd to have dyed in the year of Grace five hundred and ninety. And he is com|memorated likewise in our English Martyro|loge on the same day by the name of S. Main.
9. After that S. Sampson had spent some years in his Monastery of Dole, the Bishop of that Citty dying he was elected in his place. And having in his custody the Pall which he had worn formerly being Arch-bishop of Menevia, the same he made use of in his E|piscopall functions also at Dole. From whence his Successours Bishops of Dole taking advan|tage, assum'd likewise to themselvas the ho|nour of wearing a Pall, and consequently of challenging an Archiepiscopall Iurisdiction and an exemption from the power of their former Metropolitan the Archi-bishop of Tours. This they continued many ages, till the dayes of Pope Innocent the third, notwith|standing many oppositions and protesta|tions of the said Arch-bishops. And all that time the See of Menevia, or S. Davids, though acknowledged the prime Church and Metro|polis of Cambria, yet abstain'd from the Pall. For which cause Pope Eugenius the third under our King Henry the first subjected it to the See of Canterbury in the year of our Lord eleaven hundred forty eight.
10. Thirty three years S. Sampson with ad|mirable sanctity administred that Bishoprick, and in the year five hundred ninety nine re|ceiv'd his eternall Reward.Martyr. Gal. 28. Iulij. His body by reason of the frequent incursions of the Danes and Nor|mans, was removed from Dole to Orleans: Where it was receiv'd with such reverence, that a Church was built on purpose to keep it which to this day is dedicated to his honour, although destitute of that sacred pledge: which among many other Bodies of Saints was impiously burnt by those professed Enemies of Sacred things the Hugue|nots in the last age, who seised on that Citty. Thus we read in the Gallican Martyrologe on the twenty eighth of Iuly.Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2. f. 251. Some part of his Relicks was with great veneration repos'd in the Abbey of Middleton in Dorsetshire, which was built by King Ethelstan in expiation of being at least accessory to the murder of his brother Edwin in the year of Grace nine hundred thirty four.
11 His Successour in the See of Dole was his kinsman, and companion of his voyage, S. Maglore: concerning whom we shall treat in due place.


XXIX. CHAP.XXIX. C.

1.2. c. Of S. Malo, or Mahutus.

1. ANother Kinsman of S. Sampson call'd S. Maclovius,A. D. 540. or S. Malo, otherwise S. Mahutus, was famous at this time. He during the tempest rais'd in Brittany by the treason of Mordred against his Vnckle King Arthur, and the bloody war following, left the kingdom and pass'd likewise into Lesser Brittany, the common refuge of devout men in those times.
2. He was born in Brittany: His Fathers name was Went (He is call'd Hano in the Gal|lican Martyrologe) a Count and founder of the Citty by Historians call'd Guincensis. His Mo|ther was call'd Derwella, or Darwalla, and she being threescore years old was deliver'd of him on the Vigile of Easter in the valley of Llan-carvan in Glamorgan-shire.
3. In the same place at that time lived a Holy man call'd S. Brendan, Abbot of the Mo|nastery of Llan-carvan by whom this Infant so wonderfully born, was baptis'd, and afterwards educated in all vertue and piety. From his childhood he is reported to have shin'd gloriously by innumerable Miracles, saith, Harpsfeild, which indeed accompanied him all his life-time:Vincent. l. 21. c 9. Anton. tit. 12. c. 8. many of which are recorded by Vincentius and S. Antoninus, but reso|lutly declar'd to be impostures by the Centu|riators of Magdeburg; without any proof.
Camden. in Huntingd.4. Our learned Camden affirms that the constant Tradition was that he was afterward made Bishop of a Citty in the Province of the Iceni, now Huntingdon shire, call'd by Antoni|nus Durosipons, because seated neer the River Ouse, but afterward the name was changed into Gormonchester, from Gormon, or Guthrum the Dane to whom upon his becoming Chri|stian King Aelfred gave those Provinces. Notwithstanding it is rather probable that the said Tradition was grounded on some mi|stake.
5. In succession of time upon occasion of the troubles afore said, S. Malo, or Mahutus went beyond sea into Lesser Brittany: where he liv'd in great sanctity. But when the fame thereof was spread abroad (as we read in the Gallican Martyrologe) he,Martyr. Gal. 15. Novemb. out of a contempt of his own glory, retir'd himself privily into a cer|tain bordring Island, where in his Eremiticall manner of living he express'd an Angelicall pu|rity. But the brightnes of the divine splendour discovered this light which endeavour'd to con|ceale it self. For when the Inhabitants of the neighbouring Island heard say that a certain stranger excelling in the gift of preaching and power of Divine Miracles did hide himself there from the conversation of men (this they were told by some who had receiv'd help from him) they in

a common assembly came, and drawing him by force out of his solitude, chose him for their Pa|stour: and inviting the neighbouring Bishops, they placed him in the Pontificall chair of the Citty of Aleth, and partly by entreaties, partly by mere force they compell'd him to be their Bishop and Ecclesiasticall Governour.
6. S. Machutus being thus exalted to this di|gnity shed forth abundantly the beames of that Divine Grace with which he was replenish'd, illustrating mens soules with the true knowledge of God, inflaming them with his Love, and affor|ding both admonitions and examples of all ver|tues: to which likewise he added a great efficacy by wonderfull operations and miracles. Insomuch as since the Apostles time wee read not of any one who wrought greater wonders in the name of Christ, then he: For with his word he calmed tempests; three dead persons he restor'd to life; to the blind he gave sight; by the sprinckling of Ho|ly Water he expell'd Devills; and quenched the poyson of serpents.
7. Neither was it in regard of Miracles onely that this Holy Bishop was like unto those Princes of our Faith, but resembled them likewise in his pa|tience which was oftimes put to the tryall: For he was assaulted by certain impious persons, and suffred many calamities for iustice and Religion, insomuch as in the end he was violently thrust out of his Episcopall Throne and Diocese, together with seaven other devout persons whom he had chosen for his especiall companions, and who imitated him in purity of living: yet this so heavy a Crosse he bore after our Lord with a courageous mind, as the Apostles heretofore did.
8. Attended with these holy men Saint Ma|hutus fled into Aquitain: and in the Citty of Xaintes (Santonum) he was most kindly enter|taind, and fatherly assisted by Saint Leontius Arch-bishop of Bourdeaux, and Metropolitan of that Citty: who there accommodated him with a convenient habitation for serving God. For the Holy Arch-bishop Leontius bore a most tender affection to him, admiring and reverencing the Divine Graces which he observ'd in him, whom he esteemd as sent from heaven to assist him in his Pastorall charge. For which reason, in all Visi|tations of his Diocese and Province he took him for his companion, earnestly beseeching him to be his assistant by his wholesom counsells, by his Prayers acceptable to God, and by the examples of his holy Life.
9. Moreover this Man of God, although so disgracefully and uniustly exild, was not unmindfull of his flock: but forgetting all iniu|ries, he dayly invok'd our Lords clemency for the conversion of that stubborn people. The Di|vine Majesty a last condescended to his Prayers, and by an Angel acquainted him that his flock was now penitent, and earnestly desir'd the return and favour of their Pastor: and that it was Gods will that he should repair to them, and restore to health that Region which was greivously afflicted with the scourges of Divine severity; that he should restore plenty to the barren earth, and bestow his benediction on the inhabitants: And lastly having done this, that he should again return to Xaintes, where he was to be devested of his corruptible flesh, that his soule might freely ascend to partake eternall felicity. All these things the Holy Bishop perform'd according as God had commanded: and when he came back from Brittany S. Leontius receiv'd him with grea|ter ioy, and express'd more respectfull Offices and kindnes to him then formerly.
10. Shortly after this S. Mahutus (or S. Ma|clovius (dyed, full of dayes and sanctity, and was buried by Leontius in Aquitain.Ibid. And though the inhabitants of Aleth were depri|ved of the sacred Relicks of their prime Prelat, whom they had treated so iniuriously: yet the Name of Blessed Maclovius remains, never to be blotted out: which to this day both adorns and defends that Citty with his glorious protection and celestiall benefits. Notwithstanding the Episcopall See does not now remain at Aleth, but is remov'd to an Island two miles distant from thence, anciently call'd Aaron, where a Citty new built, is in memory of their Holy Prelat and Patron call'd S. Malo (Vrbs Ma|cloviensis.)
11. To this large relation in the Gallican Martyrologe,Ap. Capgrav. in S. Maht. Iohn of Tinmouth adds: That S. Mahutus with his seaven Disciples in devotion visited Rome, where he redeemd many Infidell Captives, and having instructed them in the true Faith, baptis'd them. Moreover that after forty years government having been in|iustly and violently driven from his See at Aleth, he cursed and excommunicated the people, and then retired to an Island in Aquitain calld Agenis, from whence he repair'd to Leon|tius a Bishop there. Which relation contra|dicts the Gallican Martyrologe, according to which S. Maclovius was so far from cursing his flock,Magdeb. cent. 6. f. 753. that he prayed dayly for it. However the Centuriators of Magdeburg charitably re|member only his cursing and not his prayers: and most unskilfully write, that he flourish'd under Leontius Bishop of the Saxons (mistaking Saxonum for Santonum:) and that he curs'd the Brittains, his own coun|treymen, from whom he never receiv'd any iniury. How long he liv'd appears not: but his death is in our Martyrolo|ge assign'd to the year of Grace five hundred sixty four.



A. D. 542.
XXX. CH.XXX. CHAP.

1.2. Of S. Brendan.
3. Of S. Doc, and S. Canic.

1. SAint Brendan the spirituall Father and Instructour of S. Maclovius, though by birth no Brittain, is not be denied a place in this History: Concerning whom we read in B. Vsher that he came out of Ireland to visit the Holy man S. Gildas Albanius in Brittany:Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. 934. where he built a Monastery and a Church. He was also Superiour in the Monastery of Lancar|van, where he baptised S. Maclovius. After that he returned into Ireland, where he was Abbot of a Monastery call'd Birra, and in the year of Grace five hundred seaventy one most happily ended his holy Life.Of whose glory and Beatitude revealed to S. Columba,Ad. in vit. S. Colum|ba. l. 3. c. 5. the Authour of that Saints life call'd Ada|mannus thus writes, where he introduces S. Columba thus discoursing with his Minister Diormitius: Columba. Goe and quickly provide all things necessary for celebrating the Holy Eu|charist: for this is the day of the blessed death of S. Brendanus. Diormitius. Why doe you command that we should prepare so solemnly for Masse to day; since no Messenger from Ireland (Scotia) has yet brought tidings of the death of that Holy man. Columba. However goe, and faile not to doe as I have commanded: for this last night I saw heaven on a sudden opened, and quires of An|gels descending to meet S. Brendans soule, by whose incomparable splendour the whole world was that houre enlightned.
2. S. Brendan thus call'd to heaven, en|joyd on earth also an eternall Monument of his name and Sanctity: for in the Isles of Orkney a town and Church were built, and were call'd from his Name. The reason of which honour and devotion was because his Sacred body was thither translated. The day of his death is celebrated in our Marty|rologe on the sixteenth of May:Martyr. Ang. 16. Maij  14. Iun. and his Tran|slation on the fourteenth of Iune.
3. We will here conclude with the Me|mory of a Holy Brittish Abbot call'd S. Doc, who flourish'd in this Age. Of whom the Irish Annals thus write in the life of Saint Canic (from whom the Province of Kilkenny took its appellation, importing the Church of Canic.) When S. Canic was grown to an age ca|pable of knowledge,Ap. Vsser. in Primord. f. 935. he was desirous of instruction, and therefore pass'd over the Sea into Brittany, to a Religious wise man naimed Doc: and under him he studied diligently, and was taught both learning and piety. This S. Doc was one of the three Holy Brittains from whom the Irish learnd the form and Rites of celebrating Masse, as hath already been shewd: the other two were S. David and S. Gildas.





THE TWELTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. Constentin succeeds King Arthur. His Cruelly: Pennance, and undertaking a Religious life.

1. _IT seems the Brittains at the beginning had no such conceit of King Arthurs returning,A. D. 542. for surely they would have expe|pected awhile and not immediatly have filled his Throne with a succession of strange Princes. The Bards had not yet contrived their fantasticall Stories, which could find none in these times to hearken to them.
2. Therefore after King Arthurs death Con|stantin, according to his designation, suc|ceeded him in the Government of Brittany. He was the Son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, and kinsman to King Arthur. His sufficiency to discharge that employment for the be|nefit of his countrey was enough approv'd by his glorious Predecessours choice. But Al|mighty God having fix'd a period to the Brittish Monarchy, permitted many factions to arise, and many pretendants to the Prin|cipality, the opposing of whom hindred Con|stantin from advancing the common proffit and safety of the Kingdom.
Gild. de Ex+cid.3. Yea moreover ambition and revenge had such power over him that they invited him to commit crimes, which hastned the ruine of his countrey. Hence it is that Gil|das calls him the Tyrant of Danmonia: Tyrant by reason of his cruelty, and Tyrant of one onely Province, because severall others at the same time had invaded each one their severall Principalities: and for the maintai|ning of their unjustly usurp'd power fill'd the whole nation with all manner of crimes and impiety.
4. This gave occasion to the same Gildas to write and publi'sh a passionate Invective against the vices of the whole Brittish Na|tion,Id. ibid. which had universally deprav'd the in|habitants of all states and conditions excep|ting a few, exceeding few, who seing destru|ction unavoydably coming on the Nation, sequestred themselves from publick affaires, and in solitude deplor'd the sins of others, and by great austerities and pennances pro|cur'd indulgence to their own soules.
5. In former times, saith he, our Kings, pu|blick Officers,Id. ib. private persons, Bishops and other Ecclesiasticks, every one kept their order and perform'd the duties belonging to them. But when they were dead (Such as Ambrosius, Vther-pendragon, Arthur; and likewise Dubricius, David, c.) there succeeded a generation utterly ignorant of the former Vertues, among whom all the rules of Truth and Iustice were so shaken and subverted, that no foot-steps, nor so much as the least monument of those vertues appeard in any

of the foresaid orders and conditions,A. D. 543. c.
6. Constantin at his first ascending into his Throne bound himself by a solemn Oath to govern justly, and to use his utmost endea|vours to defend his subjects from injuries and oppressions, and the common wealth from the violence of its enemies. This ap|pers, because the year following we find him accused of perjury and violating his Faith given, for his barbarous cruelty, and sacrilegious profanation of Gods house.
Weminist. A. D. 5537. For two sons of Mordred, saith Mathew of Westminster, rose in arms against Constantin, being desirous to revenge their Fathers death (slain by King Arthur, as hath been said) These ioyning in a confederacy with the Saxons, fought many battles with him. But at last being compelled to flye, Constantin pursued them: and one he slew before the Altar of S. Amphibalus his Church in Winchester: And the other who had hid himself in a certain Convent of Monks, he condemned to a cruell death at London.Gild. de Ex|cid.
8. For this Sacrilegious inhumanity, Gildas in his too free stile calls Constantin the tyran|nicall whelp of the Lyonnes of Danmonia, an in|fringer of the dreadfull Sacrament of an Oath by which he bound himself before God and all his Saints to abstain from all injustice and treachery to his subjects; notwithstanding which, in the very bosoms both of their carnall Mother, and the com|mon Spiritual Mother the Church, and nere unto the most Holy Altars he had torn the bowels of two Royal Youths, though covered with the Vest|ment of a holy Abbot (Sancti Abbatis amphi|balo) whilst they stretched forth their hands, not armed with swords to resist, but to implore help from God and his Altar: notwithstanding all which, he most barbarously shed their blood, which with a purple dye stained the Seat of the Eccle|siasticall Sacrifice and the Sacred palls which co|vered it. By which expression of Gildas it seems that these two children, Sons of Mor|dred, had not been guilty of raising war against Constantin: but without any offence done by them had been murdred contrary to his ath.
Id. ibid.9. In consequence to which Invective the same Authour adioyns most pressing exhor|tations to Constantin, that he would doe sui|table pennance for these horrible crimes,  implore the Divine Mercy, that if possible, he might avoyd the dark inextricable torrents of eternall fires, in which otherwise he must for ever be rolled and roasted.
10. It is probable that this Zealous Writer, who flourished at this time, did personally use the like exhortations to him, which he after recorded in his Book: and that they wrought a good effect on him.A. D. 545. For though some of our Historians write that he was slain by Conan who succeeded in the King|dom:A. oet. hist. l. 9. Yet Hector Botius relates how Constantin after a short raign having been deprived of his wife and children, grew weary of his Kingdom, and privily stealing from his freinds, went into Ireland: And that there for the love of Christ he laboured unknown like a poore servant in a Mill. But afterward by perswasion of a Monk, to whom he had discovered his condition, he was induced to shave his head and consecrate himself to a Re|ligious life in a Monastery: where he lived with such piety and devotion that he became a pattern of all vertues to the rest of the Monks. That at last he was by the Prelat of that place sent in Mission to the Scotts to instruct that nation in the doctrin of Christ, where he suffred Martyrdom by the hands of certain impious persons. After some Ages he was venerated as a Saint, and by the authority of succeeding Bishops Temples were dedicated to his honour, which yet remain in that Nation.
11. What is thus related by Botius,Ap. Capgr. in vit S. Da+vidis. receives a strong confirmation from the Authour of S. Davids life in Capgrave, where we read, That when the fame of S. Davids holines was spread abroad, severall Princes forsaking their King|doms, retired to his Monastery. Likewise Constan|tin King of the Cornishmen (which is the same Title with Rex Danmoniae in Gildas) forsaking his Throne, became a Monk there: and after some time spent in the devout service of God, he at last went into a far distant countrey, where he built a Monastery.


II. CHAP.II. CHAH.

1.2. c. S. Kentigern forced to flye into Wales: where he founds a Monastery, and Episcopall See: Of Malgo, a Prince who opposed him.

1. BEfore we proceed to the Gests of Conan Successour to Constantin in the King|dom of Brittany, it will be requisite that we relate a great affliction and persecution which befell the famous and Holy Bishop Kentigern in the second year of the raign of the said Constantin. His Birth, Education  consecration to the Bishoprick of Glasco, with the defects attending it, have been already declared.
2. Now in pursuance of his succeding Gests,A. D. 543. Ap. Capg. in vit S. Ken|tigerni. Vsher. in Chr. Iohn of Tinmouth thus writes: Certain Sons of Belial kinsmen to King Marke rose against the Saint, conspiring his death. Whereupon being admonished by Divine revelation, he departed directing his journey to Menevia, where the Holy Bishop David flourished with all vertues. Near Car-leon he converted many to the Faith and built a Church. Being come to S. David, he abode with him some time; and received from the Prince of that Region, Cathwallam a place commodious for a Monastery: Which having erected at Egla (Elwy) he fixed there an Episcopall See. Near that place there was a certain Noble man, which often threatned and effectually endeavoured to expell him from thence, whom God therefore smote with blindnes: But upon the holy Bishops prayers

his sight was restored:A. D. 545. for which he became ever after his helper and protectour.
3. There were assembled in that Monastery no fewer then nine hundred sixty five Brethren, who all lived under Monasticall Discipline, serving God with great abstinence. Of which number three hundred who were illiterate, he appointed to tilling of the ground and guard of the Cattell, out of the Monastery. Other three hundred he assigned for preparing nourishment and performing other necessary works within the Monastery: And three hundred sixty five who were learned, he deputed to the celebrating Divine offices dayly: Not any of which without great necessity would he permitt to goe out of the Monastery, but ordaind them to attend there continually as in Gods Sanctuary.
4. And this part of the Convent he divided so into troops and companies, that when one had finished the service of God in the Church, another presently entred and begun it againe: which being ended, a third without any delay entred. I this means Prayers were offred in that Church without any intermission, and the praises of God were allways in their mouths.
5. Among these there was one, named Asaph, more especially illustrious for his descent and form, who from his childhood shone bright|ly both with vertues and miracles, and day|ly endeavoured to imitate his Master in all Sanctity and abstinence. To him the Man of God bore ever after a particular affection, and committed the care of the Monastery to his prudence, and in conclusion appointed him his Successour in the Bishoprick.
Godwin. in catalog. in Episc. Asaph.6. As touching the forementioned Noble+man who opposed this Holy Bishop, B. God|win thus writes in his Catalogue: Saint Ken|tigern at first built a Church of wood and lime: but afterward he renewd it of stone, although he was therein much hindred and molested by a certain Prince named Malgo or Maglocun, whose dwelling was six miles from thence at De|gnwy. But afterward being asswaged, he per|mitted him to place there an Episcopall See: on which he bestowd both ample possessions and pri|viledges: Doing the same likewise to the Mona|stery. The See is by some called Elguy, or Llan|elwy, so named from the River Elwy near which it was seated. And of that Church Saint Kenti|gern was the first Bishop. But in succeeding times it was called Saint Asaphs, from his name who sate there Bishop next after.
7. As touching this Prince Maglocunus or Malgo Conanus,Gild. in Ex|cid. he is mentioned by Gildas, but deeply accused by him to have been though an expeller of many Tyrants, yet withall as he was greater then many in power, so like|wise in malice. Of him more hereafter.


III. CHAP.III. CH.

1.2. c. S. Kentigern wonderfully recalled to Glasco: where he destroyes Idolatry among the Picts.
8.9. S. Columba Visits him. Twenty Irish Saints called Columba.

1 SAint Kentigerns life was prolonged till after S. Augustin the Monks coming into Brittany,Ap. Capgr. in vit S. Kentigern for his death is by the best Historians assigned to the year of our Lord six hundred and one. Yet because his following actions are not mixd, nor have any considerable in|fluence on the generall affaires touching the Brittish Churches, we will in this place summ up the remainder of his life.
2. During S. Kentigerns abode in Cambria hapned the blessed death of the Holy Bishop S. David, whose glory was discovered to Saint Kentigern by revelation as hath been shewd. In that countrey he remaind the space of seaventeen years, exercising most perfectly the functions both of an Abbot, and after|ward a Bishop at Elwy, till in the end he was recalled to his first Bishoprick at Glasco: the admirable manner whereof we find related by Iohn of Tinmouth to this effect:3. After that all the enemies of S. Kentigern in the Kingdom of the Cumbrians had been con|sumed by diverse calamities and diseases, the inhabitants of that region, by reason of the ab|sence of Saint Kentigern who had been so many years exild from thence, had forsaken the way of our Lord taught by him, and were returned to Idolatry, like doggs unto their vomit. Which Apostasy of theirs God punished with a greivous famin, the earth, sea and all the elements refu|sing their accustomed aid and comfort to them.
4. But at length our Lord was pleased to raise up in that Region a good King named Rederech, who had been baptised by some of the Disciples of S. Patrick, and who was very desirous to restore the Faith of Christ in his Kingdom. For which purpose he directed Messengers with letters to S. Kenti|gern, in which having acquainted him that the men who sought his life were dead, he most ear|nestly beseeched, and in the name of our Lord ad|jured him that he would no longer be absent from his flock, for which he was obliged even to sacri|fise his own life,5. S. Kentigern having received this Message, without delay prepared for his return: and having by admonition from an Angel appointed Saint Asaph his Successour in the Bishoprick of Elwy, he being attended with six hundred and sixty of his Brethren took his iourney back to the Region of the Cumbrians: at his entrance whereinto he was mett by the devout King and very great numbers of the people, giving thanks to God for his presence: Vpon whom the holy man pronoun|ced a solemne benediction.
6. After that he cryed with a loud voyce, In the name of our Lord Iesus Christ I command all those who doe envy the salvation of men, and resist the preaching of Gods word to depart presently from hence, that they be no hindrance to those who shall beleive.
Having said this, immediatly in the sight of all an innumerable multitude of wicked Spirits, horrible to behold both for their stature and shapes, fled away from the company: which caused a wonderfull fear and trembling in them. But the holy Man encouraged and com|forted them, letting them see visibly Who they were in whom they had beleived, and by whom they had been induced to adore dumb Idols, or the Elements, which were creatures appointed by God for their use and service. And as for Woden whom (by the seduction of the Saxons) they esteemd their Principall God, and to whose honour they consecrated the fourth day of the Week, he shewd that he was no better then a mortall man who had been King of the Saxons, and Ancestour to severall nations: that his Body was then resolv'd into dust, and his soule tormented in hell-fire for ever.
7. When he had sayd thus, adding also many other speeches to explain the Christian Faith, the ground on which he sate in a plain feild calld Holdelin, swelld up under him in the sight of them all, so that it grew to a reasonable high hill, and so remains to this day. And all the people seing these wonders, after they were instructed in the Faith, receiv'd Baptism. Thus by his doctrine he freed the Nation of the Picts from Idolatry and Heresy. He converted likewise the countrey of Albania: building many Churches and founding severall Monasteries. By which it appears that they were Picts, not Saxons to whom he preach'd: and that they were such as had for|saken Christianity formerly profess'd by them: but in his absence were returnd to their Idolatry, and in imitation of their Saxon neighbours had admitted the worship also of their idols and false Gods.
8. Whilst S. Kentigern liv'd among the Picts,I ibid. S. Columba (calld by the English, Columkill) hearing at his Monastery in the Island of Hy the fame of this holy Bishop, came with a great troop of his Disciples to visit him: and was mett by him with a like multitude, which they divided on both sides into three companies, the first of young men, the second such as were of perfect age, and the third venerable old men: all which in the way towards one another sung spirituall songs. And when S. Columba came in sight of the Bishop, tur|ning himself to his Disciples he said, I see a pillar of fire as it were a golden crown in the third quire descending upon the Bishop and casting a celestial splendour about him. Then the two Holy men approaching to one another with great fervour of affection gave and receiv'd mutuall kisses and em|braces.
Hect. Bt. l. f. 163.99. Hector Boetius seems to signify that Brid King of the Picts was present at this meeting: And that afterward S. Columba going to a Monastery ioyning to the Castle of Caledonia built by Con|vallus, there instructed in the Faith the Caledo|nians, the Horesti and other neighbouring Nations: Likewise that in the same place was afterward erected a Church dedicated to S. Columba, and plentifully enrich'd by the following Kings of the Scotts: Which Church being an Episcopall see was vulgarly calld Dunkeld. But that Authour seems in this relation to mixe and confound the actions of two different Saints, both calld Columba; for certain it is that Columba who was first Bishop at Dunkeld flourish'd almost a hundred years after this time:Vsser in Pri|mrd. f. 705. for to him Saint Cuthbert being then a child was recommended. Which mistake is very pardonable, because, as B. Vsher observes there were in Ireland almost twenty severall men famous for ver|tue and piety,Ibid. f. 1034 all which had the same Name, Columba.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHA.

1.2. c. S. Kentigerns iourney to Rome: And the Great Controversy concerning the Tria Capitula.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred nine|ty three S. Kentigern out of Brittany,Vsser in In. Chron. ad A. D. 593. and a Bishop call Alban out of Ireland went to Rome to visit Pope Gregory the Great, saith B. Vsher from ancient Records. What speciall busines might move them to undertake that iourney besides their devotion to the Monuments of the Apostles there, does not appear in our Historians. Yet it may probably be guess'd at from a consideration of the state of the Church in those times.
2. A great Controversy was then agitated: the occasion wherof was this. The famous Council of Chalcedon having condemn'd Euty|ches and his doctrine, which confounded the two natures in Christ, was reiected by a faction of the Eutychians, calld Acephali, upon this pretence, because it seemd to them to favour the contrary Heresy formerly con|demn'd, of the Nestorians who acknowledg'd not only two natures, but two Persons in our Lord. The grounds on which the Ace|phali charged the Council of Chalcedon with this imputation was, first because it seemd to approve an Epistle of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, and also the Writings of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia full of blasphemous passages sa|vouring of Nestorianism, and thirdly had re|ceived into Communion Theodoret Bishop of Cyrrhus who had written sharply against the twelve Capita of S. Cyrill. Hereupon the Em|perour Iustinian being desirous to represse the Acephali who had rais'd great commotions in Aegypt and the East, by the advice of Theo|dorus Bishop of Cesaera in Cappadocia a secret favourer of the Acephali, publish'd a large Edict, calld Tria Capitul, in which he proscri|bed the sayd Ibas, Theodorus and Theodoret, pro|curing likewise a condemnation of them

and their writings as Hereticall from the Bishops of the East. Notwithstanding Menas Bishop of Constantinople in his subscription to the Emperours Decree added this condition, If these things were approved by the Bishop of Rome.
3. Iustinian therefore perceiving that without the sentence of the Pope his attempts would be ineffectual, calld Vigilius then Bishop of Rome from the thence to Constantinople: Who at his departure was seriously admonished by the Churches of Rome, Africk, Sardinia, Greece and Illyricum that he should by no means consent to any novelty, nor suffer any pre|iudice to be cast on the Council of Chalcedon. In complyance with whom by Letters written in his iourney to Menas Patriark of Constanti|nople he freely reprehended their condemna|tion of the Three Bishops, desiring Iustinian to recall his Decree. And when he was come to Constantinople he suspended from his Commu|nion the Bishops who had subscrib'd to the said condemnation: for he iudged that not any of the Gests of the Generall Councill of Chalcedon ought to be retracted, or calld into dis|pute.
4. Notwithstanding five months afterward at the request of the Empresse Theodora he re|stor'd them to his Communion: and moreover though he would not subscribe to the Empe|rours Decree, yet by his consent the whole Cause was discuss'd in a Synod of seaventy Bishops at Constantinople: and when the suffra|ges of the Bishops were brought to him, he wrote a Decree which he sent to Menas, in which he also expressly confirm'd the Tria Capitula.
5. But this condescendence of Vigilius to avoyd a rent of the Eastern Churches, was ill taken in the West, insomuch as the Bishops of Africa, Illyricum and Dalmatia withdrew themselves from his Communion, and Facun|dus who defended their cause, calld him a Prevaricator. Whereupon Vigilius endeavou|red to persuade the Emperour in the presence of Menas and the other Eastern Bishops that whatsoever had pass'd on either side should be rescinded, and that a Synod should be assembled, to which particularly the Affrican and Illyrian Bishops, who had been scandali|sed, should be calld. But they being unwil|ling to obey, Vigilius was dealt withall that in case the Western Bishops would not comply, he ioyning with the Greeks, should condemn the three Bishops. Which he utterly refusing, the Emperours Decree was notwithstanding publish'd. And when Vigilius, together with Dacius Bishop of Milan, threatned the Gre|cian Bishops with Excommunication, in case they consented to the Decree, the Emperour was so incensed that Vigilius was forced to fly for refuge into S. Peters Church: from which Sanctuary when the Emperours Officer endea|voured to draw him, he was repelld by a tu|mult of the people. But many iniuries being still offred to Vigilius, he fled by night to Chalcedon into the Church of Saint Euphemia.
6. This constancy of Pope Vigilius procur'd this effect, that laying aside the Imperiall Edicts, the discussion of the whole cause should be reserved to a Synod: which the Pope desir'd to have celebrated in Italy: But the Grecians refusing, it was agreed that an equall number of Western Bishops should be summoned to Constantinople: Which agree|ment notwithstanding, the Emperour sum|mond all the rest of the Eastern Patriarks.. Thus a Councill of Eastern Bishops only mett on the fourth day before the Nones of May: at which Vigilius refused to be present, not esteeming it Canonicall, by reason of the absence of the Western Bishops, who were most interessed in the affaire.
7. However after twenty dayes respite obtain'd, Vigilius sent a Writing to the Em|perour, which he calld a Constitutum, wherin he at large gave his iudgment of he Tria Capitula, telling him that as tou|ching the blasphemies of Theodorus, he did abhorre them: but in imitation of the Council of Ephesus wold spare his name. Again that it would be superfluous to cast any infamy on the Writings of Theodoret against S. Cyrill, since S. Cyrill himselfe, and the Councill of Chalcedon had requir'd no other satisfaction from him but only to pronounce Anathema against Nestorius: which he did. And as touching the Epistle of Ibas, no discussion should be made of it after the Council of Chalcedon.
8. This Constitutum the Emperour contrary to his promise reserv'd to himself: but withall acquainting the Synod with Vigilius his mind touching the Tria Capitula, which he had oftimes both by words and writing express'd, the Synod proceeded to a con|demnation of them, withall complaining that the Pope would not afford his presence among them.
9. After this Definition of the Bishops in the Council, the Pope being in extreme an|guish because he saw how the Western Bishops would be offended, and that this scandal would be the greater by reason that the Em|perour had not sent his Constitutum to the Council, utterly refus'd his consent and appro|bation of their Definition; For which refusall, he was by the Emperour sent into banishment with seuerall other Bishops.
10. His banishment did not continue long, for six months after the Synods Defini|tion, Vigilius sent a Decretal Epistle to Eu|tychius the Successour of Menas, in which he condemn'd the Tria Capitula, and profess'd Communion with all those who embracing the Four Councils of the Church, had condemn'd the same (meaning hereby the last Council, which he would not name.) This Decree of Vigilius was by the Grecians referd among the Acts of the Council, by vertue wherof it became acknowleged a lawfull Oecumenicall Council.
11. This end being given to this unneces|sary Controversy, all the Western Churches, ex|cepting only the Bishops of Istria, Venice and Liguria, consented to it: But these Churches being under the dominion of the Longobardi, broke into an open Schism, which conti|nued till the time of S. Gregory the Great. And besides them we doe not find any other Churches unsatisfied excepting Ireland only: to the Bishops whereof S. Gregory, in the year before S. Kentigerns iourney to Rome,Greg M. l. 2. Epist. 36. In|dict. 10. wrote an Epistle in answer to one of theirs which had charged the Roman See for in|juring the Council of Chalcedon by condem|ning the Tria Capitula. But S. Gregory infor|med them that this Controversy did not at all touch the Faith of the Church, but only the per|sons of two or three Bishops: That the authority of the Council of Chalcedon was entire both with those who oppugn'd, and those who defended the Tria Capitula: and therefore none could have just cause to make a rent in the Church upon so trifling a quarrel. Which answer of the Holy Pope it seems gave satisfaction to the Irish Bishops:Id. l. Ep. 62 Indict. 4. for we read following Epistles from him to them as to unanimous Brethren, in|structing them touching Rites in Baptism and whether it was to be administred to such as return'd from the Nestorian Heresy, c.
12. The state of this Controversy hath been thus largely sett down, because at this very time it was hottly agitated when S. Kenti|gern went to Rome, and probably was a principall motive of his journey. Which is the more likely because an Irish Bishop cal|led Albanus went thither at the same time likewise. And though the Brittish Churches are no where mention'd as partaking with those who were divided from the Roman See, yet it might well become the zeale of so holy a Bishop as S. Kentigern to inform himself truly of the state of the present controversy, that so he might prevent a future breach.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1. S. Kentigerns death.
2. The manner of it.
3 His preparation thereto.
4. Of his Miracles.

1. SAint Kentigern eight years after this his voyage to Rome by a mature and happy death rested from his labours, to witt, in the year of our Lord six hundred and one, being then fourscore and five years old, according to the true compu|tation of Bishop Vsher: though others mis|lead by Capgrave, add a hundred years more to his age.
2. The manner of his death is thus related by Iohn of Tinmouth:A. D. 547. The man of God Saint Kentigern being worn away with age,Ap. Capgrav. in vit. . Ken|tigern. had his nerves so dissolved that he was forced to sustain his iawes by tying a linnen ruban about his head, which came under his Chin: to the end he might be enabled with lesse difficulty to pronounce his words. This dis|solution of his sinews may be ascrib'd to a pro|mise a little before his death made him by an Angell: Who told him,Since thy whole life in this world has been a continuall Martyrdom, it hath pleas'd our Lord to grant thee a milder and easier end of thy life, then other men ordinarily find.
3. And as touching his preparation to his death,Id. Ibid. it thus follows in the same Au|thour: At length calling together his Disciples, he earnestly exhorted them to a continuance in observing the duties of their holy Religion, to mutuall charity, peace, hospitality and diligence in reading and Prayer. Moreover he gave and bequeath'd to them earnest and efficacious pre|cepts firmly to obey the Decrees of the Holy Fa|thers, and Constitutions of the Holy Roman Church. After which Exhortation given, he departed to our Lord on the Ides of Ianuary, in the sixtieth year after he was first conse|crated Bishop.
4. After his death the same of his Sanctity was every where spread by a world of mira|cles; the particulars may be read in Capgrave, to whom the Reader is refer'd. Concerning him thus writes Iohannes Major, S. Kentigern was contemporary and a singular freind of S. Columba.I. Major d Gest.  2. c. 7. He was illustrious for many miracles: and his body reposes at Glasgu: to whose honour a Church was erected in that Citty, second to none in Scot|land for costly ornaments and rich endowments of Canonries. His Memory is celebrated in our English Martyrologe on the thirteenth of Ianuary.Martyg l. 13. Iaar.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Kingdom of the Northum|bers erected.
7. K. Conan dyes: and Vortiper succeeds.
8. After whom Malgo Conan raigns.
9.10. Battells between the Brittains and Saxons.

1. COnstantin the kinsman, and Succes|sour of King Arthur being dead,A. D. 545. Westm. hc or removed, Aurelius Conanus his Nephew a young man of extraordinary worth and well de|serving the Crown, saith Westmonasterien|sis, succeeded him: his only fault was that he was a lover of Civill contentions. He cast into prison his Vncle, to whom the Crown in right belonged: and murdred two of his Sons, who stood in his way to the kingdom.

Which ambition and cruelty was probably a cause inducing some of our Historians to charge him with the murder of Constantin his predecessour.
2. Gildas gives a Character of him much lesse favourable then Mathew of Westminster:Gild. de Excid for he accuses him of many parricides, adul|teries, fornications, inflaming his countrey with civill wars, and other crimes: for which without repentance he denounces to him a short raign, and after it eternall miseries. And accordingly it fell out, for though Mathew of Westminster allows him thirty years rule: Yet it more suits with Chronology to assign only four to his raign.
3. In the third year whereof, whilst the Brittish Provinces consum'd themselves with civill contentions,A. D. 547. a new and powerfull kingdom of the Saxons was establish'd in the Northern parts, calld the Kingdome of the Northumbers: the manner and degrees by which they arrived to such power is descri|b'd by Malmsburiensis, to this effect.
. de Reg. l. . c. 3.4. Hengist at the beginning of his raign in the kingdom of Kent sent into those Northern parts his Brother Otha with his Son Ebusa, men of great courage, experi|ence and Nobility. For they derived their descent from Woden one of the German Deities: Which Woden had three Sons Weldege, Withlege, and Beldege: From the eldest son descended the Kings of Kent: from the second the Kings of the Mercians: and from the third the Kings of the West-saxons and Northumbers: whose first King Ida reckoned himself the tenth from Woden.
5. Now Otha and Ebusa the first Saxons which brought an army into those Northern parts fought many battles with the Brittish inhabitants, and having conquered those who resisted them, received the rest into their protection, suffring them to live in a quiet subiection. They and their successours also notwithstanding contented themselves many years with the title of Governours or Dukes, acknowledging a dependance and submission to the Kings of Kent. But in the year ninety nine after their first arrivall, they assum'd the Title and Dignity of Kings: Of which the first was calld Ida, whether attaining that supereminence by election or invasion, is not manifest in story.
6. Other Writers affirm that the whole Re|g possess'd by these Northumbers was divi|ded into two parts: Of which that which was more Northern, extending it self from the Bay of Edenborough to the Picts-wall was inhabited by the Bernicians: and the other reaing from the Picts-wall to the River of  was held by the Deiri: So that the whole kingdom of the Northumbers ancient|ly containd the Provinces of the Picts, Laudon, Northberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, , York and Lancaster: This will appear by the lives of severall Saints said to have liv'd in the kingdom of the Northumbrians. The same Authours add that the said Di|vision of the Kingdom was made by Ida,A. D. 556. who leaving his Son to govern the Deiri, himself fix'd his habitation among the Bernicians beyond the Picts-wall.
7. Aurelius Conanus dying in the fourth year of his Raign,A. D. 548. Gild. de Ex bid. Vortipor Prince of the De|metae succeeded him: who is by Gildas stild a Tyrant who in his old age ascended the throne by civill discords, being a wicked son of a good Prince: defild by many paricids and adulteries: who having rid himself of his lawfull wife, wallowed in last with her impudent daughter. Whereupon he exhorts him by a timely repentance to avert Gods iudgments from him.
8. His raign likewise lasting onely four years,A. D. 551 Gild. ibid. the throne was invaded by Malgo Co|nanus, or Maglocuus, a Prince no lesse vitious then his Predecessours: For in the same Gildas his description he is said to have murdred his Vncle (Prince of Venedotia calld Catwallain) together with the greatest part of his Nobility. (This is the same Maglocunus who afforded to S. Kentigern a place for a Church and Mo|nastery. And afterward being tormented with remorse for his parricides, he relinquish'd the world, and retired into a Monastery where he under took a Monasticall Profession. But the sparks of ambition thus coverd, broke forth again into a flame, so that quitting his solitude, he return'd to all his former crimes, and became an Insular Dragon, depressing other Tyrants, and by strengthning himself with their power beco|ming a far greater Tyrant himself.
9. In the second year of his Raign a great battell was fought between the Brittains and Kenric King of the West Saxons:A. D. 552. Ethelvverd. Huntingd. l. 3 The place of the Combat was neer Sorbodunum, calld afterward Salisbury. In which combat after much blood shed the Brittains were at last overcome and forc'd to fly.
10. And four years after, the Brittains thirsting to avenge them selves of their for|mer defect,A. D. 556. Huntingd. ib. gathered together all their best forces: against whom Kenric with his son Ceaulin marched. The armies mett in the province of the Dobuni (Oxfordshire) at Beram|bury. (now Bambury) The Brittains divided their Army into Nine Bodyes, three of which they placed in the front, three in the midst, and three in the rear. The Saxons though infe|riour in numbers, yet much ceeded them in stature and strength: and they fought all in one Body. The combat was bloody, con|tinuing till night: and it was doubtfull which side had the better. After this many other battells pass'd between them: but for the most part the victory fell to the West Saxons.



VII. CHA.VII. CHAP.

1. Bridius King of the Picts.
2. King Malgo-Conan dyes: and Careti|cus succeeds.
3. Severall Petty Brittish Princes.
4. Alla King of the Northumbers.

A. D. 557.1. WHilst the Brittains and Saxons con|tended in the West, the Picts in the North beyond the Frith of Edenborough made Bridius their King, who was Nephew to Loth their former King, being his Bro|thers son. But whereas Hector Botius says that he raign'd in the Province of London,H. Boet. that is inconsistent with what was formerly related touching the limits of the Kingdom of the Northumbrians. In the Ninth year of this King Bridius, S. Columba came of Ireland into Brittany, as shall be shewn. And this being constantly affirm'd by all our ancient Historians, to have hapned in the five hun|dred sixty and fifth year of Grace, B. Vsher without cause questions the placing the be|ginning of King Bridius his raign in the year five hundred fifty seaven.
A. D. 558.2. In the year following dyed the Tyrant Maglocunus after whom Caretum took upon him to sustain the state of Brittany every day more and more and more falling to ruine. But in vain: for besides that God had fix'd a period to it, this Prince was no better then his Predecessours, being like them stain'd with all vices. But determinatly to set down either when he began his raign, or when he ended it, is extremely difficult considering the small light which our Records afford of those times. And as for the severall Princes whose shamefull Characters are given us by Gildas, it is hard to say whether they were Monarks of the Brittains. On the contrary by his manner of writing, most of them sem to have liv'd in severall Provinces, and there raign'd at the same time.
3. Besides the fore named Prince the same Gildas directs the point of his sharp stile against one named Cneglas,Gild. de Ex|cid. by interpretation Yellow Lyon, whom he accuses of all sorts of crimes, impiety again God, and savage cruelty to his subjects: repudiating his lawfull wife, and vio|lating her Sister, who after her widdow-hood had vowd chastity to God: and lastly by many injuries afflicting holy men and Pre which ceased not to offer up to God their sight and prayers for him. Whom he exhorts to change his life that he might reap benefit by the Prayers of those who had power to bind in heaven, whan they had bound in this world, and to loose likewise such as were penitent.
4. Now by a view of the impieties of all these last Princes of Brittany the Reades will observe the justice of Gods severity against so wicked a Nation from which he took the Spirituall Kingdom of Christ,A. D. 560. and bestowd it on a people which few years after brought fruits worthy of it. And again out of this dunghill of vices some pearles may be ga|thered, for here we find the Wise Gildas com|mending a perpetuall vow of Chastity, made not only by Virgins, but Widows also, the in|fringing of which vow he bitterly inveighs against. And again he acknowledges in Gods Preists a power of retaining and absolving sinners, not by way of declaration, but au|thority and iurisdiction.
5. In the year five hundred fifty nine dyed Ida King of the Northumbrians,A. D. 59. to whom suc|ceeded his Son Alla, whose Empire extended both over the Deiri and Bernicians. This is that King Alla to whose name Pope Gregory alluded when he said prophetically, that in the Province of King Alla there should be sung Alleluia. But we must observe that though he had the authority paramount over all the Kingdom of the Northumbrians, yet there were in some of the Provinces Brittish Princes with dependance on him which called themselves Kings: So we men|tioned lately Mken King of the Cumbrians. For these Northern Saxons having obtaind their dominion not by absolute conquest, but in many Provinces by Treaty, they left the Princes there still invested with their former authority, yet with dependance and defe|rence to them.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. c. Saint Theodoric a Brittish Prince retires into solitude: And comes out to fight with the Saxons: In which fight he is mortally wounded.
6.7. c. His Son Monric censured by a Synod at Landaff.

1. THis Age afforded us more then one Example,A. D. 560. both of the vigour of Episco|pall Authority and zeale exercised by a Holy Bishop Synodically, and likewise of submission to the said Spirituall Authority by Princes, otherwise of little devotion, on the con|trary staind with many vices and crimes. But before we relate these particulars, we will first declare who this Bishop and Princes were.
2. The Bishops name was S. Oudoceus,A. Capgrav. in Oudoco the Son of Anaumeda Sister to S. Theliau and Budic a Prince in Lesser Brittany. S. Oudoceus from his infancy was addicted to piety. He was assidileus in fasting, watching and prayer for an everlasting reward. In devotion he visited the Monument of S. Peter at Rome: and at his return he went to the place of S. David, and from thence he diverted to the Church of S. Theliau, taking with him certain Relicks which during his Pilgrimages he

had obtaind. Afterward he succeded Saint Theliau the next Bishop of Landaff after Saint Dubricius: and was an heyr not only of his dignity, but of his vertue, doctrin and mi|racles. He is commemorated on the sixth day before the Nones of Iuly.
4. Next as touching the Prince, his name was Mouric, Son of Theodoric Prince of Gla|morganshire in the Province of the Silures, who being weary of worldly vanities, un|dertook a Monasticall Profession, and served Almighty God in solitude; having transferr'd his Pricipality on his son Mouric. Into which his Son was no sooner entred, but the Saxons broke into his countrey, and began to wast it. Whereupon the inhabitants had recourse to their former Prince Theodoric, whom they even compelled to quitt his de|sart, and to be their Generall in the war. He full of Divine courage encountred the infi|dell Enemies, whom he putt to flight at Tintern nere the River Vaga. But having recei|ved a dangerous wound in the combat, he returned homeward, and perceiving that it would prove mortall, he gave charge to his Son Mouric, that in what place soever he should end his life, he should there build a Church to God, and a Sepulcher for himself. After this proceeding in his journey, he had not passed above five miles, but at a place where the Rivers Vaga and Severn meet, he gave up his Spirit.
5. There did his Son Mouric erect a Church in which he layd his Fathers body: whom posterity venerated as a Saint, calling the place from his name Merthir-Tendric, that is, The place of the Martyr-Theodoric: At this day it is more contractedly called Merthirn. In the same place,Godvvin in Catalog in . Epi|sp. saith B. Godwin, is seated the house and possessions of the Bishops of Landaff: adding, That Mouric first of his own accord gave to that Church a farm called Mochros, lying on the banks of the River Vaga together with Portheassegg and the Church of Gurvid. And afterward for ex|pion of a murder committed by him on a per|son called Cynetu, contrary to a league by oath con|tracted between them, he added other possessions, as Ringranauc, Nantana and Kansulvim, with other lands besides. He had two Sons Arthruis and Frior: and by Arthruis, or Athruis he had a grandchild called Morcant.
6. This is that Prince Mouric,  this the crime against which the Holy Bishop Oudoceus exer|cised his spirituall authority: the order and manner we read expressly declared in the Acts of a Synod of Landaff lately rescued from darknes and worms by our diligent Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman:Spelman. the tenour whereof is as followeth: The Synod of Landaff assembled by Oudoceus third Bishop of that Church about the year of Grace five hundred and sixty in which Mouric King of Glamorgan for his perfidious murdring of Cynetu was excommunicated, c.
7. King Mouric and Cynetu mett together at Landaff, and in the presence of Oudocus Bishop swore before the Relicks of Saints lying before them, that they would observe a firm peace between them. Some space after this solemn Oath thus made, King Mouric by treachery slew Cynetu. Whereupon Bishop Oudoceus called together all Ec|clesiasticks from the mouth of Taratyrin-Guy to Tyvi, together with three Abbots, Consen Abbot of the valley of Carban, Cargen Abbot of Ildute, and Sulgen Abbot of Docquinni: and in a full Synod exco~municated King Mouric for the mur|der by him committed, and for perjury in trans|gressing the Covenant made in his presence, and on the Altar of S. Peter the Apostle and of S. Du|bricius and S. Theliau: moreover inclining the Crosses toward the ground, he interdicted the countrey of Mouric, and so dismissed the King.The Christian Communion also cursed the King with his progeny, the whole Synod confirming it and saying, Let his days be few, his children Orphans and his wife a Widow. And the King with his whole Region remaind the space of two years  more under the same Excommunication.
8. After that the King seing the perdition of his own soule and damnation of his Kingdom, could no longer sustain an Excommunication of such continuance, but humbly beggd pardon at Landaff of Bishop Oudoceus: Who thereupon in the presence of three Abbots imposed on him the yoke of Pennance proportionated to the quality and heynousnes of his crimes, the King all the while humbly inclining his head shedding teares abundantly: The Pennance was, that he should three wayes, make satisfaction to God and the Church of Landaff, namely by Fasting, Prayer and Almes.
9. King Mouric accepted this Yoke of Pennance: And for the redemption of his own soule, and for the soule of Cynetu he gave to the Church of Landaff, and into the hand of Oudoceus Bishop and all his Successours, four villages with their entire liberty, to be held free from all service for ever, and with absolute enjoyment of Common through his countrey to the inhabitants abiding in the said lands, in feilds, woods, pastures and Water. The first is called Ringracnauc; the second Nantavo; the third, a village beyond Kadava where Cynetu was slain; the fourth a village beyond Nadava, where the Kings Son committed adultery: it reaches from the Fenn called Elleti to Nandava, and it is called the village Gudberdh. These four villages contain four and twenty Modij of Land.
10. Witnesses hereto, of Clergy men, were Oudo|ceus Bishop, Consen Abbot of the vale of Carban, Carbam Abbot of Ildute, Sulgen Abbot of Do|cuni. And of Laicks were present King Mouric with his Son Frioc, and Morrant the Son of Ar|thruis, c. This is the form of the first Synod of Landaff, in which the discreet Reader will observe severall passages which will give light to see both the Religion and Discipline of that age.



A. D. 545.
IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1.2. c Severall Welsh Synods, and the occasions of them.
6. S. Oudoceus his death.

1. THE Complaint of Gildas touching the Princes living in his time was ve|ry just, that Brittany had Kings, but those Kings were bloody Tyrants, often times swearing, and as oft forswearing; ready enough to make vows and promises, but presently breaking those promises, sanguinary, proud, parricids, c. For besides the fore-cited Synod, the same Bishop Oudoceus was obliged upon the very like causes to collect two more, which are extant also in Sir H. Spelman: Which, to avoyd te|diousnes, shall not here be set down at length, being both of them parallel to the former. It will suffise therefore breifly and summarily to sett down the occasions of collecting the~,  the proceedings in them.
Spelman.2. The occasion of the former of them was this:King Morcant and his Vnkle Frioc in the presence of S. Oudoceus Bishop and the three forenamed Abbots at the (podium) Church of S. Ildutus took their oaths at the Holy Altar on which were placed the Relicks of Saints, that they would observe peace and amity together without any guile: adding this convention, That if either of them should kill or commit treachery against the other, he should not redeem his crime by money or lands, but should be obliged to quit his kingdom, and spend his whole life in pilgrimage in forrain countreys. A good while after which Covenant made, King Morcant by the Devils instigation slew his Vncle. After which crime commit|ted, he came to the Holy Bishop Oudocus to Landaff, humbly desiring pardon of those his two crimes of Homicide and perjury. The Bishop thereupon assembled a Synod at the Monastery of the Vale of Carban whereto came all the Clergy and forenam'd Abbots: as likewise King Morcant attended with the principall persons of Morcannuc (or Glamor|ganshire.)
3. The Synod being assembled and consul|ting on this affaire, gave their judgment that to avoyd the depriving the land of the pro|tection of its naturall Lord, the King should be permitted to redeem a pilgrimage, by fasting, prayers and Almes. Which Pen|nance the King laying his hand on the four Gospells and the Relicks of Saints undertook to perform, promising moreover that for ever after he would in all things mercifully execute justice. Which Pennance being fi|nish'd accordingly, and Christian Communion restor'd to him, he proclam'd the Churches of Catoc, Ildut and Docunni free from all Regall service discharging likewise the Church of S. Ildutus of a bagg of Honey, and an iron-caldron which formerly were to be presented to the King.
4. The Third Synod, which for affinity of the matter shall be adjoyn'd here,A. D. 547. though it was celebrated probably many yerrs after, was assembled on this occasion: A certain Brittish Prince named Guidnerth in a conten|tion for the Principality slew his Brothe Merchien:Spelman. ib.For which he was excommuni|cated by S. Oudoceus in a full Synod: in testi|mony of which Excommunication the Crosses were taken down and layd on the ground, and the Cimbals were turned. Thus he re|main'd excluded from Christian Communion the space of three years. At the end of which demanding pardon, he was sent into Lesser Brittany to S. Sampson, Arch-bishop of Dole, from him to receive iudgment and suitable pennance. This was done, partly because of the great amity between those Bishops, but cheifly because the same language being spoken in both countreyes he could more freely discover his fault, and require indul|gence from the said Arch-bishop. This voyage was undertaken by Guidnerth: who having obtain'd absolution he return'd with Letters sealed by S. Sampson before the year was en|ded. But because he had not according to the injunction given him, remain'd a whole year in Exile, the Bishop would not take off his Excommunication. Presently after S. Oudo|ceus dyed, to whom Berthgiun succeeded in the Bishoprick of Landaff. To him King Mor|cant and Guednerth made an earnest request to take off the Excommunication from Gued|nerth, and to raise again from the earth the Crosses and Cimbals with the Holy Relicks. Whereupon after a promise made by him to make satisfaction for his crime by fasting, prayers and alms, he was at last with great devotion, and many tears shed by him ab|solv'd by the Bishop. After which the said Guednerth to testify his gratitude gave to the Church of Landaff these Lands, Lann, Cat|gual and Tye, with all the woods, Sea-coasts, and liberties, c. Witnesses whereof were these Clarks, c.
5. B. Godwin affirms that this third Synod was celebrated not by S. Oudoceus but by a Bishop of Landaff call'd Grecielus the seaventh from S. Oudocus,Godvvin. in Catalog. in Episc. Landa to whom Berthguin succeeded: and that the fratricide Guidnerth to shew his grati|tude gave to the foresaid Bishop and his Succes|sors, of his free liberality Lancadwallader, now call'd Bishton or Bishopston: which, saith he, is the only Mannour now left to that See.
6. As touching S. Oudocus, the Authour of his life in Capgrave relates that he quitted his Pastorall Cure,Ap. Capgrav. in S. Oudoc. and built a Monastery nere the River Weye (Vaga,) where assembling a great mul|titude of Brethren he spent the remainder of his life, which lasted many years, in wonderfull absti|nence and Sanctity. Whereby it is manifest that the foresaid third Synod was not cele|brated in his days: since it is scarce possible that he being the third Bishop of that see, should live till the fourteenth, which was Berthguin. He is celebrated in our Martyro|loge on the sixth day before Nones of Iuly.



A. D. 562.
X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2 c. The Gests of the younger S. Gil|das: in Ireland: and Brittany: Of Saint Columba: Of S. Brendan.

1. WE have often had occasion in this History to cite testimonies from our famous Historian Gildas, sirnamed Badonicus, and Sapiens, call'd also the Younger Gildas to distinguish him from S. Gildas Albanius whose Gests have bene formerly related. Now because we are come beyond the times of those Brittish Princes which have been mention'd, and in their foule colours painted by him, it will be requisite to afford him a place here also, and breifly to collect what we find in other Authours concerning him.
2. By his own Testimony he was born in the year when the great battell was fought at the Mountain call'd Badonicus between the Brittains and Saxons in the time of King Aurelius Ambrosius: to which Mountains the Saxons retiring were besieged by the Brittains, and afterward in a battell discom|fited This hapned in the year of Grace four hundred ninety three, being the forty fourth year after the first entrance of the Saxons into Brittany.
3. The Authour of his Life extant in the Monastery of Fleury in France, from whence severall Extraits are afforded us by B. Vsher, though in some passages thereof he mingle the Gests of the Ancient S. Gildas call'd Al|banius with those of this Gildas, yet in this which follows he reflects only on our pre|sent Gildas Badonicus sirnamed Sapiens, whom he affirms to have bene a Disciple of S. Iltu|tus, and after he had left him to have gone into Ireland:Ap. Vsser. in Primord. f. 907. The words are these, Gildas, ha|ving remained some years under the discipline of S. Ildutus, by whom he was instructed perfectly, and as far as God had enabled him to instruct him, as well in Secular learning, so much of it as was expedient, as in the knowledge of Divine Scriptures; at length taking leave of his pious Master, and much reverenced fellow-disciples, he went into Ireland (Iren perrexit) there more ex|actly to learn the opinions and dictats of other fa|mous Schollars, both in Philosophicall and Divine learning. Having therefore pass'd through the Schooles of many learned Teachers, and like a diligent Bee collected the iuyce of diverse flowers, he layd it up carefully in the Hive of our Mo|ther the Church, to the end he might in oppor|tune season poure forth the mellifluous words of the Gospell on his own countreymen, and thereby draw them out of misery to eternall ioyes, and like a good servant restore unto his Lord with advan|tage the Talent entrusted to him. This, which was his first iourney into Ireland, was in the year of Grace five hundred and forty.
4. Here this Authour calls Ireland by the ancient true name given it by Diodorus Sicu|lus, by whom it is stiled Ire,Diod. hc. l. 5. and the inha|bitants Iri and Irenses. In which Island, saith Bishop Vsher,Vsser. ibid. there flourish'd in this age the Schooles of Armagh, wherin the Elder Gildas had presided, when he laboured piously in cultivating the minds of the Irish. In which employment probably the younger Gildas also succeeded him. However certain it is that in that countrey, he like a busy and care|full Bee did not only collect sweet iuyce, but a sharp sting likewise, which he after|ward darted forth against the vices of his own countrey. But with the inhabitants of Ireland he dealt more mildly, for as the fore|cited Authour testifies, he restor'd discipline in the Ecclesiasticall Order, he gather'd many con|gregations of Monks,Id. ibid. and likewise mercifully deliver'd from the slavery of Pagans many captives.
5 How long his abode in Ireland conti|nued, doth not appear in ancient Records: but certain it is that he return'd into Brit|tany, where, as we may judge by his wri|tings, he found small comfort and encou|ragement to porue forth the honey which he had gather'd in Ireland, such were the cala|mities, and confusions raigning there, vices and miseries contending which should ex|ceed the other. So that his almost only em|ployment was to bewayl the destruction of his countrey hastning on and by publishing the crimes especially of the Rulers, both se|cular and Ecclesiasticall, to justiy the severity of God to have been beneath their demerits and provocations.
6. But in the year of our Lord five hun|dred sixty two he was by a double message and invitation from Ireland interrupted in his sad thoughts, and withdrawn from be|holding such mournfull spectacles, as every where in Brittany offred themselves to his eyes. The first Message came from persons of quality in Ireland, and is thus related by Adamannus in the life of S. Columba:Adaman. in vit. S. Colu~b. Ap. Vsser f. 904. The Se|niours of Ireland by faithfull messengers sent an Epistle to S. Gildas by Nation a Saxon (we must read, a Brittain) to the end to entertain a mu|tuall entercourse of charity between them. And when he had read over their letters, and held in his hand an Epistle written to him from S. Co|lumba, he presently kiss'd it, adding these words,He who wrote this Epistle is a man replenish'd with the Graces of Gods holy spirit. Thereupon one of the Messengers said: It is true what you say: Yet notwithstanding this holy man has been censur'd by a Synod in Ireland, because in ex|treme necessity and danger of death he comman|ded his kindred and countreymen to resist by fighting a violence offred them. S. Gildas having hear'd S. Columba thus reprehended, answerd,What a foolish, imprudent and ignorant people are your countreymen in Ireland!
7. Thus is the first message declared: in which that clause which concerns S. Colum|ba's action, unjustly censured by the Bishops of Ireland, shall shortly be cleared, when we are to treat of that holy mans coming into Brittany, the cause whereof was the said cen|sure.
8. The second Message, ioynd with an invi|tation, which about the same time came to Saint Gildas, was directed from a King in that countrey named Ammeric:Ath. vit. Gildae in Flo|iaec. Bibl. c. 9.10. And it is thus described by the Authour of S. Gil|das his life in the Library of the Monastery of Fleury: At that time King Ammeric raignd over all Ireland. He also sent messengers to Saint Gildas, requesting him to come to him; withall promising that if he would undertake that iour|ney and restore to good Order the Ecclesiasticks in his Kingdom, wherin generally the Catholick Faith it self was decayed, both himself and his subjects should in all things be obedient to him. When Gildas heard this, he, like a valiant soldier throughly furnished with celestiall arms, pre|sently-went into Ireland, there to preach the Gos|pell of Christ.
9. Being come thither, he was presented to the King by certain Noble persons who had formerly been acquainted with him. Assoon as King Am|meric saw him he gave him many gifts, and with many prayers entreated him to stay some time with him, and, as he had signified in his Message, restore order to the Church in that Region, be|cause in a manner all the inhabitants had lost the Catholick Faith. S. Gildas accordingly travelling through all the Provinces of Ireland restored Churches, instructed the Clergy in the true Faith and worship of the holy Trinity, cured those who had been poysond with Heresy, and expelled all Teachers of Errour. So that by his Zeale and di|ligence Truth began again to flourish in the coun|trey.
10. After this the Holy man built many Mo|nasteries in that Island, and instructed the chil|dren of many of the Nobility in learning and piety. And to win the greater number to the service of God, he himself became a Monk, and brought to the same Profession very many as well of the Nobility as meaner persons and orphans. He compassionatly freed likewise from the tyran|nicall slavery of Infidels many poore Christians, c.
11. Thus this holy man became as it were a second Apostle to Ireland, repairing the ruines of that Faith which Saint Patrick first preached among them. Now whereas Ada|mannus says, that the Epistle first sent him out of Ireland was brought by Faithfull men: If we enquire who these Faithfull men were, it will appear very probable that among them the Holy Abbot Komgall was one, for the Writer of his life sayes, that at this time, namely in the seaventh year after the foundation of the Mona|stery of Beancher (which saith B. Vsher was built in the year of Grace five hundred fifty five) that holy man sayld into Brittany, out of a desire to visit some holy men, and to remain there some time:A. D. 563. where he built a Monastery in a certain village called Heth.
12. How long S. Gildas abode in Ireland is not manifest: though for so great a work as he performed there, a short time would not suffise. But it is without question that he re|turned into Brittany, where he also dyed in a good old age:Pits in Gild. For thus writes Pits of him, At last Gildas the glorious Confessour of Christ being ninety years old ended his life in great holines in the Monastery of Banchor, where he was buried the fourth day before the Calends of Fe|bruary in the year of Grace five hundred eighty three, when Maglocunus sustaind the Brittish Empire falling to ruine. And on the same day is celebrated in our Martyrologe the memory also of the other Saint Gildas Albanius.Martyrolog. Angl. 2. an. Now whereas it is said that Maglocunus was then King of Brittany: that may possibly be true: for the succession of the Brittish Princes du|ring these tumultuous times, for want of Writers, is very uncertain.
13. If we consider the great age in which he dyed, that may reasonably be applied to him,Ap. Vsser is Primord. f. 9.55. which B. Vsher would rather referr- to the former S. Gildas, namely that S. Brendan the Son of Finloga in the year of our Lord five hundred sixty two came into Brittany to visit the holy old man Gildas dwelling there, who was fa|mous for his great wisedom: which passage is ex|tracted out of an uncertain Authour of his Life. For at that time Gildas was more then threescore and ten years old.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1. The Raign of King Ethelbert.
2.3. c. Of S. Columba: His Contention with King Dermitius: whence followd a Civill Warr: in which the King is miracu|lously overthrown.
6. S. Columba pennanced by S. Finian a Bishop.
7. And excommunicated by a Synod of Bishops.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred sixtyA. D. 561. one Irmeric King of Kent after he had raignd thirty years, dyed; leaving behind him a Son and a Daughter: His Son and Successours name was Ethelbert, his daugh|ters, Ricula. This is that happy and famous Ethelbert, who according to his Name was the glory and splendour of his Nation, who had the first prerogative of receiving and propagating the Christian Faith among the Saxons. Some disposition thereto was begun in his Fathers time,H. Boet. who by Hector Botius his testimony (who calls him Iurminric) permit|ted in his Kingdom (at least a privat) exercise of Christian Religion. But before it will be open|ly professed there by his Son, thirty years of

his raign must be spent, as shall be shewd hereafter. During which time many chan|ges hapned to his state: for he was frequently exercis'd in war, wherein toward the be|ginning he sustained great losses, which afterward he repair'd by many victories, with which he much enlarged the limits of his dominions.
2. In the third year of his raign the fa|mous S. Columba by occasion of Civil wars and the iniurious dealing of the Bishops in Ireland, was compell'd to quitt that Island and come into Brittany. Thus does Adel|mannus who wrote the life of that Saint relate the particulars; Two years after the Civil war at Culedre bene, Vsser in  f. 105.  f. 02. when Dermitius son of Kerbail was Monark of Ireland, and all busi|nesses were determin'd before the Kings Tribunal, it happned so that S. Columba was obliged to appear before him to challenge a certain free man who had been made a captive.And when the cause being pleaded before the King, an uniust sentence had been pronounced by him, the Man of God rose up with great indignation and before all there pesent, said thus, O uniust King, Know that from this moment thou shalt never see my face within thy dominions, till God the Iust Iudge shall have diminish'd thy Kingdom for thy iniustice: For as thou hast despis'd mee here before thy Nobles by a Wrongfull iudgment, so shall the Eternall God despise thee before thine enemies in the day of war.
Having said thus, he presently took horse, smiting him with his whip so as that great store of blood issued from him. This being observ'd by the Kings Counsellors present, they wondred at it, and humbly entreated the King to comply with the Holy mans request, for fear God should dissipate his Kingdom according to his threatning.
3. But the King filld with fury would not un|derstand, that he might doe right: but moreove swore that he would toke revenge on all the kin|red of S. Columba, and make them all slaves. And according to this Oath he gathred a mighty army of three and twenty thousand, horse, foot and charrets: and with it march'd to the confines of that countrey, with a resolution utterly to extir|pate the inhabitants. When therefore the people of Conal heard of the Kings coming, they likewise were assembled to the number of three thousand, desirous to fight manfully in defence of their coun|trey, being in so great danger, and placing all their hope in God alone.S. Columba rose very early, and being full of Gods Spirit, he encouraged them, and with a loud voyce which sounded terri|bly through the whole army, he said to them, Fear nothing, God himself shall fight for you, as he did with Moyses against the Egyptians at the Red sea: Not any of you shall suffer the least harm: for our Lords wrath is inflam'd against this proud Kings army, so that if but one onely person among you shall in his Name give an assault, he alone by Gods power shall putt them to flight. Be coura|geous therfore: Not a man of you shall fall in this combat.
4. Assoon as he had spoken this, which his army hearing beleiv'd as an assurance given them from God himself,A. D. 565. a few of his soldiers the same moment with wonderfull courage rush'd upon their Enemies not at all expecting them: for the Holy mans words had utterly taken from their minds all apprehension of death. And at the same time an Angel of God armd like a soldier, and in the shape of a man of an incredibly high stature appeard in the Kings Camp. His aspect was so terrible, that the soldiers hearts utterly faild them, and instead of resisting their enemies, they rush'd one upon another in their hast to fly away, and such a confusion there was of horses and char|rets, that for hast they killd one another. Thus a handfull of men without the losse of any one de|feated a great army, taking many prisoners.
5. This wonderfull victory being obtain'd, they return'd to the Man of God: who addressing his speech to a youth named Scandalan then attending on him, with a propheticall voyce thus said to him,My son, this day will procure for mee a tedious pilgrimage in a strange countrey, where I must live absent from my kinred and freinds many years. But say nothing of what I tell thee, till the event shew the truth of my words.
6. After this S. Columba went to S. Finian a Bishop, to receive condign Pennance from him, because of so much blood shed in the foresaid war: and with him there went an Angel of God, who shone with wonderfull brightnes: but was visible to none except the Holy man Finian, calld also Find barr. When therfore Saint Columba deman|ded Pennance of the Holy Bishop, his answer was,Thou must be obliged by thy preaching and exam|ple to bring as many soules to heaven, as by occasion of this war have sunk into Hell. After which sentence, S. Columba with great ioy, said, Thou hast pronounced a iust and equall iudgment upon mee.
7. But the Holy mans troubles did not end thus: for by occasion of this war and bloodshed Saint Columba in a Synod of Bishops was censur'd to abstain from the Commu|nion: though many among them dissented from this sentence: upon whih great contentions and disputes arose among the Clergy, which occasiond Saint Columba his letter to Saint Gildas requesting him to endeavour the composing those differen|ces.



XII. CH.XII. CHAP.

1.2 c. S. Columba's coming into Brit|tany. He fixes his habitation in the Isle called Hye.
6.7. c. He Converts the Picts. Monaste|ries built by him.
9. c. His twelve companions: One of them was Constantin late King of Brit|tany.
11. c. His agreement with Saint Kenti|gern, c.
14.15. His death: and place of buriall.

A. D. 56. Ap. Vsser. f. 1059.  f. 703.1. SAint Columba wearied with these Ec|clesiasticall contentions resolved to quitt his Native countrey, but not permit|ting himself to be a chuser of his place of Exile, he consulted by a messenger the Holy man Brendan Abbot of Birre, to whom God had given the Spirit of Counsel and Discre|tion. Who after he had lifted up his eyes and heart to heaven, commanded to digg under the feet of the Messenger, where was found a stone on which was engraven only the letter I whereupon he bade the Mes|senger to tell his Master that he must goe to an Island called I or Hy, where he should find employment for his zeale, and be the cause of bringing many soules to heaven. Thus writes Adamannus in his life quoted by B. Vsher.
H. Boet.2. But Hector Botius assigns another more probable reason of his going into that Countrey, saying, The fame of the great devo|tion and piety of Conal King of the Picts draw the Holy man Columba out of Ireland into Brit|tany, attended with a multitude of his disci|ples, where he became the Father and directour of many Monasteries.
3. As for the Island called Hy, it is erro|neously written by Dempster, Hydestinatus, and from him by Baronius likewise: The ground of which mistake was the wrong reading of this passage in S. Beda,Beda l. 3. c. 3 Monachus erat Episcopus Aidan, upote de Insula quae vo|catur Hy destinatus where the two last words which ought to be severed, are by him read as conjoynd into one. This Island was after|ward called Iona, falsly by some Exscribers of Adamannus written Iova.
4. In the ordinary Copies of S. Beda in stead of S. Columba we find written S. Columbanus: Whence many Writers being deceived doe confound this Saint with that S. Columbanus who founded the Monasteries of Luxueil (Lu|xoviense) in France and Gobio in Italy: who was likewise an Irishman, and a Father of many Monks. Whereas they are indeed di|stinguished both by their names, gests and ages wherein they lived. As for the present S. Columba, the Brittains usually called him S. Columkill, for the great number of Mona|steries or Cells of Monks which he built in Brittany.
5. The Authour of his Life in Capgrave be|sides a large Character of his vertues, piety austerities, c. (solemnly repeated allmost in all Modern Stories of Saints) further re|lates how he was many years before pro|phecied of,Ap. Capgrav. i vit. . co|lumb. for saith he, A certain Disciple of S. Patrick a Brittain, named Maccaeus, fore|told of him, saying,In latter times shall be born one called Columba, who shall illustrate the age wherein he shall live, and his name shall be spread through all the Provinces of the Isles of the Ocean: for he shal be acceptable to God and highly favoured by him. He shall descend from Noble parents, and in the forty fifth year of his age shall passe out of Ireland (Scoti) into Brit|tany, where he will live a stranger and exiled person for Christ.
6. As touching his coming into Brittany, and his Gests here, we receive this account from S. Beda,Beda. l. . In the five hundred sixty fifth year of our Lords Incarnation, when Iustinus the Successour of Iustinian governed the Roman Em|pire, there came out of Ireland a certain Preist and Abbot, in habit and profession a Monk, called Columba, with an intention to preach the Word of God to the Northern Picts, who are sepa|rated from the Southern Regions by vast and hor|rible Mountains. For as for the Picts dwelling on the South of those Mountains, they had many years before renounced their Idolatry and embra|ced the Christian Faith (as their Tradition is) by the preaching of Nynias a most Reverend and holy Bishop born in Brittany, who had been regu+larly instructed in the Mysteries of Divine Truth at Rome. The Seat of whose Bishoprick dignified with a Church dedicated to S. Martin, where the said holy Bishop with many other Saints doth rest, is now in the possession of the Angli. The said place pertaining to the Province of the Berni|cians is ordinarily called Candida casa (White House) because he built there a Church of hewn stone, a way of building not practised by the Brit|tains.
7. Now Columba came into Brittany in the ninth year of the raign of Bridius the Son of Mei|lochon, the most powerfull King of the Picts: and by his preaching and example converted that Nation to the Faith of Christ. So that for a reward he received the Island of Hy (or Iona) for the possession of a Monastery. The Isle is but small, being, according to the estimation of the Angli, only of five families: And his Successours doe hold it to this day: where himself was likewise buried being seaventy years old, after he had spent about thirty two years from his entrance into Brittany.
8. This Holy man before his coming into Brittany had founded a Noble Monastery in Ireland named in that tongue Dear-mach, or the feild of Oakes, for the abundance of those trees growing there. And from these two Mona|steries of Hy and Dear-mach, many others were

propagated in Ireland and Brittany by his Disci|ples. Among all which notwithstanding the Mo|nastery of Hy in which his sacred Body rests doth hold the preeminence and cheif authority. Now the said Island is usually governed by an Abbot who is a Preist: To whose Iurisdiction the whole Province, and even Bishops themselves, by a custom no where else practis'd, ought to be subiect, according to the example of their first Teacher S. Columba, who was only a Preist and Monk, and not a Bishop: Of whose Life and Sayings many strange things are extant in writing compild by his Disciples. But what a kind of man soever he was, of this we are assur'd that he left behind him Suc|cessours famous for their great continence, Divine Love and Regular institution. Thus writes S. Beda.
H Boet. l. 9. f 6.9. Hector Boetius hath moreover collected from ancient Records the names of S. Colum|ba's twelve Companions in his Voyage and labours, calld by Adamannus his (Commi|litones) fellow soldiers. There came (saith he) into Albion with S. Columba twelve men eminently imbued with the Doctrin of Christ, but more adorn'd with sanctity. Their Names were Baathenus and Cominus, who after S. Colum|ba's death were Superiours over Monasteries, and no mean ornaments of the Christian Church among the Scotts. Also Cibthacus and Ethernan nephews to S. Columba by his Brother, and both of them Preists. Moreover Domitius, Rutius and Feth, men illustrious for their descent, but more for their piety: Lastly Scandalaus, Eglodeus, Totaneus, Mote|fer and Gallan. These men when S. Columba pass'd from Ireland to Brittainy, fixing their habita|tions in the Isle Iona, afterward travelled through the Regions of the Scots and Picts, and by their la|bours in teaching, disputing and writing imbued both those nations with vertuous manners and true Religion.
10. One companion more the Scottish Hi|storians add to S. Columba, to wi, S. Constantin formerly King of the Brittains, who repen|ting of his crimes sharply censur'd by Gildas, became a Monk. Concerning whom Iohn For|dn quoted by B. Vsher thus writes: Conte~porary to S. Columba was S. Constantin King of Cornwal,l. Fordn ap. Vsser. f. 69. who leaving his earthly kingdome, became soldier to the Heavenly King, and with Saint Columba went into Scotland, where he preached the Faith to the Scots and Picts He built a Monastery in Govane near the River Cluid, which he govern'd as Abbot. He converted to the Faith the whole Province of Kentire, where he likewise dyed a Mar|tyr, and was buried in his Monastery of Govane.
Boet. l. 3. c. 4.11. Hector Boetius names the King of the Picts, who bestowd the Isle of Hy or Iona on the Irish Monks Comgall or Conval, who, saith he, was King of Dalrieda: and so eminent for his Piety that the fame therof drew S. Colum|ba out of Ireland.
12. At the same time not far from S. Co|lumba liv'd S. Kentigern, lately returnd to his Bishoprick of Glasco, and who no doubt was an efficacious assistant to him in his Aposto|licall Office. Of the solemne meeting of these two Saints,A. D. 568. with their Disciples, we have already spoken in the Gests of Saint Kenti|gern.
13. That in all Points there was a perfect agreement in Faith not only between S. Kentigern and S. Columba, but also between the Disciples of S. Columba, and S. Augustin is evident from S. Beda, c. Onely in one Rite or Ceremony they differed, which was the time of observing Easter. Vpon which unconsiderable difference notwithstanding some Modern Protestants doe ground an opi|nion that the Brittish Churches did receive not only their Sacred Rites, but Faith also from the Eastern Churches, and not from Rome. But how great this mistake is, hath in some part already, and shall more clearly be de|monstrated when we shall treat of the Con|troversy agitated between S. Augustin the Monk, who urged a conformity to the Ro|man observance, and the Brittish Bishops zea|lous to continue the Errour taught them by the Picts and Scots, who had first received it from S. Columba: whereas he fell into it, not out of any love to Novelty, or refractary contention, but meerly ignorance of the Paschall Computation.
14. Adamannus, followd herein by B. Vsher, placing the arrivall of S. Columba in Brittany two years sooner then generally our other Historians doe, they consequently assign thirty four to have been spent by him here.When therfore thirty of those years were past, the Holy man out of an impatient desire to be freed from the burthen of mortality,Ap Capgra in vit. S. Columb. earnestly prayd to God to end his pilgrimage After which prayers oft repeated, he saw in a vision certain Angels approaching to him, as to conduct his soule to heaven: Which sight imprinted such ioy in his countenance that his Disciples observ'd it. But that ioy presently vanish'd, and in its place succee|ded great sadnes. For he saw those Angels recalld, who told him that upon the Peti|tions of the Pictish Churches, c. God ha added four years more to his life. Thus writes the Authour of his life in Capgrave
15. At last in the year of Grace five hundred ninety seaven, the year in which S. Augustin came into Brittany, this Holy man dyed most happily, and his Sacred Body was buried in his Monastery of Hy: from whence notwith|standing it was translated, at least a great portion of it, into Ireland, and repos'd in the Church of Doun-patrick: The memory of which translation is celebrated in the Eccle|siasticall Office long ago printed at Paris: and in the same Church of Doun, according to the testimony of Ranulfus of Chester, an In|scription on his Monument signified, That in that one Tomb three Saints, S. Patrick, S. Bri|gide and S. Columba did repose.



A. D. 570.
XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1.2. King Ethelbert invades the other Saxon Kings: by whom he is worsted.
3.4. c. His Mariage with Bertha, or Aldiberga a Daughter of France: who is permitted a free exercise of Christian Religion.
9.10 Saying Masse was the generall De|votion of the Church.

A. D. 568.1. HItherto the Saxon Princes had em|ploy'd their forces onely to the de|struction of the Brittains: but now finding no resistance from them, turnd their arms against one another.Ethelvverd. in Chron. For, saith Ethelwerd, three years being expir'd after the coming of S. Columba into Brittany, Ceaulin and Cutha mov'd a Civill war against Ethelbert. But Malmsbury and Huntingdon acknowledge Ethelbert King of Kent to have been the ag|gressour.Malmsb. l. i. de Reg. c. 2. Huntingd. l. 2 For it seems being vex'd to see the Dominions and power of Ceaulin King of the West-Saxons so much encreas'd, for besides his own Territoryes immediatly subiect to him, the other Saxon Princes in the East and South acknowledged a dependance, so that Ceaulin assum'd the Title of Monark: Hereupon Ethelbert a valiant Young Prince, being mindfull of the glory of his An|cestours, who first had establish'd a Kingdom in Brittany, and had always enjoyd a preemi|nence above other Princes, resolved to en|large the bounds of his Empire, and not to content himself with the only Province of Kent.
2. In pursuance of which design he rais'd an Army,A. D. 569. and with it march'd out of his own confines into the Province of the Regni, or Surrey, where passing unwarily over a little River calld Vandalis, he was rudely repuls'd by Ceaulin: and again endeavou|ring to march forward, the Armies mett at a Village calld Wibbandun (now Wimbledon) where he was with a great slaughter of his army compelld to fly back into Kent, having lost in the combat his two Cheif Captains, Oslaf and Knebban. Near the place where the battell was fought remains still a Monu|ment of it, to wit, a rampire rais'd in a round form, as encompassing a Camp, which is at this day calld Knebensbury, or the Burg of Kneben.
3. Ethelbert after this losse, sought to strengthen himself by forrain aid:A. D. 570. for which purpose he treated a freindship and confe|deracy with the neigbouring powerfull Kingdom of the Franks: to make which confederacy more lasting, he desired to joyn it more strictly by mariage:A. D. 575. which according|ly was effected.
4. Hitherto when we had occasion to mention that Kingdom we calld it Gaule, which was its ancient Primitive name. But afterward a Nation out of Germany, calld Franks, invading it, and under King Phara|mond possessing the greatest part of it, chan|ged the name of it from Gaule into France: and so hereafter we shall call it. The Suc|cessours of Pharamond for severall genera|tions were Pagans, till by the Apostolick zeale of Saint Remigius Bishop of Rhemes in the year of Grace four hundred ninety nine King Clodovus was converted to the Christian Faith, and with him the greatest part of his kingdom: Which Faith ever after conti|nued and encreased there.
5. At this time that Kingdom was divided into four parts, each of them severally go|verned by four Kings Sons of Clotharius, and Grandchildren of Clodovus: Charibert the Eldest Son had the seat of his Kingdom at Paris; Chilperic at Soissons; Gunthram at Or|leans; and Sigebert at Rhemes. Now a daughter of one of these did Ethelbert King of Kent marry: but of which of them par|ticularly, is not mention'd in our Story. Saint Beda indefinitly writes that she was daughter of a King of the Franks.
6. The name of this Lady according to S. Beda, Malmsburiensis, c. was Berta: But S. Gregory who liv'd in this age, and had en|tercourse by letters with her, more rightly calls her Aldiberga, and adiudges great praise due to her in the conversion of the Saxons.
7. The parents of this Lady made a diffi|culty to deliver a daughter professing the Christian Faith to the bed of a Pagan. But Ethelbert engaging himself to allow her and her family an entire freedom publickly to professe her Religion, and to exercise all the Sacred Rites belonging to it: the mariage was concluded: and the Lady sent into Brit|tany.
8. She was attended by a prudent and devout Christian Bishop called Lethardus, by Harpsfeild said to have been Bishop of Salva|nort (but he doubts there is an errour in the Copies where this unknown name is found.) This Bishop is in Capgrave stiled the Precursor of S. Augustin, and one who opened the dore by which he brought in Christia|nity.
9. There were then in Dorobernia the prime Citty of Kent, since calld Canterbury, seve|rall Churches which had been built many ages before by Christians in the times of the Ro|mans, and which had not been utterly de|molish'd by the Saxons. Among which the Queen made choice of that which was dedi|cated to the honour of Saint Martin, a holy Bishop in wonderfull veneration through all France.Beda l. i. c. 26 For thus writes Saint Beda, There was near to the Citty toward the East a Church

anciently consecrated to the memory of S. Mar|tin whilst the Romans inhabited Brittany. In which Church the Queen, who as hath been said was a Christian, usually perform'd her de|votions.
10. What those Devotions were is thus more particularly express'd by the Authour of the life of the Holy Bishop Lethardus in Capgrave,Ap. Capgrav in vit. Le|thardi. who writes thus: In the most an|cient Church of the Holy Bishop S. Martin situ|ated near the Citty, the Queen together with her Christian family did frequent the Sacraments of Masses and Prayers, in the celebrating whereof the Blessed Bishop Lethardus was President, or Cheif Prelat. For the saying or singing of Masses were indeed the Solemn Devotions of the Church in those times, as appears, for as much as concerns France particularly, the Native countrey of this Queen, by the Councils of Orleans and Tours,Ccil. An|nn. 1. c. 2 Ccil. . . c. 4. Magdeburg. Cent. 6 f. 334 celebrated in these very times: And this is acknowledged to have been the generall practise of this age by the Centuriators of Magdeburg who write thus, The reader hereby may observe that the Solemnities of Masses did now fill all places. And for as much as concerns Brittany, we have already shewd that among the Nor|thern Picts S. Columba knowing by revela|tion the death of S. Brendan in Ireland,Adn. in it. S. Columb l. 3. c. 15. cele|brated a Solemne Masse for his soule.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2 King Ceaulins conquests: and death.
3. c. The Kingdom of the East Saxons Erected.

1. THE two Saxon Kings, in Kent and the Western parts, did not prosecute their hatred against one another, but esteemd it more for their advantage to enlarge their Dominions by invading the Provinces as yet in the possession of the Brittains. In order whereto Ceaulin King of the West-Saxons,A. D. 571. who had hitherto employ'd his forces in the con|quest of places bordring especially on the Sea, sent his Brother Cutha or Cuthwolf with an army into the inland Provinces: The Successe of which expedition is thus descri|bed by Florentius, and which, saith he, was undertaken in the year of Grace five hun|dred seaventy one:2. Cuthulf the Brother of King Ceaulin fought with the Brittains in a place calld Bedanford (or Bedford.A. D. 572. Flore. hc.) And having obtaind the Victory, he took from them four Royal Citties, to wit, Lingan|burgh (a place now unknown,) Egelesburgh (now calld Aylsbury in Buckinghamshire) Bensingtun (or Benson, in Oxfordshire) and Egnesham (where placed, is uncertain.) After which victory, he the same year departed this life.
A. D. 575.3. In the year five hundred seaventy five was erected the Kingdom of the East Angles in Norfoll,A. D. 585. Suffolk and Cambridgshire, together with the Isle of Ely. The name of the first King raigning there was Vffa, from whom his Successours; or as some write, all the sub|jects, were called Vffings. Some place the be|ginning of this Kingdom before that of the West-Saxons: but no where can we find their names recorded: the reason perhaps being, because before Vffa's time they were Kings only by courtesy and with dependance on greater Princes, as those of Kent, c. as in|deed in following ages they were again the Beneficiarij sometimes of the Mercian Kings, and sometimes of those of Kent.
4. Two years after the beginning of Vffa's raign was fought a Battle fatall to the Brit|tains,A. D. 577. by which they were expelld out of almost all the fertile plaine regions of the Island, and driven to the Mountains of Cam|bria. Geffrey of Montmouth to make his coun|trey-mens calamity more illustrious, tells us that a certain King, calld Gormand, came with an army of one hundred sixty six thousand African soldiers and ioynd with the Saxons against King Careticus and his Brittains, and drove them beyond the Severn into Wales.
5. But Ethelwerd,Malmsb de Reg. l. 1. c. 2 Malmsbury, c. more soberly inform us, that whereas the Brittains had hitherto defended themselves against the West-Saxons by the firm walls of their Citties of Glocester, Cirencester and Bathe, this year Ceau|lin after an overthrow given them in battell, expugn'd those three strong Citties, and forc'd them to retire to mountains and woods. This battell, saith Camden, was fought at a place calld Deorham:Camden. in Somerset. Huntingd l. 2 after which the Citty of Bath was given up to the Saxons. In which battell three Christian Kings of the Brittains were slaine, whose names were Commagil, Condidan and Faringma|gil. So that afterward Ceaulin and his Son Cuthwin were so terrible to the Brittains, that all places hastned to render themselves to their power. Thus we read in Henry of Huntingdom.
6. The Brittains notwithstanding after seaven years rest,A. D. 584 Id. ibid. again attempted another combat with the Saxons at a place calld Fedhan|lea, saith the same Authour, where on both sides they fought with horrible fury. In somuch as Cuthwin the Son of Ceaulin being oppressd with multitudes was slain, and the army of the Angli putt to flight. But King Ceaulin having again repair'd his army, the soldiers wherof bound them|selves by an oath that they would not fly, at last in a battell vanquish'd the conquering Brittains, and pursuing them took many Provinces and innume|rable spoyles. B. Vsher saith that this Battell was fought (iuxta Moram lapideam) at San-more in West-morland:Vssr. in Pri+mord. f. 570. But that place being a part of the territories of Alla King of the Deiri and Northumbrians, no probable cause can be assign'd to draw the King of the West-Saxons so far from his own Dominions, unlesse per|haps to give assistance to Alla.



A. D. 586.
XV. CH.XV. CHAP.

1.2 The Mercian Principality erected by Crida.
3.4. c. Theonus Arch-bishop of London and Thadioc of York with most of the Brittains quitt England, and fly into Wales c. carying Relicks c. with them.

A. D. 585.1. WHereas our Historians say that by the last battles the conquered Brit|tains lost many Citties and Regions,Wstmonast. hc. we may iudge that Mathew of Westminster had some reason to affirm that in the year of Grace five hundred eighty five the Kingdom of the Mer|cians took beginning, under their first King Croeda or Crida. Notwithstanding it may more properly be said, that the foun|dations of that Kingdom were now layd, which took not its iust form till ten years after.
2. This Crida reckond himself the tenth in descent from Woden the Idol Deity of the Saxons. And wheras the other Saxon Princes possess'd themselves of the extreme parts of the Island towards the Cambrians, Picts and the Ocean, Crida peirc'd into the bowells of Brittany, by little and little possessing himself of all the Provinces which were towards the North confined with the Rivers Humber and Mersey: on the South with Thames: on the East with the Severn and Deva: and on the East with the German Ocean.
3. The Brittains themselves by a voluntary cession made Crida's way very easy to his new erected throne, in which he as yet sate con|tented with the inferiour Title of Governour or Duke. For the Saxons being now dispersed through all the parts and Provinces of Brit|tany, and every day gaining more strength, became intolerably burdensom to the poor Brittains, and being Infidels publish'd Lawes extremely preiudiciall to Christian Religion profess'd by them: Whereupon by agreement between the Clergy and other Brittish Inhabi|tants hitherto mixt with the Saxons, they re|solved to quitt the Countrey and to retire, some of them flying to the mountains of Cambria, others into Cornwall, and great num|bers beyond Sea into Lesser Brittany and other Christian Regions.
A. D. 586. Westm. hc. Godvvin.4. Then it was, saith Mathew of Westminster, to wit, in the year of our Lord five hundred eighty six that the Arch-prelats, Theonus Bishop of Lon|don, and Thadioc of York, seing all the Churches which had been subiect to them now destroyd to the ground, they, attended with many Ecclesia|sticks who had escap'd danger from the Saxons fled into Cambria, and caried with them the sacred Relicks of Saints,A. D. 588. out of fear least by an irruption of the Barbarous Saxons the Sacred Bones of so many and so great Saints should otherwise be blot|ted out of the memory of men. Many likewise passing over into Armorick Brittany, left the two Provinces of Loegria and Northumbria utterly de|priv'd of Christian Congregations. The Bodies also of some Saints after they had reverently hid them in Monuments, they cast great heaps of earth over them, least they should be obnoxious to the contumelious scorn of the Infidels. For the Kings of the Angli and Saxons, as they were very powerfull in arms, so they were most violent Pa|gans, who thirsted after nothing more then defa|cing of the name of Christ, and subverting his Religious Worship. Insomuch as when they had subdued the countrey, if any Church remaind untouch'd, they took occasion thereby to bring greater confusion and contempt on the Name of Christ, by turning it into a Temple of their pro|fane Idoll-Gods, and with their impious Sacri|fices polluting the Holy Altars of the true God.
5. Concerning this Theonus Arch-bishop of London,Catalog. in London. he was formerly Bishop of Glocester, and from thence translated to London, in the year five hundred fifty three, saith B. Godwin. And the year of Grace five hundred eighty Six taking his whole Clergy with him he is sayd to have fled to his own countrey men in Wales, together with Thadioc Arch-bishop of York. And those who afterward in the time of the Saxons sate at London, were simple Bishops: the Metropoliticall dignity being transferd to Dorobernia, or Canterbury, as shall be declared. Neither after the depar|ture of Thadioc, doe we read of any other Arch-bishop of York, till by the conversion of Edwin son of Alla, King of the Northum|brians, S. Paulinus was there consecrated Arch-bishop.
6. By this Secession and flight of the Brit|tish Clergy and other inhabitants, there re|maind the miserable relicks of the Brittans saith Mathew of Westminster, onely in three Provinces,Westmonast. to wit, in Cornubia, or Cornwall (so calld because it stretcheth it self like a horn into the Sea:) in Demetia, which is South|wales: and in Venedotia, which is calld North|wales. With these narrow limits they were forc'd to be contented: nevertheles they never depar|ted from the true Faith of Christ. One thing indeed there is for which they are iustly to be re|prehended: which is the mortall hatred which even to this day they bear to the English Na|tion by whom they were expelld their ancient Territories, which hatred is so irreconcileable, that they will lesse willingly communicate with them, then with dogs.
7. By what hath here been transcrib'd out of our ancient Historians the discreet Reader may iudge how vainly and ground|lesly our Modern Protestant Writers doe boast of their conformity with the Religion of the ancient Brittains, in opposition to

Writers doe boast of their conformity with the Religion of the ancient Brittains, in oppo|sition to that which S. Augustin the Monk shortly after taught the Saxons: and how im|pudently some of them affirm that the Saxons were instructed in Christianity by the Brit|tains, and not from Rome.


XVI CH.XVI. CHAP.

1.2.3. A preparation for the Conversion of England: erroneously denyed by B. Parker.
4 5. c. How S. Gregory seing pretty English slaves, was moved to seek the Conversion of our countrey.

A. D. 588.1. THE Saxons were no sooner in a se|cure possession of this Island, but Almighty God began so to dispose the effects of his Divine Providence as to prepare the way for their conversion to him, in order to their eternall Happines: as if an Earthly kingdom had not been a reward answerable to their merits in destroying an ungratefull people, abandond to all filthines and im|piety.
2. The instrument of this felicity, shortly to approach, was the Blessed man S. Gregory, as yet a privat Preist and Monk, but presently after a most worthy Successour of S. Peter in the Chair Apostolick at Rome. And the occa|sion moving him to interesse himself in so pious and glorious a design is thus breifly declared by our learned Selden: There having been brought to Rome,Selden. in Analect. Brit. l. . c. 2. saith he, a number of young English children to be expos'd to sale in the publick market, Gregory then a Monk excited by a Zealous affection to propagate the name of Christ, and moved to a tender compassion by seeing the amiablenes and beautifull features of those youths, and being inform'd that the Nation from whence they came was destitute of the knowledge of Christ, he took a resolution to sow amongst them the Divine seeds of Christian Faith. And being afterward exalted to the Pontificate, in order to the effecting his pious design, he sent a certain Monk calld Augustin to lay the foundations of a Christian Church in the Island, adioyning to him other auxiliaries, devout companions of his la|bours.
3. Notwithstanding B. Parker the gene|rally supposed Authour of the Brittish Anti|quities,Antiquit. Britann. f. 34 out of envy and indignation to ac|knowledge any obligation to Rome, pro|nounces this to be a mere Fable: His argu|ment is, for that in his iudgment there was no probability that the Saxons for gain should sell their children.Tacit. de Mo+rib. Germa|norum. Whereas Tacitus recounting the manners of the ancient Germans, sayes that they would out of gree|dines of gaining by dice-playing even sett their own liberty to stake:Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3 and Malmsburiensis affirms that it was a familiar and almost na|turally inbred custome among the Saxons to sell their Children: Which custom continued many ages in our Nation, insomuch as in the days of our King Henry the second, by the testimony of Giraldus Cambrensis,Girald. Cambr in Hibern. exp. l. 1. c. 18. a Synod at Armagh in Ireland was obliged to make a Decree for the redeeming of such English youths as had been sold for slaves in that Island. And before that time, among the Laws of Inas King of the West-Saxons,Inae Leg. 30. there is more then one which under great pe|nalties forbid this horrible and unnaturall commerce. Lastly with regard to Saint Gre|gories own time, he himself is a witnes beyond all exception that the Angli were accustomed to sell their children, for in an Epistle to Candidus a Preist,Gregor. M. l. 5. Epist. 10. his Procurator in France, he gives him order to redeem such English children as he mett with sold for slaves in that Kingdom; and having bought them, to send them to Rome to be there in|structed in the Christian Faith.
4. This difficulty therefore being suffi|ciently cleared, we will here more particu|larly and circumstantially set down that passage of Story, which gave occasion to S. Gregory to extend his charitable care towards our Nation. Wee find it related by almost all our ancient Historians, and by forrainers too when they treat of the Gests of S. Gregory. Yet in some of them, and particularly in Malms|buriensis and Ioannes Diaconus, one Errour is to be observed touching Chronology: For they referr this passage of Story to the times of Pope Benedict, wheras most certain it is that it hapned toward the latter end of Saint Gregories immediate Predecessour Pope Pela|gius. For a good while pass'd after Pope Be|nedicts death before Saint Gregory was Pre|fect of the Citty: after which he undertook a Monasticall Profession in a Monastery built by himself Ad clivum Scauri: from whence he was shortly after calld and created Arch|deacon of the Roman Church, then sent Apocrisarius (or Nuncio) to Constantinople, at his return from whence he saw these English youths with so much kindnes and compassion.
5. The exact Narration of which passage is in this manner deliver'd by Saint Beda: We must not passe in silence,Beda lib. 2 c. 1 says he, a relation which by Tradition from our Ancestours is brought down to us, to wit, upon what motive it was that Saint Gregory express'd so much care of the salva|tion of our Nation. For they tell us, how on a certain day when great variety of Merchandise was brought into the Market-place by forrain Merchants lately arrived, and a world of people were mett to buy, S. Gregory among the rest came, and took notice cheifly of three young children of a pure complexion, beautifull looks, and hayre grace|fully ordred. Assoon as he saw them, he enquir'd from what countrey they came: and was told that

they came from the Isle of Brittany,A. D. 589. where the in|habitants generally are so comely. He demanded further, whether those Islanders were Christians or Pagans: and was told that they were Pagans.Hereupon he deeply sighed, saying, Alas, what pitty is it that the Prince of Darknes should possesse men of such lovely bright countenances, and that persons so amiable in their looks should cary soules utterly voyd of inward Grace.Again he askd what was the name of their particular Nation: to whom it was replyed, that they were called Angli. Well may they be call'd so, sayd he, for they have Angelicall faces sui|table to such as shall be coheyrs with Angells.
He enquired further, how the Province was call'd from whence they were brought.The an|swer was, that the inhabitants of it were call'd Deiri. They are well call'd Deiri, said he, importing by their Name that they shall be deliverd from the ire of God (de ira Dei eruti) and call'd to partake his Mercy.
His last Question was, How the King of that Na|tion was call'd:And he was told that his name was Alle: whereupon in allusion to that name he sayd, Alleluia must be sung in those parts to the prayse of God the Creatour of all things.
6. Afeer this discourse ended he went to (Pelagius) Bishop of the Roman and Aposto|lick See (For as yet himself was not chosen Pope) and humbly entreated him to send into Brittany some Ministers of Gods word to con|vert that Nation to Christ: Adding, That himself was ready to be employd with Gods assistance in such a work, in case his Holines thought fit. But his offer could not be taken: for though the Pope would have granted his desire, yet the Romans would not permit his absence so far from the Citty. Notwithstanding a while after when himself was exalted to the Popedom, he brought to perfection the work so long and so earnestly desir'd by him, sen|ding indeed other persons to preach the Gospell there, but himselfe by his counsels, exhorta|tions and prayers contributing very much to make their preaching fruitfull and effectuall. These things according to what our Ance|stours have deliver'd, we thought proper and fit to be inserted in our Ecclesiasticall Hi|story.


XVII. CHAP.A. D. 590.
XVII. CH.

1.2. S. Columban comes out of Ireland into Brittany: and thence goes into France.
3. Of S. Phara a Holy Abbesse: to whom many Brittish Virgins repaire.

1. BVT Alla King of the Deiri,Malmsb. de Reg l. 1. c.  (saith Malmsburiensis) though by the sel|ling of those children he gave occasion of bring|ing Christianity among the Angli, yet was not so happy to hear any thing of it himself. For the Divine Election regarded hi Son. Which Son was not his immediate Successour Edelric, who the next year upon the death of his Father Alla possess'd his throne: But Edwin, a Prince who after many vicissitudes o for|tune came first to the Crown of the Northum|brians, afterward to the Faith of Christ, and lastly to the glory of Martyrdom, as shall be shewd. As for Ethelric, his raign was short, for it lasted onely five years, and af|forded nothing memorable.
2. In the first year of King Ethelrics raign, S. Columban,Haraeus 21. Novemb ong vit. S. Columban. after he had spent severall years in the Monastery of Benchor in Ireland came over into Brittany, being mov'd with a desire of seing strange countreys, saith Haraeus out of Ionas who largely wrote that Saints life. The Ve|nerable Abbot Comogel did much bewayle his departure, but being unable to resist the Divine Will, he dismiss'd him: so that he with twelve Companions inflamed with the same desire took ship, and came into Brittany, from whence he afterward pass'd into France. When he undertook this journey he was no more then twenty years of age. In France he was very courteously receiv'd by King Sigebert (or rather his Son Childebert) who gave him the choice of any place for his abode. These devout men therefore entring into a desart call'd (Vosegus) the Vauge, found there a certain place encompass'd with old walls, and watred with warm springs: but time had ruind all the buildings. The name of it was Luxovium.
3. Whilst S. Columban lived in Austrasia, a Province of France, he was Spirituall Ma|ster and instructour to the Holy Virgin Phara, reckon'd by the Centuriators of Magdeburg among the Brittish Nunnes. Others say she was Neice to S. Columban himself. From whomsoever she was descended, certain it is that the sweet odour of her vertues and sanctity was so largely spread that many devout Virgins, and some of them of Prin|cely families, out of Brittany repair'd to her, to learn piety under her government in France, as shall in due place be shewd.



XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2.3. War betwen the Scots and Picts.
4. The South-Saxon King subject to the West-Saxons.
5. S. Gregory consecrated Pope.

1. IN the year five hundred and ninety a war was began in the Northern parts of Brittany between the Scotts and Picts, which drew the whole Island into great factions. In those parts Aidan or Edan son of the King of the Scotts then enioyd the principality, who had been crownd King by S. Columba in the Isle Iona or Hy, saith Adamannus.
2. The cause of these commotions was the same which had formerly rais'd so long and furious wars between the Saxons and the Brittains. For the Scots out of Ireland at first were invited by the Picts to assist them against the Brittains, as the Saxons were by the Brittains against the Picts and Scots: and these Irish Scots, imitating the Saxons, at first stayd in those parts upon courtesy: but after|ward grew insolent, and new Aids from their own countrey dayly flocking to them, they fix'd their habitation, and not long after a Kingdom there. Which being once establish'd, their next attempt was to drive the Picts out of their own Provinces, which at last they effected, far more entirely then the Saxons had against the Brittains, for the Scotts utterly rooted out of the world the very name and Nation of the Picts.
3. It was for this Empire of the Northern parts of Brittany that Edan Prince of the Scotts now contended, and the whole suc|cesse of the war though waged at a great di|stance from the Isle of Iona where S. Columba then was,Adamnan. ap. Capgrav. in vit. S. Colu~b. yet was divinely reveal'd to him: For thus doe we read in his Life;S. Colum|ba being in the Isle of Iona, on a certain day cal|led his brethren together, and kneeling down sayd, Let us now pray fervently for this people and their King Aidan, for this very hower the battell against their enemies begins.A little while after he rose up, and looking towards heaven sayd, Now are the barbarous enemies put to flight, and the victory is given to Aidan, though dearly purchas'd, for of his army there are slain three hundred and three.
This needs not seem incredible, for many examples occurr in Ecclesiasticall story declaring how God has oft been pleas'd to reveale unto his servants events hapning in places far removed.
Westm. hc.4. The same year dyed Cissa King of the South-Saxons, saith Mathew of Westminster, and his Kingdom was devolved on Ceaulin King of the West-Saxons: Yet so as that it was admi|nistred by his son Edelwalc, who enioyd also the Title of King, yet as Beneficiary to Ceaulin.
5 But that which most illustrated this year was the advancement of S. Gregory to the Popedom,A. D. 591. who immediatly after the death of Pope Pelagius was with the wonderfull ap|plause of all degrees and orders in Rome placed in S. Peters Chair, to the great benefit of the whole Church, but more especially to the incomparable felicity of our Island. For his admirable Gests, among which the most illustrious was the Conversion of the Angli and Saxons, he was deservedly call'd S. Gregory the Great, and the Apostle of En|gland, as our Martyrologes declare.


XIX. CHAP.XIX. CH.

1.2. Ceaulin King of the West-Saxons driven out of his Kingdom: dyes.
3 Ethelbert King of Kent becomes Supreme among the Saxons.

1. THE year following Brittany afforded a memorable example of the instabi|lity of worldly greatnes and power, in the person of the hitherto prosperous King of the West-Saxons Ceaulin: who after all his conquests was at last overcome in fight and expell'd his kingdom and life also. Which is in this manner related by Malmsburiensis,Malmsbur de Reg. l. 1. c. 1. Ceaulin, saith he, in his last days was banish'd from his kingdom, exhibiting to his Enemies a miserable spectacle of himself. For such was the generall hatred born to him both by the Brittains and Saxons, that they all unanimously conspir'd to destroy him: Armies therefore being gathred on both sides, a battle was fought at Wodensdike in the one and thirtieth year of his raign, where his forces were utterly defeated: after which he was compell'd to forsake his kingdom, and a little after he dyed.
2. The place where this battle was fought is in Wiltshire,Camden in Wiltshire. where a great fosse divides the Pro|vince in the middle, saith Camden, from East to West, call'd by the inhabitants Wansdike, and fabulously reported to have been made by the Devil upon a Wednesday: for it takes its name from Woden, or Mercury the Saxon Idol, which gave the appellation to Wednesday. The cause of the raising of that rampire seems to have been for a separation of the Kingdoms of the Mercians and West-Saxons. And neer thereto, is seated a Village call'd Wodensbury, where Ceaulin fighting against the Brittains and Saxons was utterly broken.
3. After the death of Ceaulin, his Brothers son Cealric possess'd the Kingdom of the West-Saxons: but being much inferiour in courage to his Predecessour, he did not inherit that extent of power which Ceaulin had exercised over the other Saxon Princes. Which opportunity was not omitted by Ethelbert King of Kent, next in power to Ceaulin: who

without much hazard obtained that pre|eminence.A. D. 593 By which meanes a freer way was opened to communicate Christian Truthes to severall Provinces of the Kingdom, after they had been once entertained by Ethelbert, which hapned little above three years after the death of Ceaulin.


XX. CH.XX. CHAP.

i.2. c. The Irish Churches reduced from Schism by S. Gregory.

A. D. 592. Greg. Al. l. 2. Epist. 6. Indict. 0.1. SAint Gregory in the third year after he was Pope, by his authority and wisedom restored the Churches of Ireland to Catholick Vnity, from which they had been separated upon occasion of the quarrell about the Tria Capitula: of which we treated before. His Epistle to them concerning that subject is extant: which that it had its full effect to their satisfaction may be proved by many arguments. For presently after this time there is mention of severall of their Bishops and devout persons, which undertook Pil|grimages to Rome to visit the Holy places, and to expresse their duty to the supreme Bi|shop.
Ibid. l. 9. Ep. 62. Ind. 4.2. Moreover another Epistle of the same Holy Pope is extant also, in answer to certain doubts and questions which they had pro|posed to him touching the Rites and manner of Baptism: what Form of Profession was to be administred to such as returned to the Church from the Nestorian Heresy, c. But since those matters doe not concern the Ecclesiasticall affaires of Brittany, the Reader, if he be inquisitive, may inform himself concerning S. Gregories resolutions in those cases from S. Gregory himselfe in his Works every where to be mett with.
3. Onely we shall in this place observe that the Churches of Brittany were at this time free from any stain of Schism or Errours in Doctrines. Yea probable it is that by them the Churches of Ireland were denounced to the See Apostolick, as culpable. It was about the year five hundred sixty six, saith Baronius, that they engaged themselves in the said Schism, and now after twenty six years, through Gods goodnes, and by the endea|vours of his servant S. Gregory they were restored.


XXI. CHAP.A. D. 594.
XXI. CH.

1.2. c. The death of severall Saxon Princes
4.5. The Death of the devout Queen Ingo|berga, Mother to Queen Bertha.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred nine|ty three Edelric King of the Northumbers dyed,A. D. 593. and his Son Ethelfrid succeeded him, sirnamed the Cruel: concerning whom Malmsburiensis gives this Character,Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. Thus being possessed of his Kingdom he began first vigorously to defend his own dominions, then unjustly to invade the bounds of others, and every where to seek occasions of exalting his glory. Many combats were undertaken by him providently, and execu|ted gallantly: for neither was he restraind by slouth, when war was necessary, neither in the exercising it did his courage impell him to teme|rity.
2. About the same time Titillus King of the Eastangles being dead, his Son Redwald possessed his throne: who by some Writers is accounted the first founder of that Kingdom. By the perswasion of the Holy King and Martyr S. Edwyn, he was induced to give his name to Christ in Baptism: But these and many other things concerning him, which fill the Saxon Annalls, hapned severall years after this time, and shall in their due place be declared.
3. This year was fruitfull in the deaths of our Saxon Princes: for Crida King, or Duke of the Mercians now likewise ended his life, to whom succeeded his Son Wibba or Wippa, not memorable in story for any thing so much as leaving behind him his illustrious children Penda, Kenwalch and Sexburga: of whom hereafter.
4. About the year five hundred ninety four,A. D. 594. the pious and vertuous Queen Ingoberga received the reward of her patience by a holy and happy death. She had been the wife of Charibert one of the Kings of the Franks, and after she had born him a daugh|ter, was unworthily repudiated by him to make way for a Concubine called Meroflenda. Her memory challenges a place in our Hi|story, in as much as most probably she was Mother to Bertha or Aldiberga, the Christian Lady above twenty years since maried to Ethelbert King of Kent, whose piety and en|deavours had a great influence in disposing her Husbands mind to embrace the Christian Faith very shortly to be proposed to him by S. Augustin the Monk.
5. As touching the said Queen Ingoberga we receive a character of her vertues and an ac|count of her happy death from a worthy French Bishop an eyewitnes of both, to wit Gregory Bishop of Tours: whose relation is as

followeth:A. D. 595. In the fourteenth year of King Chil|debert, Ingoberga Widow of Charibert departed this life.Gregor. Tu+ron. l. 9. c. 26. A Lady she was of great sincerity and devotion, diligent in watching, prayers and Alms-giving. She, I suppose by direction of the Divine Providence, sent messengers to mee desi|ring my counsel and assistance about her Last Will, and disposing of matters which she intended for the good and remedy of her soule. For which pur|pose she requested my personall presence that after advice between us, her intentions might be committed to writing. I could not refuse to come to her: and at my entrance I mett with a Reli|gious man, who received mee courteously, and pre|sently called for a Notary. Then we advised toge|ther: after which she bequeathed some legacies and Offrings to the Church of Tours, and of Saint Martins: and some to the Church of Mans. This was the substance of her Will, and a few months after spent with sicknes she departed this life, by orders left in writing having given free|dom to many of her servants. At her death she was, as I conjecture, seaventy years old. By the vertues, devotion and charity of this good Queen, we may collect that Aldiburga her daughter, at least unquestionably her neer kinswoman, brought the like into Brit|tany.


XXII. CH.XXII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Saxon Heptarchy, or Sea|ven Kingdoms of the Saxons in Brit|tany: with their respective limits: and Princes at this time when S. Augustin came to convert our Nation.

1. THE next thing that occurrs in our Ecclesiasticall Records touching Brit|tany is the rising of the Sun of righteousnes upon it, by the Light whereof the darknes of Idolatry and Pagan superstition was dis|pelled, and a new seed of pious Princes, zea|lous Bishops, immaculate Virgins, devout Monks, and multitudes of all sorts far excel|ling in all Christian vertues and Graces the late Brittish inhabitants, sprung up and flou|rished to the admiration of all other Chri|stian Churches: insomuch as that from this time Brittany began to deserve the Title afterwards annexed to it, of being called The Isle of Saints.
2. But before I relate how and by what degrees the foundations of so great a Hap|pines were layd, it will be expedient to give a generall prospect at one view of the pre|sent state of Brittany, how the Provinces were divided into severall Saxon-Goverments: and what Princes ruled in each.
3. It is agreed generally among our Writers that the Day-star of Christianity at least bgan to shine in Brittany in the year of Grace five hundred ninety six: for then the Apostolick Messengers from Rome received their Mission from the most worthy Successour of Saint Peter, S. Gregory the Great in the seaventh year of his Pontificate, and begun their iourney towards our Island, though they did not arrive here till the year following.
4. Now at that time the Saxon Heptarchy was established in Brittany, for all the Pro|vinces of it (excluding the Northern King|doms of the Scotts and Picts, with the Western parts called Cambria or Wales possessed by the Brittains, and likewise Cornwall not yet whol|ly subdued by the Saxons:) were entirely under the dominion of the Angli and Sa|xons: and having been by degrees conquered by severall Princes and Captains out of Ger|many, which were independent of one ano|ther, each one challenged his conquest, and governed the Provinces subdued by him as his own lawfull right  possessions: though some of them proving lesse powerfull, and confind within narrower limits then others, in a short time were forced to demand pro|tection and consequently acknowledge some dependance on their more powerfull neighbours.
5. The Kings so governing, each his respe|ctive portion were in number Seaven: Their Names and Provinces were as followeth in order according to the antiquity of each Kingdom.
6. First Ethelbert was then in the thirty sixth year of his Raign over the Kingdom of Kent: He was Son of Irmeric, Son of Otha, Son of Eska, Son of Hengist, who founded that Kingdom in the year of Grace four hundred fifty seaven. His Kingdom containd the County of Kent, as it is at this day bounded, without any considerable difference.
7. Next over the Southsaxons (which King|dom comprised Sussex and Surrey) raignd Edilwalch the Son of Cissa, the Son of Ella, who established that Kingdom in the year four hundred ninety one. Then was the sea|venth year of Edilwalch's raign.
8. Thirdly the Kingdom of the West-Sa|xons was now the fifth year possessed by Cel|rick Brothers Son to Ceaulin, Son of Kenric, Son of Cerdic founder of that Kingdom in the year of our Lord five hundred and nine|teen. Within whose Dominions were com|prehended Hantshire, Berkshire, Wiltshire, So|merset, Dorsetshire, Devonshire and part of Cornwal.
9. Next over the East-Saxons, Sebert then was in the first year of his Raign. He was Son of Sledda, Son of Erkenwin, who in the year of Grace five hundred twenty seaven foun|ded that Kingdom, containing Essex, Middle|sex and so much of Hartfordshire as is under the Bishop of Londons Iurisdiction, whose Dio|cese is adequate to this Kingdom.
10. After this was the Kingdom of the Northumbers, to which belonged whatsoever lyeth between Humber and Edenborough-Frith.

It was sometimes subdivided into two Kingdoms, of Bernicia and Deira. Bernicia contain'd Northumberland with the South of Scotland to Edenborough: and Deira consisted of part of Lancashire, with the entire counties of York, Durham, Westmorland and Cumber|land. The whole Kingdom at this time was governed by Ethelfrid, in the fourth year of his Raign: Who was Son of Edelric, Son of Alla, Son of Ida, who founded that Kingdom in the year of our Lord five hundred forty seaven.
11. After this was the Kingdom of the East-Angles, containing Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgshire with the Isle of Ely and some part of Bedfordshire. At that time Redwald had been four years King thereof: who was Son of Titillus, Son of Vffa esteem'd the first King and founder of it in the year of Grace five hundred seaventy five.
12. The last, though largest, of the Saxon Heptarchy was the Kingdom of the Mercians, so call'd because being seated in the middle of the Island, it was the Marches or Limits on which the other Kingdoms did border. It comprehended the whole Counties of Lincoln, Northampton, Rutla~d, Huntingdo, Buckingham, Oxford, Worcester, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham, Leicester, Stafford, Chester, Glocester, Part of Lan|cashire, Herefordshire, Shropshire and Bedford|shire. At this time, when S. Augustin the Monk was sent by Pope Gregory to the Con|version of the Saxons the King, or at least Cheif Governour of Mercia was Wibba son of Crida who layd the foundations of it in the year of our Lord five hundred eighty five.
13. These were the Kings raigning in Brit|tany when Almighty God from heaven vi|sited it by sending Apostolicall men to teach the blind Inhabitants the wayes to glory and Happines. And these were the limits of their respective kingdoms. Which limits not|withstanding were in continuall motion, varying according to the successe, good or bad, of the Princes invading, as oft they did, the bounds of their Neighbours. And among these seaven Kings commonly one was most puissant, overruling the rest, who stiled himself King of the English Nation. Which supereminence Ethelbert King of Kent at this time enjoyd:Camd. Britan. to whom the Word of life was first offred, and by him thankfully ac|cepted, as shall consequently be declared.
14. Now since in the poursuit of our Hi|story we are to give an Account of occur|rents relating to another new Government and Church in Brittany, being little con|cerned hereafter in the affaires of the Brit|tains themselves: We will therefore in the following Books denote the Succession of times not by the Brittish, but Saxon Kings, in whose raigns they shall happen respectively. And though at this time in the Saxon Heptar|chy the Kingdom of Kent was both the most powerfull, and will for a good space fur|nish us with most plentifull matter proper to our History: Yet considering that ere long the West-Saxon Kingdom will both grow in power, and be very fruitfull in affor|ding rchly materialls relating to Religion: but especially considering that in time the same Kingdom will swallow all the rest, and reduce the whole Kingdome into a Monarchy: we will therefore hereafter prefixe succes|sively the Names of the West-Saxons Kings: be|ginning with Celric, in whose dayes the Holy Christian Missionners arrived in Brittany, bringing with them the happy tidings of the Gospell, ioyfully hearkened to in Kent, but either not made known, or unwelcome to the said Celric, as likewise to his Succes|sour Ceolulf, and their Subjects the West-Saxons.





THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER THE ENGLISH-SAXON HEPTARCHY. III. PART.

THE THIRTEENTH BOOK.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. S. Gregory himself undertook the Mis|sion into England but was recalled.
3. c. The Conversion of England falsely and maliciously ascribed to the Brittains: and French.
10. Queen Aldiberga a promoter of it.
11. Other Queens in this age did the like.

1 _THOSE bowels of Compas|sion which eight years agoe the sight of a few well fea|tur'd English slaves had moved in S. Gregory, then only a private person, and those charitable designs which on that occasion God had inspired into his heart to procure the eternall felicity of our Nation, seemd all this while to have been little better then ineffectuall wishes, arguments of a good Nature, or a mercifull Christian disposition onely, for which he might ex|pect and obtain a reward and blessing to himself, but with little advantage to us.
2. Yet if a Tradition verified by Authours of no mean esteem, may be beleived, even then also S. Gregory proceeded further then to wishes: for he is sayd not only to have so|licited Pope Pelagius to employ able Ministers for reducing into Christs fold a Nation both in name and beauty resembling Angels: but when the difficulty of the journey, the un|certain event of it, the savagenes of the Nations manners, and roughnes of their language had terrifyed all men from the at|tempt,

he himself petitiond for and obtain'd so dangerous art employment,A. D. 596. and had pro|ceeded three days in the iourney towards Brittany, when the Pope was forced to recall him by reason the Citty of Rome loudly murmured to be deprived of so ex|cellent and so necessary a person, who was only fit to succeed in the Chair of S. Peter, and to watch over the whole Church.
3. S. Gregories holy intentions therefore seemd to sleep till himself was invested with power to promote so heroically Christian an affaire: and sixe years were spent in his Pontificat before he could find persons ca|pable of the courage to undertake it. It may be wondred that among the Brittish Clergy their temporall losses should work so deeply on their minds, that they should envy hea|ven to their Conquerours, and that not any should be found among them willing to preach Christ among a blind people to whom he was unknown.
4. But such uncharitablenes and unchri|stian aversenes from the spirituall good of their enemies is observ'd avd condemn'd in the Brittains by our Ancient Writers Gildas and S. Beda,Bed. l. 1. c 22. as is fully testified by this ex|pression of the latter of these two pious Historians, Among other unexpressibly hey|nous crimes of his countreymen which the Brit|tish Historian Gildas describes and deplores in his mournfull stile, he adds this also, That they would never be brought to preach the Word of Christian Faith to the Nations of the Saxons and Angli inhabiting Brittany with them.
5. Indeed if the Brittains had undertaken a commission of such a Nature, small successe could have been expected: For as hath been sayd heretofore, the whole Nation both Ecclesiasticks and Laicks, were so coverd withall sorts of vices, that such Teachers would have disgraced that Holy Truth which they profess'd in words, but renounced by their actions.Id. ibid. Therefore the Divine piety, saith same Saint Beda, did not desert his people whom he foresaw, but destin'd far more worthy Preachers to the Saxon Na|tion, by whom they should be effectually in|duced to beleive.
6. Notwithstanding in despight of such evident Testimonies, a Modern Protestant Hi|storian of the highest rank,Parker. Ant. Brt. f. 7.8. c. without any ground from Antiquity, or any Motive but a hatred to the Apostolick See of Saint Peter, will needs entitle the Brittish Prea|chers to the Conversion of severall of our Saxon Princes, before Saint Augustins arri|vall from Rome. He had rather acknowledge for the founders and Apostles of the Chri|stian Churches in this kingdome men by their own Writers describ'd to be enormously cruel,Gild. Bed. l. 1. c. 14. haters of Truth and lovers of lyes, men wholly polluted with luxury, drunkennes, ani|mosities, strifes, contentions, envy and all other vices: in a word such men as provoked God to destroy their own Nation, and there|fore very improper instruments of the salvation of strangers, then professe any obligation to Saint Gregory, for his vertues and piety onely, sirnam'd Great by the whole Church, a man eminent for his learning, exemplary for his piety, illu|strious for his Miracles, and by constant Tradition acknowledged the Apostle of Eng|land.
7. Another Protestant Controvertist on the same motive of envy will shamelesly ascribe to the French Clergy the greatest share in the Conversion of the Saxons:Sutlif. in Subvers. of Convers. Whereas how slow they were in teaching the true Faith to their neighbours even when some of them desirous of information implor'd their help, we find testified bz Saint Gre|gories complaint in letters to the French Kings Theodoric and Theodebert themselves, and their Queen Brunichildis, Where he ac|quaints them, that he was credibly inform'd that the English Nation through Gods mercy were in a willing disposition to receive the Christian Faith,Gregor. M. l. . Epist. 58. d. Ibi Epist. 59. but that the French Clergy and Bishops their neighbours were negligent and voyd of all Pastorall solicitude towards them: And therefore least the soules of that Nation should perish in eternall damnation, he had undertaken the care to send the bearer of those Letters Augustin, c.
8. But let it be suppos'd that the Apo|stles of the Saxons had been Brittish or French Preachers, certain it is they would have been far enough from teaching them such doctrines as these men have publish'd in their Writings: They would neither by their words nor example have taught the Clergy the conveniency of wives, or inde|pendency on the Governours of Gods Church: Nor the Layty to deny due veneration to Gods Saints, to tread under feet their sa|cred ashes, to demolish Monasteries, to detest vows of Chastity, to renounce Ro|man Rites, to abominate the Holy Sacrifice and Altars, to abiure all care and charity to the dead, c. So that whosoever were the Planters of the Christian Faith among the Saxons, such Preachers as Parker and Sutcliff are not their Successours, but sup|planters of the same Faith.
9. Now whereas Saint Gregory signifies that the Nation of the Angli were willing to embrace the Christian Faith, we cannot as|cribe this good disposition in them more probably to any then to the pious Queen Aldiberga, her Bishop Saint Lethardus, and her Christian Family, whose devout, cha|ritable, peaceable and humble lives and conversation could not chuse but recom|mend the Religion which they profes|sed.
10. Particularly Queen Aldiberga had among her own Ancestors a worthy pat|tern to imitate, which was her Great Aunt, Saint Clotilda, by whose prayers

and exhortations her husband Clodoveus King of the Franks was powerfully moved to relinquish Idolatry,Baron. ad A. D. 553. and with his whole Nation to embrace Christianity, as Baro|nius declares. Now though Aldiberga's exhortations did not produce so ample an effect on her husband King Ethelberts mind, yet that she effectually concurred to di|spose him to hearken to Divine Truth when represented by one employd from a greater authority, and enabled more powerfully to confirm it, seems sufficiently clear from severall passages of Saint Gregories letter to her,Greg. M. l. 9. Epist. 59. in the close whereof he seems to wonder that she had not long before enclined her husbands mind to follow that Faith which the professed: And however he testifies that after Saint Augustins coming her diligence and zeale was extraordinary: in conside|ration of which he uses this expression: We gave thanks to Almighty God,Ibid. who in mercy has vouchsafed to reserve the Conversion of the English Nation for your merit and re|ward.
11. And it is observable that oftimes in this age God was pleased to use that infirm Sexe in the great work of planting his Faith in severall kingdoms. Thus four years before this by Queen Theodolinda the Longobards, who were Pagans or Artans, were brought into the bosome of the Ca|tholick Church. And not twenty years be|fore that, Ingundis daughter of Sigebert King of the Franks, and Aunt to this Queen Al|diberga, was an instrument of converting her husband the Spanish Prince S. Hermene|gild from Arianism, who became a glorious Martyr.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2.3 The first Missioners Names: they were Monks.
4.5. c. Whether Benedictins, or Equi|tians.
16. Whether the Brittish Monks were of the Egyptian Institut.

A. D. 596.1. THE notice which Saint Gregory had of the good inclination which King Ethelbert and his Saxons had to hearken to the Word of life in all probability came from his Queen. And this no doubt en|couraged him to hasten thither a Mission of devout and zealous Preists: whom he chose out of his own Monastery Ad clivum Scauri, Religious men well known by him to be eminent for learning and piety. These he instructed with good admonitions, and having furnished them with Letters of re|commendation to Princes Bishops through whose territories they were to passe, to be assistant to them in so holy a Work, he dismissed them with spirituall authority to preach the Gospell: particularly advising them in their passage through France to adjoyn to their company such as might be helpfull to them by their knowledge of the manners and language of the Saxons, little differing from that of the Franks lately converted to Christianity.
2. What the Names were of these first Missioners is not agreed on among our Modern Historians.Baron. hc. Baronius affirms that the principall of them were Augustin and Mel|litus. Others to Mellitus adjoyn Iustus and Iohn.Bed. l. 1. c. 2.9 But they have not well distinguished times: for a Second Mission, four years after this, was destined by Saint Gregory into Brittany to assist and cooperate with Saint Augustin, when the number of Converts was multiplied: and on that ground the names of the Missioners are confounded. But Saint Beda sayes expressly that Mellitus a Roman Abbot, went not at first with Saint Augustin, but was sent afterward for supply, and with him Paulinus and Ruffinianus. In our authentick Records therefore we find onely these Missioners named at the first Delegation, Augustin, Laurence, Peter and Iohn.
3. That these first Preachers of Christia|nity among the Saxons in Brittany were Re|ligious Monks, in all regards the Predeces|sours of those which about a thousand years after were violently deprived of their Mo|nasteries, their countrey, and many of them their lives also for continuing in the same Faith and a Profession of the like au|sterity of Discipline which they had from the beginning been taught, is a truth so manifest in all our Records, that only Passion can question it.
4. But whether these Religious persons were peculiarly of the Family of Saint Be|nedict has of late been made a question. Cardinal Baronius was the first who de|nyed it, and his principall reason is, because Saint Gregory, out of whose Mo|nastery they came, assumed an Abbot to govern the same Monastery not from Mount Cassin, where Saint Benedict had establi|shed his principall Convent, but out of the Province of Valeria, and schoole of S. Equitius.
5. To clear this matter, in which some partiall minds are willing to frame a dif|ficulty, wee are to take notice that in those more ancient and devout times the Masters and Instructours in a Monasticall life did utterly neglect the continuance and eternity of their names, their principal and onely care being employed in culti|vating the soules of their Disciples and pu|rifying their affections. Hence it came to passe that the Professours of a Solitary austere life, under what Master soever, were

simply called Monks, without any addition of the title or name of their prime Insti|tutour. Thus here in Brittany though Saint Patrick, Saint Columba, Saint Columban, Saint David, Saint Brindan and others had gathered many families of Religious men, yet none of these, or their Suc|cessours did distinctly call themselves by the names of their Masters, or factiously pretend to any advantage or honour from being descended from any of those Saints. So it was then in Italy and else|where. And therefore no wonder if in Saint Gregories or long after in Saint Beda's Writings we find not the names of Benedi|ctins, Equitians, c.
6. Moreover though most of the fore|said Institutours of Monks did no doubt pre|scribe certain Laws and Rules by which their Disciples were to be directed, (so we read that Saint Brindan received a Rule by an Angel dictating it:) Yet those Laws were not published, nor known out of their particular Convents, neither did they extend beyond the generall duties and exercises of their Religious Subjects: very many things being reserved to the iudge|ment, discretion and will of the Abbots. Whereas Saint Benedict, no doubt by a speciall direction of Gods Spirit, compo|sed an entire and perfect Rule, compre|hending the whole duty both of Supe|riours and Subjects, and obliging both to conformity, as well in the order of re|citing the Ecclesiasticall Office and Psal|mody, as the duties of each respective Officer, the managing of the Convents revenews, the prescribed times of refe|ction, of working, reading, silence, sleep, c. Which Rule for the excel|lency and perfection of it became in a short time publickly known, admited and generally accepted.
6. Which generall admission of Saint Benedicts Rule among the professours of a Coenobiticall life found little or no diffi|culty, after the said Rule had not only been highly commended in the Wri|tings of so holy and admired a Prelate as Saint Gregory, but moreover produced, read, approved and the observation of it enjoyned in a Roman Synod celebrated under the same Pope the year before Saint Augustin and his fellow-Monks were dire|cted by him in Mission to Brittany.Biblioth. M. SS. Patrum tom 6. part. 1. f. 4.3.
8. This we read to have been done in the Great Bibliotheque of the Fathers, quo|ted no doubt out of that Ancient Manu|script belonging to Saint Benedict's Mona|stery at Sublac, mentioned by Baronius. In which this Form of Confirmation of the said Rule by Saint Gregory in that Synod is found: I Gregory, Prelat of the Holy Roman Church have written the Life of Benedict, and I have read the Rule which the Saint himself wrote with his own hand. I have commended it, and confirmed it in a holy Synod: Moreover I command that through the severall parts of Italy, and where the Latin tongue is read, it be to the end of the world observed dili|gently by all those who shall come to the Grace of Conversion. I doe likewise confirm the twelve Monasteries which the Saint hath built.
9. No doubt therefore can be made but that Saint Augustin brought with him this Rule into Brittany, which was observed in all the Monasteries there foun|ded by him and his Successours. This is confirmed by the universall, constant and unquestioned Tradition of the English Chur|ches, and the Testimony of ancient Records, in which there is not the least mention or suspicion that our first Missioners brought any other Rule besides this, and evident proofs there are that in the next Age the Institut of Monks in their Convents was Benedictin, yet not any where can the least foosteps or signs appear that any change had ever been made among them, nor is any time assigned when they began to be Benedictins. Whereas manifest proofs there are that in Brittany there were many other Monasteries among the Brittains and Scotts both before and long after Saint Au|gustins coming, as at Banchor, Hy, c. of a different Institut, and which refused to submitt to Saint Augustin either as Bishop or Abbot: all which notwithstanding in after times submitted to the Institut of Saint Benedict: and the times of such submission are recorded.
10. Thus we read that in the Northern parts there were after this time many illu|strious Monks, as Aidan, Finian, Colman and others who came out of the Monastery of Hy, and never had known the Rule of Saint Benedict: which when they afterward knew, would not forsake their ancient Institut. And generally through the Nor|thern parts till about the year seaven hun|dred Saint Benedicts Rule was not in use: at which time S. Wilfrid brought it amongst them, as himself professed in a publick Synod, as will be shewed in due place.
11. Likewise in the Kingdom of the Mercians, though-after its first Conversion to the Faith by the endeavours of King Oswi there were many Monasteries, yet among them the same Rule was little in use, till the year of Grace seaven hundred and nine. But then Pope Constantin in a letter to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury confirming the Monastery of Evesham,Ap. Capgr. in vit aint Egvvini. addes this condi|tion, To the the end that there the Congregation of Monks may be reformed or ordred according to the Rule of their famous Father Benedict, and continually serve our Lord: Which Rule is not commonly known or observed in those parts. And yet before that time severall Monasteries, at Peterborough and elso where, had been foun|ded by the same S. Wilfrid.
12. Hence appears that our Records doe testify when the Rule of Saint Bene|dict was introduced in the Kingdoms of the Northumbrians and Mercians, But no Memoriall can any where be found to witnes where, or when the same Rule was establish'd in any Monasteries in the Kingdom of Kent, which notwithstanding did abound in Monasteries, in all which, for ought appears, no other Institut pre|vailed: but that this of Saint Benedict flou|rish'd there, innumerable Proofes are extant. Which is an invincible argument that it was at first brought in there with Chri|stianity.
13. Therefore as touching the reason alledged to the contrary by Baronius be|cause Saint Augustin came out of the Mo|nastery of Saint Andrew at Rome, the Abbot wherof was a Monk taken out of the Convent of Saint Equitius in the Pro|vince of Valeria. What proof can be brought that that Convent had not em|braced the Institut and Rule of Saint Bene|dict? or how ever that after his coming thither Saint Gregory had not impos'd that Rule, so much magnified by himself, on that Monastery whereof he was founder?
14. In those days the difference between Religious Instituts was not so considerable, as to cause any great difficulty in the changes. They all intended the same thing, and generally proceeded the same wayes to their End. It was not then in Gods Church, as it is now, Where severall Orders of Reli|gious persons are instituted of severall Spirits; some rigorously confined to solitude; others permitted freely to exercise Spirituall Works of Charity in the world; Some for|bidden to begg: others forbidden to accept of any thing but dayly Alms; Some obli|ged to great externall austerities in their Habits, dyet c. Others more exercised with internall Mortifications; Some de|stined to preach or Write; others only to pray; Some to procure Charities for the Redemption of Christian Captives; others to attend on hospitalls and sick persons, c.
15. These things considered, it may with full assurance be concluded that Saint Gre|gories Monks and Missioners were no other but Benedictins: although they did not usually call themselves by that Title, till a controversy arising in the following age between them and other Monks of a former Brittish Institut, they were obliged for distinctions sake to assume that Name.
16. And wheras many of our Modern Pro|testant Writers will needs have the Brittish Monks to have been of the Aegyptian or Asia|tick Institut: Not any Records can be pro|duced to testify that ever any Aegyptian or Asiatick came into Brittany to establish their Orders here: Or that any Brittain travelled into those Countreys to acquaint himself with their manner of Religious Conversa|tion. Certain it is that generally the great Masters and Teachers both of Faith and Mo|nasticall Discipline in Brittany came from Rome: From thence came S. Fugatius and S. Damia|nus: and after them S. Patrick and S. Ninian, c. And therfore we may conclude, that as they were there instructed in the purity of Christian Doctrines, so likewise in the institut of Monasticall observations. Yet it is not denyed but that they might from thence also furnish themselves with Books treating of the Egyptian or Syrian Instituts touching Monasticall Discipline, which in practise they might be willing to imitate, such as are severall peices of S. Hierom, or Cassians Institutions, c. But this will not argue that they were Disciples of the Eastern Fathers in Religious observances, and much lesse in the Doctrin of Christian Religion and Discipline it self. But it is time that we attend the Holy Monk S. Augustin and his companions in their voyage towards Brittany.


III. CHAP.III. CHA.

1.2. The Missioners being arrived in France are discouraged: and desirous to return.
3.4. c. S. Gregory encourages them: and recommends them to severall Bishops, and Princes
9 Ingratitude of some Protestants to Saint Gregory.

1. SAint Augustin therefore, the Provost or Priour of S. Gregories Monastery in Rome, in the company of Laurence a Preist, Iohn and other Monks by S. Gregories command and benediction, set forward on their voyage towards Brittany. From Italy by Sea they aborded at Marseilles and from thence went forward to Aix (Aquas Sextias.)
2. Aut being arrived there, their hearts began to faile them. For they were told how tedious a iourney yet remains; what tempestuous seas must be pass'd; it is ano|ther world whither they are sent; a rude and savage nation, whose barbarous lan|guage they could not understand, c. Affrighted with such ill newes, and ima|gining dangers yet greater then they had been told, they repent their forwardnes and enter into consultation what they should doe, and in conclusion by com|mon advice, they determine their best re|solution would be to return. Notwith|standing to the end this resolution might be lesse displeasing to Saint Gregory, they first sent Saint Augustin before them to acquaint the Holy Pope with the insu|perable difficulties of such a voyage

and to obtain permission to proceed no further.
3. But S. Gregories charity and zeale for conversion of soules was too vigorous to be disheartned with such vain terrours. If worldly ambition had encouraged the Romans to penetrate that remote Island, Chri|stian Charity ought much more to prevayle. If they had a good will to serve God, he would not fayle to furnish them with strength: and the reward which with a little labour they should obtain would infinitely overweigh all corporall incommodities sustain'd for the purchasing of it. With such considerations the Holy Bishop condemns their pusillanimity, instills new courage into the mind of S. Augustin: whom he sent back, with the authority of Abbot over the rest, by whom likewise he sent severall letters.One was to these Missioners his affrighted companions,Gregor. M. l. 4. Epist. 32. in which he earnestly exhor|ted them courageously to perfect that good Work which through Gods help they had begun, and not to be affrighted with the speeches of malevolent men, and so deprive themselves of that inestimable reward which remaind to their perseverance. He requir'd them likewise to be humbly obedient in all things to their Abbot S. Augustin: and con|cluded with a benediction and prayer for a good successe of their labours, of the reward wherof he hoped to be a sharer, since his desire was to labour as much as any of them.
Id. ib. l. 5. Epist. 52.4. The Second Letter, of which there were four severall Copies, was directed to Palla|dius a Bishop, (the place is not named) to Pelagius B. of Tours, to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles, and Etherius Bishop of Lyons: to all whom he re|commended S. Augustin and his associats, who had order to acquaint them with the design of their voyage And moreover he desir'd their assistance to Candidus a Preist his Procuratour for managing certain lands in France belonging to the Patrimony of the Roman See.
Id. ib. Epist. 53.5. A third letter to the same effect was address'd to Virgilius Bishop of Arles: whom, after an earnest recommendation of S. Au|gustin and the other Missioners, he enioyns to take care that such rents of the Churches patrimony as his predecessour had for seve|rall years receiv'd and kept, should be faithfully consign'd to his Procurator Candi|dus: adding, that it would be an execrable thing if Bishops should deprive the poor of that subsistence, which even Pagan Kings would not presume to touch.
6. A fourth letter was directed to Protasius Bishop of Aix,Ib. ib. Epist. 55. in which after thanks for his charity and kindnes formerly extended to these Missioners, he again recommended them to him. And touching the busines of his Precurator Candidus, he desir'd him that in case Virgilius should be unwilling to re|store the pensions received, he would ad|monish him to doe his duty, and also if there were need, he would not deny his testimony concerning the right which he knew the Roman Church had to the said Pa|trimony.
7. And whereas one Arigius,Id. ib. Epist. 57. a Patrician, had express'd much favour and charity to S. Augustin, the Holy Pope in a fifth letter ac|knowledges his resentment, giving him great commendations, and desiring the con|tinuance of the same goodnes to his Missio|ners, as likewise his assistance in the foresaid busines to his Procurator.Id. ib. Epist. 54. And moreover to the same effect he wrote a Sixth letter to Desiderius Bishop of Vienna and Syagrius Bishop of Autun.
8. Neither did Saint Gregory content him|self to procure for the comfort of these de|vout Travellours the kindnes and assistance of all such Bishops through whose Dioceses they were to passe, but moreover by a seaventh Letter address'd to Theodoric and Theodebert Kings of France, and an eighth to the Qeen Brunichilda,Id. ib. Epist. 56. Ibid. he acquainted them more expressly with the true motive of their iourney: how through the negligence and want of zeale in the French Bishops to communicate the Word of life to the Sa|xons, who even desird it, he was forced to send those pious and learned men from Rome into Brittany to preach Christ unto them. Hereupon he desired their assistance to them, and particularly that certain French Preists acquainted with the tongue and manners of the Saxons their neighbours might be adioynd to their company to be their in|terpreters and cooperatours in their prea|ching. And in conclusion he recommen|ded to them also his Procuratour Candidus, as before.
9. Thus we see Saint Gregory was not spa|ring of his pains, neither did he neglect any means or opportunity to advance the happines of our Nation: such was his ten|dernes and bowells of compassion to a poor barbarous people, living at so great a distance from him. For which charity doubtles he deserves a gratefull memory at least in the minds of all posterity. And yet we find him accused as an Apostle to the English not of the Christian Faith,Parker. Monagu. but super|stitious Ceremonies: as a preacher of doctrines, not Catholik, but onely Topicall and Vrbicall, peculiar to the Roman Church. Whereas in his Epistle to the French Kings he pro|fesses that their Kingdom for the rectitude and integrity of the Christian Faith was conspicuous through the world: Which he would never have said if the Roman Faith had been in any thing differing from theirs; and much lesse would he have desired the assistance of French Preists in the Mission, unlesse they had agree'd both in Faith and Discipline with the Roman Missioners. But Almighty God iudged much better of S. Gregories endeavours: otherwise he would not have confirm'd the Doctrins

taught by those holy Monks sent by him with so many and great miracles,A D. 597. as shall present|ly be shewd. A sad consideration whereof ought to have prevented these cruell cen|sures of S. Gregories Charity, which till a thou|sand years were passed, no mans tongue or pen durst presume to cast upon him.
10. The Holy Abbot S. Augustin thus en|couraged by S. Gregory, and moreover forti|fied by such earnest recommendations, re|turned to his companions at Aix. Whose coming instilled a new Spirit and courage into them: they no longer apprehend the tediousnes of the way, the incommodities by land, tempests by sea, or dangers at their iourneys end. But cheerfully goe on, and happily end their long voyage, though not the same year in which they left Rome.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1.2.3 S. Augustin, c. arrive in England in the Isle of Thanet.
4.5. c. Their Message to K. Ethelbert: His kind Answer: and coming to them: Their Conversation.
8.9.10. The Kings kindnes to them.
ii.i2. c. The manner of their life.

A. D. 597.1. AFter much labour willingly under|taken for Christ, S. Augustin and his companions, which with the French Inter|preters amounted to about the number of forty, with Gods blessing took land in Brit|tany in the year of Grace five hundred ninety seaven.
2. The place where they landed was the same where formerly the Saxons had aborded, to wit, the Isle of Thanet: which is thus described by S. Beda,Beda l. 1. c. 25. On the Eastern coast of Kent is seated an Island called Tanetos, no very small one, contai|ning according to the English estimation six hun|dred families (or Manses, or Hydes of land, each Hyde consisting of about one hundred acres.) Which Island is divided from the conti|nent by the River Vantsum above a quarter of a mile broad, and which is fordable onely in two places. Here the servant of God Augustin with his companions, almost forty persons first lan|ded.
3. Some Authours have more particularly markd the place where they first descended from their ship, for thus writes F. Clement Reyner from Sprott and Spiney,Cl. Ryner. in Apostolat. Be+nedictin f. 8. S. Augustin with his company took land in the Isle of Thanet in a place called Ratesbourg. Where the Holy Fa|ther quitting his ship sett his feet on a certain stone, which as if it had been clay, received the impression of his feet. For which reason the same stone was kept and layd up in a Chappel founded to his memory. This Ratesburg I suppose signi|fies the shore of Rutupia, called by the Saxons Reptacester and Ruptimouth, now Richborow, seated over against the Island.
4. Assoon as they were come to Land, Saint Augustin directed messengers to King Ethelbert to acquaint him that himself and companions were come a long iourney from as far as Rome, to preach to him and his subjects the true God, in whom if he would beleive he should not faile to attain eternall felicity. We may reasonably beleive that Ethelbert after so many years conversation with his pious Christian Queen Aldiberga was not utterly ignorant of the Substance of Christian Religion: Therefore he did not reject this Offer, nor command the new arrived Strangers to be driven from his Coast, but courteously required them to stay some time in the place where they landed, till he could find leasure to heare and answer their Mes|sage. In the mean time he gave orders that all things necessary should be provided for their entertainment.
5. Not long after, the King with great humanity went himself into the Isle of Tha|net to visit his New Guests come out of another world. There placing himself on a Seat in the open aire, he commanded they should be called before him, but first admo|nishing them that the Religion of his coun|trey, from an ancient Prophecy, forbad him to converse with such as they, under any roof. The true reason was, because he was taught that within-dores he was more obnoxious to fascination, or witchcraft.
6. The manner how S. Augustin and his company first addressed themselves to the King is thus described by S. Beda,Bed. l. 2 c. 25. They came saith he, endued with vertue and power from God, not (as the Idolatrous Brittish Preists) trusting in Diabolical incantations. For instead of an Ensign some of them caried a Silver Crosse, with the Image of our Saviour painted on a table, and in the way Sung Litanies, and prayed earnest|ly to our Lord for the eternal Salvation of them|selves and those for whom and to whom they were come. Yet this devout behaviour is by some factious Sectaries called a Superstitious Procession full of Roman vain Ceremonies.
7. Being thus arrived in the Kings presence S. Augustin after mutuall Salutations and respects, informed him more fully in the Motives of his iourney, by whom and for what end he was sent: He shewd him the vanity and perniciousnes of that Religion wherein he had been bred, that Idolatry was the invention of Devills to destroy soules: That to free the world from such igno|rance and misery, God had sent his only Son to preach the only saving Truth and to pre|serve the soules of those who beleived in him from the Devills malice and eternall damnation: For which end he willingly suffred himself to be nayld on the Crosse,  to dye an ignominious and tormenting death, that so he might be a Sacrifice to pro|pitiate Gods wrath for the Sins of the

world. This heavenly Truth he and his companions were come to declare to that Nation, c.
8. After that S. Augustin had to this effect made known the occasion and causes of his voyage, King Ethelbert, who had been very attentive to his speeches, remaind some space in great thoughtfulnes of mind: Com|paring the Religion now proposed to him with his former Superstition, he could not but acknowledge the advantage which Truth nd Holines caries from Vanity and impurity: But on the other side it seemd to him to be an unbeseeming thing for a prudent man and a Prince suddainly to give a publick te|stimony of inconstancy and rashnes in de|serting the Rites of his Ancestours and Reli|gion of his Countrey. At last therefore, concei|ving that it became his dignity not to give a suddain resolution in a matter of so great importance, his answer was, That he took kindly their charity to him and his people, neither did he mislike the proposalls they made him: but for a better satisfaction to him self and others, he would take conve|nient time to deliberate.
9. After this, he invited them to his princi|pall Citty of Canterbury (Dorobernia:) where he designed a commodious dwelling for them, withall commanding provisions to be made and supplied to these New-come strangers that nothing might be wanting to them. But the greatest grace conferred on them was a free permission to preach Chri|stian Doctrine in the same Citty, not forbid|ding any of his subjects to hearken to their Sermons and becom Converts.
10. Such humanity in a Pagan King filled S. Augustin and his Associats with great comfort, and hope that God would give a large benediction to their iourney. Thereu|pon they thankfully accepted the Kings offer of repairing to the Citty, whither they went in the same order as they first came to the King: and at their entrance into the Citty and Mansion designd for them, saith Beda, with consonant voyces they sung this Litany:Bed. l. i. c 2. We beseech thee, O Lord, in mercy turn away thy fury from this Citty, and this thy Holy house. Alleluia. Thus the Holy Crosse once more took possession of the place from which it had been banished: and thus the oraculous speech pronounced by S. Gregory began to be accomplished, that Alleluia should be sung in that Pagan countrey.
11. Let us now observe how these Holy Missioners employed their time: Of this the same S. Beda will inform us, That assoon as they were entred into the Mansion which the King had given them,Id. ib. c. 26. they began to imitate the Apo|stolick life of the Primitive Church by attending to assiduous prayers, watching and fasting, by preaching the word of life to all they could, by despising all worldly things, as if they belonged not to them, by receiving from their Disciples only such things as were meerly necessary for their subsistence; by practising themselves according to the preceps which they taught others; and lastly by having minds prepar'd to suffer any adver|sities, even death it self for that Truth which they preached. Insomuch as not a few beholding the simplicity of their innocent lives, and ad|miring the sweetnes of their celestiall doctrine, beleived and were baptis'd.
12. The same Authour further declares that the Church of S. Martin deputed for the Queens devotions,Id. ib. as hath been said, was the first publick place where they met together, sung, prayd, celebrated Masses, preach'd and baptis'd; till after the Kings conversion they re|ceived a great liberty to preach and build Chur|ches every where.
13. Here we may see what manner of en|tring these our Apostles had among us,1. Thess. 1 9. and how they turn'd our Ancestours from Idols to serve the living and true God. Neither was their Go|spell in speech only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost and a plenitude of his Gifts and mi|racles, as shall be shewd. The Preachers are Monks: they are sent by the authority of the Bishop of Rome; they carry the banner of the Holy Crosse, and the Image of our Saviour before them; they celebrate Masses; they work miracles: For all which they are ho|nour'd, their memory is precious through all Gods Church almost a thousand years to|gether. But now one Apostat Monk can per|swade a great part of Christians,Luther. Parker. in Antiq. Bri|tann. f. 35. that it was not Christ which these men preach'd: One Calvinisticall Bishop dares call these men Apo|stles to the English not of the Christian Faith or Word of God, but of Roman ceremonies and Rites, who taught them to become not Christians, but Romanists and Papists. To such blasphemous accusations as these no answer ought to be given:August. Quia melis eas committo fidelium ge|mitibus qum sermonibus meis.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2. Many Converted.
3.4. S. Augustin goes to Arles to be ordai|ned Bishop: and why.

1. BY the life and preaching of these Holy men no small number of Converts were gathered to the Church, which were baptis'd on the day of Pentecost in the fore|mentioned Church of S. Martin: But shortly after far greater multitudes follow'd their Example. Whether King Ethelbert was one of those then baptis'd, does not expressly appear in any of our ancient Records.
2. That which S. Beda relates touching him in particular,Bed. l. 1. c. 26. is thus express'd: Among others King Ethelbert was much delighted with the purity of these Saints lives, and with the comfortable sweetnes of their promises, the

truth and certainty whereof they confirmed with many evident miracles: So that in the end he also beleived and was baptised. After which very many others dayly began to flock together that they might heare the word of God by which they were perswaded to relinquish their Gentile Superstitions, and to unite themselves to the holy Church of Christ. Which the King percei|ving, he much congratulated their Faith and Conversion, and embraced them with more ardent Charity, as being fellow cittizens with him of the Kingdom of Heaven: but yet he com|pelled none to the profession of Christianity. For he had learnt from the Teachers and Authours of his salvation, that the service of Christ must be voluntary and not by compulsion.
3 Saint Augustin seeing a Harvest so plen|tifull and ripe, according to the instru|ctions formerly given him by Saint Gregory, went back into France, there to be ordai|ned Bishop: because besides the power of administring Baptisme, the other Sacrament of Confirmation was requisite, by which these tender plants might be strengthned in the Faith. Which Sacrament could not be administred but by the hand and power of a Bishop- This is testified by the same Saint Beda,Id. ib. saying, In the mean while the man of God Augustin went to Arles in France, where by the Arch-bishop of that Citty Ethe|rius (or rather, Virgilius) he was Consecrated Arch-bishop of the Nation of the Angli, ac|cording as he had received commands from Saint Gregory.Spelm tom. 1. Concil. f. 92. This was performed the sixteenth day before the Calends of December, saith Sir H. Spelman.
4. It may be demanded why Saint Au|gustin should receive his Episcopal consecra|tion from the Bishop of Arles the furthest distant from him in France, and not rather from the Prelat of Lyons, or some other nea|rer to Brittany? The reason hereof doubtles was, because such a Prerogative belonged to the Church of Arles, which Saint Gregory, who was most observant of Ecclesiasticall rights, would by no means infringe. This prerogative that See challenged and en|joyed, because that was the first Church in those parts which had received a Bishop, S. Trophimus, ordained by the Apostle S. Peter himself, as appears by an Epistle of the Bishops of that Province to S. Leo, in which they iustify their rights and priviledges of Ordination, against the pretentions of their neighbour Church of Vienna.
5. It was a great prejudice to the New Sa|xon Church that the year before S. Augustins coming into Brittany the Holy Bishop Saint Asaph Successour to S. Kentigern in the Bi|shoprick of Elwy in wales, should dye: as likewise S. Columba, the same year that Saint Augustin arrived: For doubtles the autho|rity and piety of two such eminent Saints, would have prevented the contestations  petulancy of the Brittish Bishop, which fol|lowed.


VI. CHAP.A. D. 598.
VI. CHA.

1.2. c. Saint Augustin consecrates an Idol-Temple near Canterbury into a Church, dedicated to S. Pancraece.
6. A prodigy caused by the Devill there against S. Augustin.
7.8. He builds a Church and Monastery to Saint Peter and Saint Paul near the Citty.
9. And another in the Citty to our Sa|viour.
10. He places a Suffragan Bishop in the Church of S. Martin.

1. SAint Augustin having been conse|crated by Virgilius Arch-bishop of Arles, returned into Brittany in the year of Grace five hundred ninety eight, where he was received by King Ethelbert with greater re|verence, then before: who assigned to him an Episcopal See in the same Citty: which he afterward enriched with great possessions,Bed l. 1. c. 6. as S. Beda testifies.
2. This New Episcopall Church was not that of S. Martin, where the Queen was for|merly wont to pray: But it was a Temple anciently frequented by the King whilst he was a Pagan, and was situated in the midway between the Church of Saint Martin and the walls of the Citty. In this Temple, after it had been purified from its former Superstitions and the Idol cast out, S. Augustin consecrated to the honour of S. Pancrati.
3. Concerning which Church,Spelm in Con|cil. tom. 1 ad A. D. 603. Sir H. Spelman in his Councils furnishes us with this Extrait out of an ancient Manuscript of the founda|tion of S. Augustins Monastery in Canterbury: Augustin being ordaind Bishop returned into England, and was received by the King and people with all becoming solemnity: and by the same Kings grant obtaind an Episcopall See in the Citty of Canterbury, which was the Primatial Church of the English Nation. The pious King himself undertaking the Patronage of that Church, did triumph through ioy, constituting him the President of his Metropolis, whom before he had received as a poore stranger. Neither did he onely make him a Spirituall Watchman over his Citty, but his whole Dominions also, transla|ting the throne of his Kingdom into a Pontificall Seat, and his Royal Court into a Church of Christ.
4. Yea moreover to shew that he had putt off the old man with his acts, and putt on the New, by the wholesom advice of the blessed Bi|shop he caused that Idol-temple seated Eastward from the Citty between the Church of S. Martin and the walls, in which he had oft according to the rite of his Superstition sacrifised to Devills and not to God, to be purged from the pollutions of

Paganism: and having broken in peices the Idol which was in it, he changed it into an Ecclesia|sticall Synagogue, and caused it to be consecrated by the name of S. Pancratius Martyr. And this was the first Church dedicated by our Patriark and prime Prelat S. Augustin.
5. Now it was very convenient and suitable to reason that the blessed child Pancratius, who at Rome, the Mistresse of the world, was honoured as a famous Martyr, should especially be venera|ted by the English, since that certain English Children exposed to sale in Rome by their beauty and brightnes had moved Saint Gregory, then an Abbot in the Monastery of S. Andrew built by himself, to associate those English children with Angels.
6. After this narration, there follows in the same Manuscript a relation of a prodigy caused by the Devill, enraged against Saint Augustin for eiecting him out of his pos|session: Whilst the blessed Bishop S, Augustin (saith that Authour) was celebrating Masse the first time in the same Church,Ibid. the Enemy of mankind envying the purity of the English Nation likely to be much encreased by the child Saint Pancratius, and out of rage to see himself expelled from a place possessed by him so long a time, he endeavoured all he could to destroy that Church to the ground. A rent in the Eastern wall of it, plainly seen to this day, which he made with his nayles, is a sufficient witnes of his rage. By which is evident that the Masse is not hated by Calvinists alone.
Ibid.7. King Ethelberts liberality ended not here, for as the same Authour writes, Saint Augustin obtained of him after this a certain portion of land adjoyning, in which the King built a Church to the honour of the Apostles S Peter and S. Paul, to be as it were a perpetuall munition and Safe-guard for himself and his whole kingdom: and instituted therin a Convent of Monks to serve God for ever: over whom was canonically chosen and placed Abbot a Monk called Peter, one of S. Augustins companions sent thither from the See Apostolick.Spelman in Concil. tom. 1 ad A. D. 60. But be|tween the foundation and endowment of this Monastery there intervened six years, saith Sir H. Spelman, as appears by the Charters of that Foundation.
Bed. l. i. c. 33.8. In this Church, saith S. Beda, the Bodies of S. Augustin and his Successours the Arch-bi|shops of Canterbury, as likewise of the Kings of Kent were designed to be buried. Notwithstan|ding this Church was not consecrated by S. Au|gustin, but by his Successour S. Laurentius. And the first Abbot of the Monastery was Peter a Preist.
Ibid.9. S. Augustin also by the liberality and assistance of the King obtaind another Church in the same Citty, which, as he was informed had been built by the ancient Christians in the time of the Romans: This Church he consecrated to the glory of our Lord and Saviour: and adioyning thereto he fixed an habitation for himself  Suc|cessours, where he lived with such Clerks as he had brought with him out of France, who performed all the Ecclesiasticall Offices in the Church. For a Monastery was not instituted in that Church till the age following. And though these Latter Monks contended with the other for antiquity, yet they lost their cause.Ap. Spelm. vbi supr For, as the Authour of the foremen|tioned Manuscript observes, in all the authen|ticall Priviledges granted by Popes to the Mona|stery of S. Peter and S. Paul, we find this clause inserted, As in the infancy of Christianity in England this was the first wherein Monasti|call Instituts were observed: So we decree that it with all belonging to it remain for ever free from all service, undisturbed by all secular noyse and tumults, and exempted from all Ecclesiasti|call iurisdiction and burdens.
10. Moreover the Church of S. Martin without the walls of the Citty eastward,Monast. An|glic f. 26. in which the Queen before had performed her Devotions, he made an Episcopall See, in which he placed a Suffragan Bishop (Core|piscopum) who was alwayes to remain at home, or at the Archiepiscopall Palace within the Citty, and supplied the place of the Arch-bishop when he was to attend the King, or to be absent upon occasion of Visita|tions, or other affaires. At such times he cele|brated Solemnities in the Metropolitan Church, after which he returned home. He being a Monk had power to call Monks to his assi|stance. He performed the Office of Arch-dea|con, and summoned, ordered and corrected such Clergy-men as pertained to the Arch-bishop, but those Clergy-men which lived in the Mannrs pertaining to the Monks were corrected by the Priour of the Church, other|wise called the Dean. The same Suffragan Bi|shop likewise conferred the Minour Orders in the Arch-bishops absence: Yet we doe not find that ever he was summoned to Councills, or subscribed in them. This custom conti|nued till the beginning of King William the Conquerours raign: At which time the last of such Suffragan Bishops was Godwin: who dying in the fourth year of his raign, S. Lanfranc then Arch-bishop refused to substitute ano|ther in his place, alledging that two Bishops must not be in one Citty: whereas his See was out of the Citty: Therefore, instead of a Suffragan Bishop he constituted one of his Clarks, Arch-deacon. For which he was by many condemned: Though in that age ge|nerally through the Church those Corepiscopi were suffred to expire: because it was found that they took too much upon themselves, so as to consecrate Holy Oyles, to ordain Preists, c. insomuch as for humbling them many Decrees had been made in Councills, c.



VII. CHA.VII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Ten thousand baptized by S. Au|gustin, by the testimony of S. Gregory
5.6. B. Parkers calumnies against S. Au|gustin, answered.
7. The place where this Baptism was per|formed.

1. THese buildings and foundations did not withdraw the minds of S Au|stin and the other Missioners from their more necessary duty and solicitude for conver|ting soules. For this very year our Records inform us of very great numbers which by holy Baptism gave up their names to Christ: insomuch as no fewer then ten thousand are said to have been baptis'd this year on the Solemnity of our Lords Nativity. This appears also by an Epistle sent the year following by S. Gregory to Eulogius Patriark of Alexandria, who had given him an account of great numbers of Hereticks in Egypt by his endea|vours reduced to Catholick Vnity: In answer whereto S. Gregory after congratulation with him for so great a harvest, informs him of a greater accession then lately made in Brit|tany of Pagans there converted from their Idolatry.Gregor M. l. 7. epist. 10. His words are these:2. We give thanks to almighty God for that we see fullfill'd in you what is written, Where the corn abounds, there the Oxen's strength is mani|fested. For if it had not been a strong Oxe which fixed the plough of his tongue in the hearts of his hearers, so plentifull a harvest would not have followed. But because by the merit of the good actions perform'd by you there is made an addition or encrease for which you ought also to congratulate, I will in return to your courtesy give you an account of occurrents among us not unlike those you have told mee. And that is, that whereas there is a Nation of the world, which till our times has remained In|fidels, enslaved to the worship of wood and stones, by the means of your Prayers it hath pleased God to inspire mee to send thither a Monk of my Monastery to preach the Gospell to them. He therefore by my permission having been consecrated Bishop by certain Prelats of the German Nation, with the help of some assistants which they gave him, was conducted to that barbarous countrey: and but even now letters from him have acquainted us with the news of his safety and labours; and how both himself and his companions have been so glorified in that Nation by the miracles wrought by them, that in the wonders they seem to imitate the power of the Apostles.
3. Moreover in the last Solemnity of our Lords Nativity, which fell in the first Indiction, more then ten thousand of the English Nation, as we are informed, were baptised by him our Brother and Fellow-Bishop. This I have told you, that you may see how much good your preaching has wrought in Alexandria, and your prayers in the utmost ends of the Earth.
4. Now whereas in this Epistle the bapti|sing of ten thousand English on the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord is sayd to have been performed by S. Augustin Bishop, and in the first Indiction: since the Indiction is reckon'd from the eighth day before the Calends of October it follows that S. Augustin was then Bishop, and consequently returned out of France. We may likewise observe that Saint Gregory calls the French Bishops, Gemans, be|cause being Franks, they came out of Ger|many.
5. A late pretended Successour of S. Au|gustin,Park in Ant|quit. Brit. f. 35. c. B. Parker who studiously catches at all advantages to deprave this our glorious Apostle, calls this an inverted and reciprocall Baptism: and says that these were converted by others, and not by him, for we read no where that he preached: on the contrary he loved his ease, and lived an effeminate life: If he had been truly Zealous for justice, he should have re|quired King Ethelbert to restore his Kingdom to the Brittains who were the true Lords of the Countrey, c.
4. All which calumnies are manifestly dis|prov'd by all Antiquity: For first S. Gregory in that Epistle sayes expressly that he sent S. Augustin to preach the Gospell: and his assi|duity in executing that Office is severall times magnified by S. Beda Again if S. Beda and Ethelwerd deserve credit,Bed. lib. i. c. 26 S. Augustin was a man of a most pure life: that in humility he always went on foot, and never made use of a horse or waggon: that he was patient of labour and a true Successour of the Apostles. And whereas in B. Parkers iudgment King Ethel|bert ought to have been required to restore his Kingdom to the Brittains: He did not con|sider that that kingdom had been possessed by his family the space of one hundred and fifty years: Which time if it be not sufficient to make a prescription, and so legitimate his Title, Woe be to all Christian Princes. Lastly by his calling this an inverted and reciprocall Baptism, he reflects on a passage of an ob|scure Writer, that by reason of the multitudes of those who came to be baptised S. Augu|stin was forced after he had baptised some, to teach them the Form, and require them to baptise others. But what inversion is here? Since it is well known, that Baptism being a Sacrament of such absolute necessity, is valid and effectuall by whomsoever confer|red, since it does not require Iurisdiction in the Minister of it.
7. As touching the place where this Bap|tism was celebrated, it is commonly beleiv'd to have been, not in Kent, but in the Province of the Brigantes, and County of Richmont be|longing to the Kingdom of Deira, where the River Swale, in which it is supposed to have been performed, was for that cause call'd the Holy River. But the infancy and unsetlednes of the Churches of Kent, the care of erecting

Churches and Monasteries,A. D. 599. c. will not per|mit S. Augustins absence so soon. It is not therefore to be doubted but that this so|lemn Baptism was celebrated in the Kingdom of Kent: and the mistake of many of our Writers is grounded on the confounding this Baptism with another as solemn perform'd by S. Paulinus in the seaven and twentieth year of the following Century, whose abode, saith S. Beda,Bed. ibid. was near to the said River of Swale: in which he baptised many thousands, because O|ratories and Fonts could not so soon be built in the first beginnings of that Church. Therefore Camden writing concerning that River of Sale,Camden in  says that it was call'd Holy from S. Pau|linus his baptising in it more then ten thousand men, besides women and children, in one day.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. S. Augustin sends to Rome for a Supply, c.
3. B. Godwins too sharpe Censure of S. Au|gustin.
4 K. Ethelberts writings.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred ninety nine S. Augustin seing so plentifull a harvest, and hoping for a yet greater en|crease if more labourers were sent to culti|vate the ground, resolved to acquaint S. Gregory with the present state of affairs. This respect his duty required from him: For such an account of their Stewardship had S. Fugatius and Damianus given to Pope Eleu|therius; and the like was afterward done by S. Patrick. In conformity therefore to such good Examples S. Augustin directed to Rome Laurentius a Preist, and Peter design'd Abbot of his New Monastery to assure S. Gregory of the well-fare of his children, and the great hopes of a good successe of their Mission.
2. Withall he made a request for a fresh supply of New Missioners to assist them in the dispensation of Divine Mysteries, conside|ring the great co~course of those which desi|red instruction: to comply with all which exceeded the power of those few labourers already employd. And lastly for his own in|formation, and enablement to govern as became him the infant-Church of the Saxons, so as to give no offence nor advantage of calumny to the Brittish Clergy, which no doubt attentively bent their eyes upon his actions, S. Augustin proposed certain Que|stions and difficulties to S. Gregory desiring his resolution of them What these parti|cular Questions were will appeare when S. Gregories answer comes.
3. For the present we will only take no|tice of a somewhat confident Censure which a Protestant B. Godwin has given of S. Augu|stin on this occasion:A. D. 600. Augustin, saith he, was perhaps no ill man,B. Godvvin. in Catalog. de Convers. Brit. c. 4. but his ignorance was shame|full, as appears by the Questions proposed by him to S. Gregory. But he might have considered, that those Questions principally regarding outward Rites and Iurisdiction, which Rites were not altogether uniformly practised at Rome and in France, c. It was necessary in a tender Church as this was, to take care and circumspection about matters, which other|wise were not of so great importance. However the Character wich S. Gregory from knowledge and experience gave of S. Au|gustin deserves more to be regarded then B. Godwins: which Character is contain'd in an Epistle written by that Holy Pope to King Ethelbert:Greg. M. Our most Reverened Brother and Fel|low-bishop Augustin, saith he, is a man very learned in the Rule of Monastick Institution, full of the Science of the Sacred Scriptures, and through the Divine Grace eminent in good works and vertues.
4. Iohn Pits testifies moreover that by the same Messengers Letters were sent to Saint Gregory from King Ethelbert,Pits in Ethel|bert. whom he re|ckons among the ancient Illustrious Writers of Brittany because there were extant, be|sides a Treatise call'd Decrees of Iudgment, a Book of Epistles writen by the same King to S. Gregory and S. Augustin, as this Authour collects from S. Beda.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHA.

1.2. c. The Gests, Miracles, Translation c. of S. Ivo.

1. WIthout interrupting the order of the Gests of S. Augustin, the next of which regards S. Gregories Answer to his Letters and Requests, which will not arrive till this year of our Lord six hundred be past: We will here interpose the Gests of two Saints, the one a stranger but dying in Brit|tany: the other a Brittain, but dying beyond seas: and of both the death hath been con|sign'd to this year.
2. The first was S. Ivo, concerning thorn Camden thus Writes,Camden in Huntington|shire. The River Vse being ready to enter into Cambridgshire passes by a town handsom enough and well inhabited, which in the Saxon tongue was anciently call'd Slepe, but now S. Ives from Ivo a Persian Bishop, who about the year six hundred travelled through England, and every where left a sweet-odour of his Sancti|ty, carefully sowing the word of God where he pass'd, and at last left his name to this Town where he ended his life. From whence notwith|standing the Monks of Ramsey shortly after translated his Body thither. This was a very rich Monastery seated among the Fenn about seaven miles distant from thence.
3. More particularly concerning this Saint, we read in Capgrave, Florentius, Ma|the of Westminster and Malmsburiensis,. Capgrav. in vi. 5. Ivon loren. Ad . 600. Westmon. ad . D. 101. Malmsbur. . 292. that he was born in a Citty of Persia called Frianeos, that his Father was a Prince there named Yomos, and his Mother Isitalia. That his onely Brother Athanatos lived an Eremiticall life in a cer|tain wood, and was illustrious for Miracles. That Saint Ivo was elected Bishop in the town where he was born, and not long after translated to the Archiepiscopall See of the Citty Asitanea: Which See he governed with great Sanctity and pru|dence, till a terrible famine so desolated the Countrey that Parents were compelled to devour their children. By reason whereof Saint Ivo with eleaven more devout companions forsook that Region, and passing through many countreys, at last came to Rome: where by the advice of the Pope they severed themselves: and Saint Ivo by divine disposition, together with his Nephew Sithius, his kinsman Inthius and some others, cae into Brittany. Where he spread the Gospell wheresoever he came, and afterward went over into France, where yet he could not be perswa|ded to abide long, though the king and people expressed all kindnes and respect to him: but re|turned into Brittany, and to his death remaind in a town call Slepe at three miles distance from Huntington, serving God all his days in watching, fasting and prayers.
Ibid.4. The occasion of the Translation of his body from thence, is by the same Authours described after this manner, His Sacred Body remained severall ages in the place of his buriall insomuch as his Memory was lost in that place: But at last in the year of Grace one thousand and one a certain husband man as he was plow|ing the ground light upon his Tomb, which being taken up and opened, the Body of a Bishop in his Pontificall ornaments was seen in it. Whereupon the Pastor of that village, called Ednoth, a Monk, being sent for, they with his advice caried the Body into the Church, and with great reverence placed it near the Altar. The night following the same Bishop S. Ivo appeared in a very reverend form and with great brightnes to a Carpenter called Ezi, and told him who he was: comman|ding him to signify to another Ednoth Abbot of Ramsey that he should translate his and his com|panions bodies from thence to his Monastery. But the poor man not having the boldnes to relate this vision, he appeared to him a second time re|peating the same commands: Which he still ne|glecting to perform, at the third apparition the Bishop smote him on the side with his Crosier, tel|ling him that the pain of that stroke should re|main, till he had performed what had been enjoy|ned him. The mun awaking presently after, found a greivous pain in his side as if a sword had peir|ced it.
5. That was he compelled to declare his vision to the Abbot: which assoon as he had done he was freed his pain.But the Abbot would give no credit to what the man told him, but calling him clown and fool, said, Must we translate and venerate the ashes of I know not what cobler? The night following the Holy Bishop appeared to the Abbot, and said, Rise quickly, for I whom thou scornfully calledst Cobler, have brought thee here a pair of boots that will last a good while. These thou must putt on, and wear for my sake. Having said thus, he seemed to draw on his leggs a pair of boots, with care to make them sitt smooth and hand som.
Presently the Abbot waking felt such horrible pain in his leggs, that he was not able to walk or stand. And fifteen years did he remain in this infir|mity.
6. By this Miracle the Sanctity of the Holy Bishop was approved: whereupon his Sacred body was translated to the Monaste|ry of Ramsey on the fourth of the Ides of Iune: To whose honour the Abbot Ednothus built a Church: in which he placed his Tomb after such a manner, that half of it appeared within, and half without the wall, to the end that a fountain of water which flowed thence might be ready for the use of every one who came in devotion, whether the Church was shutt, or not. Which Water by the merits of the Holy Bishop had the vertue to cure many disea|ses.
7. One great Miracle wrought there shall not be omitted, because the Relatour protests himself an eye-witnes of it I my self saw, saith Malmsburiensis, what I shall now relate.Malmsbur. f. 292. A certain Monk languished a long time with a Dropsy. His skin was strangely swelled, and his breath so noysom that none could approach him: and his drouth was so excessive that he thought he could drink whole barrells. On a time by an admonition received in sleep he went to Saint Ivo's Monument: where after he had taken onely three draughts of the water, he cast up all the superfluous humours within him. The swelling of his belly presently fell, and his thighs lost their former withered leannes. In a word he was restored to perfect health.
8. As for the Abbot Ednothus though the infirmity and pain in his leggs continued till his death,Ap. Capgr. ib. yet for a sign that his fault was pardoned, Seaven days before he dyed the Holy Bishop Ivo appeared to him in great glory, and said,The time is now at hand when thou shalt perceive that the pains I have in|flicted on thee will prove a remedy to procure thee eternall rest. Prepare thy self therefore, for seaven days hence I will come and deliver thee from the prison of thy body. And it fell out accordingly.



X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of S. Paul de Leon.

1. THE same year likewise is mark'd with the happy death of S. Paul, a kinsman of S. Sampson Bishop of Dle. Con|cerning whom we read in the Gallican Mar|tyrologe publish'd by Andrew Saussay that he was one of the Companions of S. Sampson.Martyrolog. Gallican. 12 Mart. That his Fathers name was Perfius: and that he was a Scholler to S. Iltutus, both in wit and innocence excelling all his companions. Being very young he was prevented with many Graces of Gods holy Spirit: and thereupon fearing least he should be tempted with vain glory, at the age of fifteen he retir'd into a desart, where building for himself an Oratory and a Cell, he lead there an Angeli|call life. Thus growing every day more rich in merits, when he was arrived at mature age, he was compelled to accept the dignity of Preistly Of|fice, which he adorned with the splendour of his Sanctity. The fame whereof being spread abroad he was sent for by King Margus, (probably the same with Malgus or Maglocunus) whom to|gether with his people he more perfectly instru|cted in the Mysteries of Christian Faith, to which they had lately been converted.
Ibid.2. After some time by the admonition of an Angel he retired into an Island on the Coast of Lesser Brittany called Ossa, where he brought many Infidels to the heavenly Light of the Gospell. Where likewise by divine vertue he slew a mon|strous Dragon. After which the Prince of that Region called Vintrurus (or Withurus) offred him a Bishoprick, which he with a resolute humility refused. Notwithstanding he was with a pious fraud circumvented by him. For being sent upon certain pretended affairs to Childebert King of the Franks, he caried with him private letters desiring the King to ratify his Election to the Bi|shoprick. The King received him with great re|verence, but withall compelled him to accept the Bishoprick which he had refused, to which he was Canonically ordained by three Bishops. The See of his Bishoprick was by the Kings decree seeled at Leon, to which he was wellcomed by all the people with wonderfull ioy. And this sublime Office he administred with admirable sanctity and Pasto|rall prudence to his death. His sacred body many years after was thence translated by his Succes|sour Mabbo to the Monastery of Fleury by occasion of the incursions of the Normans: where it was a long time held in great veneration.
3. The Authour of his life in the Bibliothe|que of Fleury relates how he quitted his Bi|shoprick three severall times,Ap. Vsser. f. 559. but was forced to resume it upon the death of his Succes|sours. But at last when his strength was even quite spent, he ordained one of his Brethren, named Cetomerin, Bishop in his place, a certain Noble Prince called Induael being present, who came thither to recommend himself to his prayers.A D. 601. And this being performed, he retired himself into an Island called Batha, where he spent many years governing a great Congregation of Monks, and at last happily concluded his life, being more then a hundred years old. His Church is from him to this day called Saint Paul de Leon.
4. We read in Capgrave how this S. Paul on a time visiting a sister of his who devoutly served God in a Cell seated near the Sea on the Brittish shore,Ap. Capgrav. in vit. S. Ithamar. at her request he obtained of God by his prayers that the Sea should never swell beyond the bounds marked by her by placing a row of stones. By which means the sea was restrained the space of a mile from his usuall course: and continues so to this day.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHA.

i.2. c. S. Gregory sends new Missioners: with Letters and presents to severall persons.

1. THE Messengers sent by S. Augustin to Rome stayd there a full year: which delay it seems was caused by the difficulty of finding a sufficient number of able lobou|rers to cultivate our Lords Vineyard in Brit|tany. At length in the year of Grace six hun|dred and one Laurence and Peter return'd accompanied with twelve others to assist them in the founding of the Saxon Church in our Island, the principal of whom were Mellitus, Iustus, Paulinus and Ruffintanus, all of them Monks and Brethren of the same In|stitut with S. Augustin.
2. These devout Missioners were as the former, by S. Gregory recommended to Prin|ces and Bishops residing in the Citties through which they were to passe, or were not far distant from their way.One Letter exempli|fied in severall Copies he directed to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles,Gregor. M. li. 9. Epist. 52. to Mennas Bishop of Tholouse, to Lupus Bishop of Chaillon on the Saone, to Agilius Bishop of Mets, and to Sim|plicius Bishop of Paris; all whom he entrea|ted to assist these Religious Monks with their charity, that they might not be hin|dred from a quick dispatoh of their iour|ney, so beneficiall to the Church of Christ.
3. Another letter was written by Saint Gregory to Siagrius Bishop of Autun,Ibid. Epist. in which he highly extolls his kindnes exhibited late|ly to S. Augustin, desiring the like to these his Fellow-Missioners. And to testify his tender affection to our Nation, which he shewd by a gratefull resentment of benefits conferd by Siagrius on the Pastours of it, he in re|quitall honoured this Bishop with an Ar|chiepiscopall Pall, giving him withall the

next place to his Metropolitan the Arch-bishop of Lyons, ordaining that the rest of the Suffra|gan Bishops should take place according to the priority of their Ordination. S. Gregory further enioynd the said Bishop to assemble a Synod for the rectifying of abuses, c.
Id. ib. Epist4. A third Letter the same Holy Pope wrote to Clotharius King of the Franks: wherein having magnified him for his care in pro|moting the Churches good, he recommen|ded to his favour and charity these devout travellers, assuring him of a great reward from God for his Charity. But withall he takes notice that in that Kingdom Holy Or|ders and Offices were dispenced not according to the merits of persons, but gifts: Where|upon he seriously enioyns him to take or|der that the abominable vice of Simony may be totally repress'd by a Synod of Bishops, c.
Ibib. Epist. 565. He directed a fourth Letter to Brunichil|dis Queen of the Franks, in which after humble thanks given her for her favour and assistance formerly afforded to S. Augustin, and acknowledged by him and the Monks his companions: He tells her that the fame of her Christian Charity caused generally ad|miration in others, but not in him, who by frequent experiments before had seen proofs of her piety. He signifies likewise how the Faith of Christ prospered in Britta|ny, being confirmed by many Miracles: So that she might promise her self a great por|tion in the reward of so heavenly a work as the Conversion of that Nation. And in conclu|sion he recommends the Monks accompa|nying Laurentius a Preist and Mellitus an Abbot to her benignity and assistance.Ibid. Epist.
6. These Letters were distributed by these devout Monks in their way towards Brittany:Where being arrived they presented from S. Gregory one Letter to Ethelbert (or Aldi|bert) King of Kent: Wherin congratulating with him for the great mercy extended to him by Almighty God in his conversion: He seriously exhorts him by the example of the Emperour Constantin, to demolish Idols and Pagan temples, and zealously to promote the Gospel among his subiects, both by exhorta|tions and examples of purity of life: assu|ring him that besides the glory he will therby gain above all his Ancestours, he will find great security of mind in the terrible exami|nation before the Tribunal of God: for the more zealous he shall be to blott out the sins of his Subiects by contributing to their faith and Sanctification, the more easy ac|count will he render of his own sins. After this he seriously exhorts him willingly to heare, devoutly to practise and studiously to keep in mind the good advices and coun|sells which shal be given him by his Bishop Augustin, a man learned in Monasticall Insti|tution, and replenish'd with the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures: for if he hear his Bishop, God will not fayl to hear his Bishop praying for him and his kingdom. Moreover the Holy Pope forewarning him of the great changes and calamities, which our Saviour hath foretold shall happen before the end of the world, exhorts him not to be troubled or shaken if such things should come to passe in his kingdom: but to make that good use which our Lord expects from us by giving us these Signs of his coming, which is to expresse our solicitudes cheifly about our soules, by preparing them with pious actions to meet our Lord chearfully. In conclusion he signifies to him that he had sent him some few small presents: which yet no doubt will not be under valewd by him since they come from the benediction of S. Peter.
7. What these Gifts were which S. Gregory sent to King Ethelbert, though not particu|larly express'd in this letter, it will be no great difficulty to guesse at; it we peruse some other Epistles of his to Princes and Bishops, in which we may find them expressly nomina|ted.Greg. M. l. 7. Epist. 126. Thus in a Letter to Recaredus King of Spain, he thus writes, I have sent you a small Key from the most Sacred Body of the Apostle S. Peter, in which is enclosed part of the iron taken from his chains, Which you may esteem as a bene|diction sent you from himself: that the same iron which bound his neck to the suffring Martyrdom, may loose yours from all your Sins. I have likewise committed to this bearer, to be presented to you, a Crosse in which is concluded part of the wood of our Lords own Crosse, and likewise some hairs of S. Iohn Baptist, by whose intercession you may receive comfort from our Lord whose Fore|runner he was. In other Letters of his we find him sending Relicks of Saints to his freinds:I. l. 9 Epist 27. Thus he pleasur'd Maximianus Bishop of Arabia, who thought it worth so long a voyage to send an Abbot Candidus as far as Rome,Id l. to obtain some such Reliks.
8. Another Letter also he directed to the pious Queen Aldiberga, whose goodnes ex|press'd to S. Augustin, together with her di|ligence and zeale in furthering the Conver|sion of her Husband and his Subiects, he much celebrates: for which he compares her to S. Helena Mother of Constantin the Emperour: and tells her that the fame of her piety and the blessed effects of it was spread, not only as far as Rome, but Constantinople also, where it was arriv'd to the Emperours hearing. Con|sequently he exhorts her to perseverance in labouring for the Conversion of her Sub|jects, whereby she would assuredly purchase eternall rewards.



XII. CHA.XII. CHAP.

1.2.3. Saint Gregries Advice to Saint Augustin touching the Miracles wrought by him.
4 3 c. His Answer to all the Questions propsed by him.
9.10.11. Within what Degrees of Consan|guinity Mariage is forbidden.
12 13 S. Gregory censured by Catholiks for his Indulgence herein to the English. His defence of himself.
15. c. Authority given to S. Augustin over Brittish Bishops.
17.i8 c. London why no Metropolitan See.

Greg. M. l. 9. Epist. 58.1. TO S. Augustin himself S. Gregory sent besides a long Letter, in Answer to severall Questions proposed by him.In his Letter he first expresses the incomparable ioy which the News of his happy iourney and the blessed Effects of his Employment had caused, not only in himself, but all Rome likewise. Next taking notice of the Miracles which in confirmation of the Faith God had wrought by him, he uses this Expression, Notwithstanding in that celestiall Gift, there is some thing which together with great ioy ought to cause likewise great feare. For I know Al|mighty God by thy charity hath shewn great Mi|racles among a Nation chosen by him. So that it is necessary that considering so great a Gift of heaven whilst thou reioycest at it thou shouldst feare, and whilst thou fearest thou shouldst re|joyce. The argument of thy ioy must be to see the English Nation by thy Outward Miracles drawn to a participation of inward Grace: And of thy Feare, least among the Wonders wrought by thee, thy mind naturally infirm, should be lifted up to a presumption of its own worth and by this means whilst it is raised up by a view of things without, it should within fall by vain glory, c.
2. To represse therefore all motions of presumption and self-esteem in him he re|presents the Example of Moyses, who after so many stupendious Miracles wrought by him, after such inestimable favours recei|ved from God, yet for one act of distrust committed thirty eight years before, he was forbidden to enter into the land of Promise. He adds withall, that Miracles are no sign of Divine Election, since our Saviour sayes that in the last day Many shall say, Lord, in thy Name we have prophecyed, cast out Devills, and done many Miracles: But I will say to them, I know not who you are: Depart from mee all ye workers of iniquity.
3. Notwithstanding least Saint Augustin should suspect that S. Gregory wrote thus from any information given him of his va|nity and pride, he adioyns these words, These things I now say, because my desire is that the mind of my Disciple should be abased by humility. But withall let this thy Humility not be deprived of its confidence. For I a sinner have a most certain hope that by the Grace of our Omnipotent Crea|tour, and Redeemer Iesus Christ, thy sins are already forgiven; and for that reason thou art chosen by God to be an instrument by whom others also should attain to the forgivenes of their sins, Neither shalt thou hereafter have any cause to mourn for the guilt of thine own sins, who art di|ligent to cause ioy in heaven for the conversion of many sinners, c.
4. This is the substance of Saint Gregories Letter to S. Augustin: to which we will add the summe of his Answers and resolutions to severall Questions which S. Augustin had proposed to him, and which relating to the State of the English-Saxon Church, Saint Beda thought expedient to record at large in his History.
5. The first Question was,I. Quest. How Bishops ought to converse with their Clergy:And how the Oblations and Ecclesiasticall Revenews ought to be distributed?Ansvv. To the first part he referrs him to the instructions given by Saint Paul to Timothy. To the Second, he acquaints him that according to the custom of the Roman Church, and the injunctions thence given to all Bishop, the Revenews of the Church were divided into four equall parts, of which the Bishops was to receive one, for maintaining his family, and keeping ho|spitality: A Second was to be distributed among the rest of the Clergy: The poore were to have a third: And the fourth was to be expended on the Church and other Eccle|siasticall buildings. Notwithstanding he ad|vised S. Augustin who had been brought up in Monasticall Observances, whilst the En|glish Church was yet tender, to imitate rather the conversation of the Primitive Church at Ierusalem, in which all things were com|mon, neither did any one call that which he possessed, his own.
6. The Second Question was,II. Quest. Whether Clarks who had not the Gift of Continence might marry? And in that case, whether they ought not to return to a Secular State? The answer was,Ansv. that such Clarks as were not advanced to Sacred Orders, might take wives: and for that were not to be denyed their Stipends. But withall they were still to be subject to the Ecclesiasticall Rule, to be assi|duous in reciting Psalms, and to be examples of vertuous living to the Laity. Hereto he advised that whatsoever remained of the Church revenews unspent, was to be employd in pious works and Charity.
7. The third Question was,III. Quest. Since the Ro|man and Gallican Churches, though agreeing in one Faith, yet had diverse rites and cu|stomes in celebrating Masse, c. to which of

these he should conform? The Answer was, that he would not so oblige him to the Roman practises,Ansvv. but if any where else he mett with any observance which he thought would be more acceptable to God, he should conform thereto.
(So far was Saint Gregory from deserving that imputation which Pro|testants charge him with, that he was to the Saxons an Apostle not of Christian Faith, but Roman Rites.)
IV. Quest.8. The fourth Question was, What punish|ment was to be inflicted on such as stole any thing belonging to the Church. The Answer was,Ansvv. that punishments were to be varied according to the qualities of Offen|ders: for such as stole out of mere necessity were not to be so severely punished as others. Some therefore were to be punished with stripes: others with pecuniary mulcts, c. But in all punishments Charity was cheifly to be regarded: not revenge or fury: Since the onely end ought to be the amend|ment of the offender that he may avoyd hell-fire. Particularly in restitutions and pecuniary Mulcts great care was to be had that the Church should not encrease its gains by the wickednes of Offenders.
V. Quest.9. The fifth Question was, whether two Brothers might marry two Sisters far remo|ved in kinred from them? The Answer was affirmative,Ansvv. since nothing in Scripture for|bids it.
VI. Quest.10. The Sixth Question was, To what degree of consanguinity may Christians contract ma|riage.Ansvv. The Answer was, that though the Civil Law permitted cousen germans to marry, yet the Ecclesiasticall Law forbad it, and expe|rience shewed that the offspring of such mariages doe not prosper. Therefore such as are removed in the third or fourth generatio~ or degree, may lawfully marry. But to marry ones stepmother is abominable, for that is to reveale the turpitude of ones father. The like is to be sayd of marrying the Relict of one's brother, because by the former ma|riage the wife was made as one flesh with the Brother. For the condemning of such a mariage S. Iohn Baptist suffred Martyrdom: for though he was not commanded to deny Christ, yet since Christ is Truth, and he dyed for maintaining Truth, he may be sayd to have been Christs Martyr.
VII. Quest.11. The Seaventh Question (though not extant in Beda) was Whether all such as were mar|ried unlawfully within the degrees prohi|bited, were to be separated? And whether they were to be denyed the Holy Communion? The Answer was.Ansvv. That such were to be ad|monished to abstain fro~ the use of mariage; and to be informed how greivous a sin it was: Yet since they incurred this fault in the days of their ignorance before they were baptised, the Holy Communion was not to be refused them. For such is the Churches cha|tity that some faults it corrects favourably, others it tolerats meekly, and some it does prudently take no notice off: and thereby often corrects a fault by dissembling which it is much averse from. However for the fu|ture such unlawfull Mariages are most se|verely to be prohibited to all New Converts,  the Communion to be denyed to all trans|gressours, because they can no longer ex|cuse themselves by ignorance.
12. The indulgence which S. Gregory in the resolution of these two last Questions shewed to the New Saxon-Converts, by permitting mariage in the third and fourth degrees, gave occasion of murmuring and complai|ning to other Churches, particularly those of Sicily.Ap. Greg. M. l. 2. Epist. 10. Whereupon Felix Bishop of Messana wrote to S. Gregory desiring to be satisfied upon what grounds he dealt so favourably with the Saxons, whereas both custom and the Decrees of ancient Popes, the resolutions of An|cient Fathers in the great Councill of Nica and other Synods forbad Mariage to the seaventh degree. This satisfaction he demanded, not by way of accusing or calumniating S. Gre|gory, as some Protestant Writers have done, but proposing reverently his and his Fellow-Bi|shops difficulties, and desirous to be taught by him,Ibid. who, saith he, we know does undergoe the care of the Vniversall Church, and specially of Bishops (who in regard of Contemplation are called the Eyes of Gods Church) as the Prelats of the Holy See, first the Apostles, and afterward their Successours always have done.
13. Hereto S. Gregory answered,Ibid. V Baron. ad A. D. 604. That by the indulgence granted to the Saxons he had no intention to innovate or establish a gene|rall Law, but only for a time to qualify the rigour of it, least that Nation as yet imperfect and incapable of solid food, should relin|quish the Christian Profession which they had lately undertaken. But as for all other Chur|ches, his intention was that the former Laws forbidding Mariage between kinred to the Seaventh generation, should remain unalte|rable. This, says he, which we write in answer to thee and the other Bishops in Sicily, who is thou sayst, have by thee consulted us, we command to be observed generally by all (Christians.) And this Decree, renewed by S. Gregory, the Catho|lick Church observed diligently, till Pope In|nocent the third in the Council of Lateran upon just and necessary causes, contracted this amplitude of Degrees to the fourth, as is now observed. But quitting this diversion, let us return to the rest of the Questions pro|posed by S. Augustin to S. Gregory.
14. The eighth Question was,VIII QuestWhether, in case Bishops,Ansvv. by reason of their great distance from one another, could not meet together, a Bishop might not be ordaind by him in their absence? Hereto Saint Gre|gories Answer was, That in the English Church, where himself was then the onely Bishop, Ordinations must needs be celebra|ted by him alone, unlesse some Bishops out of France would vouchsafe to come. But for the future Saint Gregory enjoyned

Saint Augustin to ordain Bishops at a rea|sonable distance, that the Canons of the Apostles and Councils might be duly ob|served, which in all Ordinations doe require the presence of at least three Bishops.
By which resolution it seems S. Gregory was in|formed of the perversenes of the Brittish Bi|shops, who were unwilling to afford any assistance in the establishing of Saxon Chur|ches.
IX. Quest15. His ninth Question was, How he was to treat with the French and Brittish Bishops?Ansvv. Whereto Saint Gregory answers, that he gave him no authority to iudge the Bishops of France, whose Metropolitan the Arch-bishop of Arles onely was, in token whereof he had from precedent Popes received the Pall. In case therefore that he should goe into France, he might assist the said Arch-bishop in reforming the Clergy, or if he were negli|gent, he might in cite him thereto: but not assume any iurisdiction over any Bishop there. But as for the Brittish Bishops, saith S. Gregory, we committ them all to thy Fraterni|ty, to teach the ignorant, by perswasion to streng|then the infirm, and by authority to correct the perverse.
(If the Pall, which is the sign of Me|tropoliticall Iurisdiction, had remained among the Brittish Bishops, as it did at Arles in France, S. Gregory doubtlesse would as well have pronounced them free from S. Aug. Iurisdiction.) There were besides these nine, two Questions more with their Answers, which for their length, and the Readers ease I omitt: the curious may read them in Saint Gregory, S. Beda or Sir H. Spelman, c.
16. To these Questions we find in the late Edition of Paris adjoyned in the last place a Request, That S. Gregory would please to send him of the Relicks of S. Sixtus Martyr. The Motive of which request, it seems, was be|cause he had been informed that some|where in Kent a Body of a pretended Martyr of that name had been held in veneration. This Petition S. Gregory granted: but withall enjoyned him to repose the true Relicks of S. Sixtus which he sent him in some place a|part: And in case no Miracles appeared to have been wrought at the Body of the pre|tended Martyr, nor any sufficient Tradition concerning the Story of his passion, he re|quired him to damme up the place where it lay, and forbid the people to venerate an uncertain Relick,
17. Another Epistle S. Augustin likewise received from S. Gregory at the same time, in which he signifies to him that he had sent him a Pall, the use whereof he allows him only during the solemn celebratio~ of Masse, and with this condition, that he ordain twelve Suffragan Bishops in convenient pla|ces, which were to be subject to his Iuris|diction. He tells him withall that the Bishop of the Citty of London should ever after be consecrated by a Synod of that Province, and receive the Pall of honour from the Aposto|lick See. He advised him likewise to send a Bishop to York: and in case that Citty and Pro|vince should be converted, his will was that twelve Bishops likewise should be there or|dained, over whom the Bishop of York was to be Metropolitan, to whom likewise he pro|mised to send a Pall. And as for the two Pro|vinces of London York neither of the Arch-Bishops should have iurisdiction over the other: and that they should take place ac|cording to their Antiquity of Ordination. Only S. Augustin as long as he lived, should have authority to exercise Iurisdiction through both the Provinces, and over all the Brittish Bishops likewise.
18 Here it is worth our observation that in all this Epistle the See of Canterbury is not named as an Archiepiscopall See: Whereas that of London is expressly decreed to be one. And yet if we consult all our Ecclesia|call Histories after these times we shall not find that ever the Bishop of London enjoyed that Priviledge and authority, but was always subject to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding that during the ages be|fore whilst the Brittish Churches flourished, London as the Prime Citty of the Island, had been the Seat of the Prime Arch-bishop.
19. We must therefore conclude, that the orders prescribed in this Letter never took effect: but that upon a following re|quest from Saint Augustin, the Metropoli|ticall authority was transferred from Lon|don to Canterbury. The Motives of which request probably were, because though London was the most Noble Citty for mer|chandise of the whole Island,Ap. Malmsb. de Pont. fi. l. 1. f. 208. yet then Can|terbury was the Royal Citty, and place of re|sidence of Ethelbert the Christian King, and withall the most potent. Now that this Translation was actually made by S. Gregory we read testified by the Letters of Pope Boni|face the fifth to Iustus Arch-bishop of Canter|bury, writing thus, I perceive by your Letters that our Predecessour of Blessed memory Gregory appointed to Augustin and his Successours for the future the Metropolitan and primitive See in the Citty of Canterbury, where the Head of the whole Nation since the times of Paganism resideth.
20. The same is confirmed by the uni|versall practise of all succeeding times. Whereby it is evident that the entire exer|cise of Ecclesiasticall authority in ordring, changing and translating of Bishopricks, and Arch-bishopricks was by all our Ancestours acknowledged to belong to the See Apo|stolick. Yea B. Parker, a Successour of S. Au|gustin in the See of Canterbury as to the Rents belonging to it, and his kind of iurisdiction also, though an Apostat from his Faith, chal|lenges this Iurisdiction upon no other grounds, but because Saint Augustin re|ceived it from Saint Gregory to the preju|dice of London: and yet both he and his Suc|cessours in contradiction to their own claim

and practise, will deny that Saint Gregory or his Successours enjoyd any lawfull Iurisdiction over Brittany.Bed. l 1 c. 29.
11. With these letters and by the same Messengers, saith S. Beda, the zealous and charitable Pope Saint Gregory sent likewise all manner of things necessary for the solemn worship of God and ministery of the Church. He furni|shed them with Sacred Vessels, cloathes for Al|tars, Ornaments for Churches, Vestments proper for Bishops, Preists and other Ecclesiasticks, Re|licks of the Holy Apostles and Martyrs, and likewise very many Books. And for this his li|berality he is by Calvinists branded with the note of Superstition. But it is no wonder that such men would despoyle Gods Church of all splendour and ornaments, who have despoyld Faith it self of all good works.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1.2 c. S. Gregories New Orders tou|ching demolishing Pagan Temples and Rites.
5. A Priviledge to the Monastery of Gla|stonbury.

A. D. 601.1. WHen S. Gregory had dispatched away these Messengers, new cares began to disquiet his mind. In his Letter to King Ethelbert he had advised him to demolish the Temples dedicated to Idols, that no marks of former Superstition might remain. But upon after-thoughts he considered that those Temples being purified, might be use|full for the worship of the true God. There|fore apprehending the Kings zeale and hasty obedience,Bed. l. 1. c. 30. he hastned away other Letters, which, saith S. Beda, deserve to be recor|ded, as a Monument of his affection and continuall solicitudes for the good of our Nation. They were directed to Mellitus Abbot, in the te|nour following:Greg. M. l. . Epist. 7.2. After the departure of thee and thy com|pany, we were in great suspension of mind, not having heard any tidings of the prosperousnes of your iourney. When therefore it shall please God to bring you safe to our most reverend Brother  Augustin, acquaint him how having diligent|ly considered the affaires of England, I have now iudged best, that the Temples consecrated to Idols in that Nation should not be demolished, but only the Idols themselves. Let therefore Holy Water be made and sprinkled through the said Temples, and then Altars may be built, and Sacred Relicks be placed in them: which being done they will be usefull for the service of God: And besides, the Saxons having cleansed their hearts from Errour by the knowledg and worship of the true God, will more willingly and familiar|ly resort to the accustomed places, which they see standing.
3. And whereas they were wont to kill many Oxen in their Sacrifices to Devills, they may be perswaded to make this change in that solemnity, that on the anniversary day of the Dedication of their Churches, or Feasts of such Martyrs whose Relicks they have, they may raise Tents or Boothes about the said Churches, and celebrate the so|lemnity with merry feasting. At which time they must not immolate their beasts to the Devill, as formerly: but kill them for meat to be eaten to the praise of God the giver of them. By this means whilst we permitt them a continuance of their former externall jollities, their minds will more easily be brought to entertaine spirituall joys. For it will be impossible at once to with|draw such rude untractable minds from all their former customs: they will not be brought to per|fection by sudden leaps, but leasurely by steps and degrees. Thus did our Lord indeed make himself known to the people of Israel in Egypt: But withall permitting them to continue their custom of Sa|crifices, he taught them to offer them to his Ho|nour, which before they did to Devills. Thus their hearts being wholly changed, they relinqui|shed some thing and retaind likewise some thing of their former practise: So that though the beasts were the same which they were wont to offer, yet since they offred them now to God, and not to Idols, the Sacrifices were not the same. These things I desire thee to tell our fore named Brother that he may consider, being there present, how best to be have himself.
4. The discreet Reader may here observe how just a Title this Holy Pope S. Gregory had to the Name of Apostle of the English Nation: since amidst the distractions and tumults of businesses which necessarily atte~ded the care of all Christian Churches, yet in one year he could write so many letters, give so many admonitions, conferr so many Indults and Graces, and all this with so much affection zeale, labour and solicitude; that he may seem to have had no other thing in his thoughts but how to adorn this New En|glish Church, and make her fitt to become a beloved Spouse of our Saviour.
5. To this year likewise belongs what we read in William of Malmsbury out of the An|tiquities of Glastonbury, touching a Royall Pri|viledge then granted to that Monastery:Antiquit. Glaston ap. Malmsbur. In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and one, that is, five years after the coming of S. Au|gustin, the King of Domnonia granted the land called Ineswitrin to the ancient Church situated there: the land containing five families (quin cassata.) This he did at the Petition of Worgrez Abbot of the same place. The Grant was subscri|bed by Manvorn Bishop and the said Abbot Worgrez. Now the Name of the King (saith the Authour) does not appear, being worn out of the Writing by age. But that he was a Brittain can not be doubted, since he calls the place Ineswitrin, for that is the Brittish name. We may like|wise consider of how great Antiquity the said Church was, which is there and then called an ancient Church. The Abbots of the same Church

were doubtles Brittains too,A. D. 602. as appears by their barbarous Names, Ladaemmid, and Bregorer. The times when they succeeded one another are unknown: But their Names and Dignities are to be plainly seen in a Picture on one side of the Altar in the Great Church.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2 c. K. Ethelberts Munificence to the Church.
4.5. Priviledge of Coyning given to S. Au|gustin and his Successours.
9 c. The Arch-bishop of Canterburie's Iurisdiction over all Brittany, Ireland, c.

1. WE will now take a view of the ef|fects which these Letters and admo|nitions produced in the persons to whom they were directed, King Ethelbert and Saint Augustin. King Ethelbert therefore casts down all Idols, and commands the Temples accustomed to profane and impious Sacrifi|ces, to be changed into places of pure Wor|ship and Piety. And S. Augustin assisted by fresh labourers, purges those profane Tem|ples, and instead of Idols erects the Sacred Crosse, the Hieroglyphick of our Faith.
2. More particularly King Ethelbert, to whom S. Gregory had proposed Constantin for a pattern,Camden. in Canti
Park in Ant|quit. Brit. f. 52. with a munificence like Constan|tins, gave his Palace and whole Royal Citty of Canterbury to S. Augustin, saith Camden, and built for himself a Palace at Reculver (Regul|bium.) Which place, Saith Parker was situated near the Sea: Where likewise he founded a Mo|nastery, the last Abbot whereof was called Wenred. Nothing now remains of this place, by reason the Sea breaking in has cover'd it. Onely the tops of towers  other ruins of the Monastery are marks to Seamen that they may avoyd the dangerous flats there.
3. Together with the Royal Citty King Ethel|bert conferred likewise on S. Augustin and his Successours many Regall Priviledges (Iura Regalia:) Among which one was a right of coyning Money with his own Stamp: For to this effect Selden thus Writes: The ancient Right of the Arch-bishops of Canterbury is si|gnified by an Old Coyn,Selden. In Spicileg. f. 2:7 one side whereof is signed with the name Plegmuud Arch-bishop, and the other with the name of Ecmund the Coyner. The Prototype is preserved in the Treasure of the fa|mily of Cotton: where I my self saw a peice of silver having imprinted on it the name  image of Celnoth Arch-bishop. And it seems the right of coyning money, generally esteemed a Regal Priviledge, did belong to the Arch-bishop as Lord of that Citty in those times.
4. This Right remained to that See till the times of King Ethelstan, about the year of Grace nine hundred twenty four: who then abrogated it, in the opinion of Selden,  publish'd a Law that not any coyn should passe but such as was stamped with the Kings Image.Id. ib. Notwithstanding it was not quite abroga|ted, for among the same Kings Laws this is one, Let there be seaven Minters or Coyners at Canterbury: Of which four shall belong to the King, two to the Arch-bishop, and one to the Abbot. So that this prerogative remained many ages entire to the Arch-bishops, though the measure and valew of the mo|ney coynd was restrain'd by King Athelstan, who commanded the same coyn for price and quantity to have passage through his dominions: and that none out of Citties should be permitted to stamp it. Neither can it appear from any authentick Record, but that this Priviledge continued till the time of the Norman Con|quest.
5. To the same See of Canterbury also, by vertue of S. Gregories Rescript, did belong an Vniversall Iurisdiction over the whole Island. Forthough in a Synod shortly following the Brittish Bishops made their opposition and contradiction to this Priviledge, for which reason S. Augustin forbore to presse it. Yet the same was afterward admitted, not only by all the Churches of the Saxons, but of Brit|tany in the largest sence, yea of the Britta|nies in the plurall number (Britanniarum) comprehending in the language of ancient Authours (Polybius hist. l. 3. and Ptolomy Georg. l. 2.) both old Scotland, which is Ire|land, and Albany which is Modern Scotland. For on the See of Canterbury did both those Nations depend in Ecclesiasticall matters.
6. Thus Queen Matildis call'd S. Anselm the Arch-bishop of the prime See,Anselm. l. 3. Epist. 55. and Primar of the Northern Islands call'd Orcades. And be|fore S. Anselms time the custom was for the Irish Bishops to receive Consecration from the Arch-bishops of Canterbury, as evidently appears from S. Lanfrancs letter to Gothric King of Ireland, extant in Baronius; as like|wise from the letter, of Murchertac another Irish King and Dofnald a Bishop to S. Anselm Arch-bishop of Canterbury,admer. Hist Nvor. c. 3. in which they re|quest him to institute a Bishop at Waterfoxd by vertue of the power of Primacy over them which was invested in him, and of the authority of Le|gat of the Apostolick See which he exercised. This is testified by Eadmerus the Monk an eye-witnes of that transaction.
7. Next as touching Scotland in the mo|dern acception, though anciently it was subject to the Arch-bishop of York by a De|cree of Pope Eleutherius sent by Fugatius and Damianus: Yet now S. Gregory derogated from that Decree, and either having regard to S. Augustins sanctity, or the eminent Em|pire of Ethelbert, who was in some sort Monarch of the whole Island, he publish'd a New Decree that all Churches of the Brittanies should be subject to the See of Canterbury.Id. ib l. 5. f. 132. And this is manifest in the Controversy between Alexander King of the Scotts and the fore|said

Eadmer,A. D. 603. who at the request of that King was appointed Bishop of S. Andrews in Scot|land by Radulphus Arch-bishop of Canterbury, whom the King would have to receive Con|secration from the Arch-bishop of York; but he refused, informing him, that the authority of the See of Canterbury did of old extend over all Brittany, and therefore that he would require Consecration from the said Arch-bishop. But the King not being satisfied, Eadmer chose ra|ther to relinquish his new Bishoprick, then prejudice the Prerogative of the Prime See of Brittany.


XV. CHA.XV. CHAP.

i.2. The King of the Northumbers over|comes the King of the Scotts.

A. D. 603.1. THE year following, which was the six hundred and third of our Lords In|carnation, Ethelfrid King of the Northumbers overcame Edan King of the Scotts.Id. l 1. c. 34. This Ethel|frid, saith Beda, was a most potent King, and wonderfully thirsty after glory. He had wasted the Brittains more then any of the Saxon Princes, and had made many of their Provinces tributary. Whereupon Edan King of the Scots inhabiting Brittany being mov'd by the great progresse of his Victories, came against him with a mighty and well appointed army, but was overcome and forced to fly back with few attendants: For in a place called Degsasten, or The Stone Degsa, celebrated by that battell, his whole army in a manner was destroyed. Yet in the same combat Theobald Bro|ther of Ethelfrid with that part of the army lead by him, was slain. And from that time till the dayes of S. Beda himself never durst any King of the Scotts enter Brittany against the English Na|tion.
Ap. Vsser. in Primord. f. 710.2. The said King Aidan, as Fordon the Scottish Chronicler testifies, after that discom|fiture did so afflict himself with greif that two years after he dyed at Kentyre. After whose death Kennet Ker son of Conal seysed on the Crown, but within lesse then a years space dying, Euge|nius Buydwel Son of Aeidan succeeded in the Kingdom. Which King Eugenius, saith he, infe|sted the Regions of the Saxons, and sometimes of the Picts with furious irruptions. But in this clause he manifestly contradicts S. Beda fore|cited,Bed. l. 5. c. 24. who likewise elsewhere expressly af|firms, That the Scotts inhabiting Brittany con|tented themselves with their own confines and attempted nothing either openly or privily against the English Nation. But from the Scotts we will passe to the Brittains, and their contentions with the now Christian-Saxons about the Church and Ecclesiasticall Rites.


XVI. CHAP.A. D. 604.
XVI. CH.

i.2. c The death of S. Gregory the Great: his admirable Sanctity, c.

1. THE year of Grace six hundred and four is memorable to the whole Church,A. D. 604. but especially to Brittany for the death of S. Gregory the Supreme Pastor, and the glorious Apostle of our Nation, as like|wise for the Generall Synod of Brittany con|voked by S. Augustin, in which there was a convention not only of Saxon and Brittish Bishops, but likewise of severall from among the Picts and Scotts.
2. As touching S. Gregory we read thus in S. Beda:Bed. l. 2. c. i. The blessed Pope Gregory after he had most gloriously governed the Roman and Aposto|lick Church thirteen years, six months and ten days, departed this life, and was translated to an eternall Throne in the Kingdom of Heaven. Whose memory we are obliged to celebrate in our History, as being truly the Apostle of our Na|tion, which by his industry was converted from the power of Satan to the Faith of Christ. For being elevated to the Pontificat over the whole world, and made a Prelat of Churches already embracing the true Faith, he made our Nation, till his days enslaved to Idols, a Church of Christ: so that to him we may apply that of the Apostle: For the seale of his Apostleship are we in our Lord.
3. His Memory is celebrated through the whole Chuch of God both Eastern and Western on the twelfth of March: On which day we thus read in the Roman Martyrologe,Marty. Rom. 12. Mart. At Rome, the commemoration of S. Gregory Pope, and emi+nent Doctour of the Church, who for many illu|strious acts, and converting the English Nation to the Faith of Christ hath the Title of Great, and is called the Apostle of the English.
4. The many glorious Gests of this Holy Pope not pertaining to our present subject, I willingly omitt, because either generally well known, or easily to be found in Eccle|siasticall Historians: and I will content my self with adioyning here a double Character given of him by two learned and Holy Bishops of Spain, S. Isidor of Sevill and S. Ildefonsus of Toledo.Ifid. Hsp. de viris Illustr. c. 27. The former of which thus writes of him, Pope Gregory Prelat of the Roman and Apostolick See, was a Man full of compunction and fear of our Lord, eminent in humility, and endued with so great light of Divine knowledge by the grace of Gods Spirit, that none was ever equall to him either in the times he lived in, or any before him. In the next place S. Ilde|fonsus gives this parallel description of the Pope,Idefons. de viris illustr. c. 2. He shone so bright, saith he, with the perfection of all vertues and merits, that exclu|ding all comparisons of any other illustrious per|sons, Antiquity never shewed the world any one

like to him. He excelled S. Antony in Sanctity, S. Cyprian in eloquence, S. Augustin in wise|dom, c.
5. I ought to have bespoken the Prote|stant readers patience, and now demand his pardon for representing this our Apostle, reiected and disgraced by severall of them, in the features and colours drawn by two such eminent Bishops, who liv'd either in, or near the same age with him, and whose iudgment, approv'd by the whole Christian world till this last age, in reason deserves rather to be relyed upon, then that of a few Apostats who liv'd almost a thousand years after him. But I leave it to their consciences to determine, whether this holy Pope de|serv'd, in England especially, that such severe Laws should be enacted, and such cruelties executed against him, as have been against those who preach Christ as he did, by the confession of Protestant Writers themselves: And they must of necessity answer, Yes: for certainly if his Successours and disciples deserve these rigorous scourges, he who seduced them, deserved to be tormented with Scorpions.


XVII. C.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. c. A great Synod of Saxons, Brittains c. assembled by S. Augustin.
5.6. c. The place is uncertain.
7.8. The Names of the Bishops.

A. D. 604.1. SAint Beda after recounting the death of this our Apostle S. Gregory, proceeds to relate the actions of S. Augustin the same year,Bed. l. 2. c. 2 in these words, In the mean time Augustin by the assistance of King Ethelbert con|voked to a Synod the Bishops, or Doctours of the greatest and next Province of the Brittains, who mett together in a place to this day in the English tongue calld Augustins-ac or Oake, seated in the confines of the Wiccij (or inhabitants of Worcester shire) and the West-Saxons.
2. Now this Synod having been a matter of great importance, we will endeavour to frame with some diligence a Narration con|cerning it, that is, touching the place where it was celebrated, the persons assembled in it, and the speciall matters debated amongst them.
3. The place though named with some Cir|cumstances by S. Beda, yet after such a vicissi|tude and cha~ge both of men and language is not at this day obvious or easy to be found. It is doubtfull whether Augustins-Oke in S. Beda signifies simply a Tree only, or a village among such trees; that is, Whether the Synod was held abroad in the open aire, or in some house. The former seems more pro|bable to Sir H. Spelman,Spelm. to. 1. Concil. f. 107 for, saith he, It was an ancient custome in Brittany to hold their assemblies abroad, for under a roof the Brittains apprehen|ded danger by witch-craft or fascination, as hath been formerly mentiond out of Beda at the meeting of King Ethelbert with this same S. Augustin. Notwithstanding though by S. Beda's rela|tion such was the Superstition of the Infidel Saxons, no ground appears why it should be imputed to the Christian Brittains, much lesse to S. Augustin and his companions who were Romans.
4. It is therfore more likely that this Synod was celebrated within-dores in a place or village which had its appellation from an Oake, and from this meeting obtaind the addition of S. Augustins name. And herein it resembled an ancient Synod assembled by Theo|philus against S. Iohn Chrysostom in the suburbs of the Citty of Chalcedon, which was calld (Ad quercum) The Synod at the oak, from some notable Oak which had stood near the Palace where the Bishops sate.
5. But where to find this village is yet un|certain. Camden with all his diligence and perspicacity leaves it in the dark. For in his perambulation of the Province of the Wiccij, mentiond by S. Beda, he gives onely this account of it:Camdn in Wigorn, About this territory there is a place, but the position of it is uncertain, calld Au|gustins-ake, or Oak: at which Augustin the Apostle of England and the Brittish Bishops mett: and after many hott disputes about celebra|ting Easter, preaching the word of God to the Saxons and celebrating Baptism after the Roman rite, they parted from one another with disagreeing minds.
6. Notwithstanding if leave may be allowd to coniecture, why may we not suppose that a place in the outward limits of Worcester|shire calld Ausric, contractedly from Au|stinsric, may not have that appellation from S. Augustin and this Synod? There is ano|ther village likewise in the confines of Warwickshire calld Haustake, which has some resemblance to the name in S. Beda. And each of these lay commodiously enough for the meeting of the Brittains. For Speed's opinon that this Synod was held in Hampshire, wants probability both because that disa|grees from the limits of the place describ'd by S. Beda, and that province was not at all opportune for the Brittains.
7. Next touching the persons meeting in this Synod, our Ecclesiasticall Writers speak very indistinctly: Sir H. Spelman affirms that wee may truly call this Synod (Panbritannicam) an Vniversall Synod of the whole Isle of Brittany:Spelm. to. i. Concil. f. 116. since therin were assembled not only the Saxons under Augustin and his Roman companions, but a multitude of Brittains likewise; there were moreover some Scotts and Picts quarelling about Easter. The names of those who mett at the first Session are unknown. David Powel writes thus, To this Synod were calld seaven Bishops of the Brittains.Povvel. in Annt. ad  in Cambriae l. 2. c. 1. For in those dayes that number of principall Churches, after the Asiatick manner, had their Ordinations under the Metropolitan of

Menevia, or Saint Davids. Thus he from the Apostat Bale: but most unskillfully.
8. For neither can it be shewd, that in Asia every Metropolitan had under him the determinat number of seaven Suffragans. On the contrary it appears from the Synod of Ephesus that the Metropolitan of Pamphilia, a Province of Asia,vid. Baron. ad A. D. 43. by ancient custom had under him only two Bishops, which custom was ratified by that Synod. Neither is there any shew of probability that the Brittains in their Ordina|tions and Rites followd the Asiatick customs. On the contrary we have demonstrated be|fore, that Saint David, Saint Kentigern and other Holy Bishops in Brittany receiv'd their exemplar and Rule from the See Apastolick:p. Capgr. in S. Kentigrn. And particularly S. Kentigern at his death gave and left to his Disciples forcible precepts concer|ning the observation of the duties of holy Religion, c. and a firm, unshaken adherence to the De|crees of the Ancient Fathers, and Instituts of the Holy Roman Church.
Bed. l. 2. c. 2 Hunting l 3 f. 315.9. Therfore it we consult Saint Beda, and Henry of Huntingdom who writes conforma|bly to him, we shall find that in this Synod there were two Sessions: and that to the first there came with Saint Augustin onely Mellitus and Iustus, who were then probably designed, but not yet consecrated Bishops: And of the Brittains neither is the number of them defind, nor the name of one of them recorded. At the Second Session indeed Giraldus Camensis acknowledges the pre|sence of seaven Brittish Bishops, but seeks not out of Asia a reason of that Number: for he writes thus,Girald. Itin. Cambr. l. 2 c. 1 The reason why at that time there were seaven Bishops in Brittany, wheras at this day there are only four, may be, because in those dayes there were more Cathedrall Churches in Wales, then now; and perhaps Wales it self was further extended then at this day.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1 The Gests of that Synod.
2.3. c. Calumnies of Protestant Writers against S. Augustin for pride and Am|bition: disprov'd.
6.7. c. Saint Beda's true Narration of the Gests of the Synod: And Saint Augustins doctrine confirmed by a Miracle.
10.11. Wherein consisted the Errour of the Brittains about the Paschall Solem|nity.

A. D. 604.1. ENough hath been sayd concerning circumstantiall matters of place and persons, regarding this Synod: in neither of which we can find any full satisfaction. That which most imports us to know, is the busines it self for which the Synod was assembled: Which, if we consult our an|cient Historians, will appear manifestly enough. Wheras some Modern Writers since the Change of Religion, incited by passion, doe from their own invention, and with|out any testimony of Antiquity tell us of ambitious designs of S. Augustin to esta|blish his Tyranny over both the Saxons and Brittains, and to introduce Roman ceremo|nies and superstitions unknown to the Brittains, and prudently reiected by them.
2. Thus writes David Powel: Augustin, saith he,Povvel. in an|not. ad itin. Camb. l. 2. c. i celebrated a Synod with this design to sub|due to himself the Clergy of all Brittany, and render them obsequious to the Roman Church. Thus likewise the Centuriators of Magde|burg: Augustin a Roman,Magdeb. Centur. 6. f. 6.7. a Benedictin Monk was in the year 582. sent by Pope Gregory into En|gland to gain it to the Roman Bishop, and to sub|due it to his gainfull and Superstitious Iurisdi|ction, c. And again, The same Augustin Bishop of the Angli mett in a Synod with the Bishops of the Brittains and Scotts, and required of them to submitt themselves to him, and to undergoe the common labour of preaching the Gospell to the Saxons.Ib. f. 448. They adde further, He in a Synod obtruded on the Brittish Churches the Roman Rites and customs, to wit, Altars, Vest|ments, Images, Masses, Chalices, Crosses, Can|dlesticks, Incense, Banners, Sacred Vessels, Holy Water, Books of Roman Ceremonies, Obla|tions, Processions, Pomps, Tithes and such like things hitherto unknown to the Brittains, who were content with the Asiatick and Greek Cere|monies. He requir'd moreover that they should celebrate Easter at the same time with him, ad|minister Baptism with the Roman Rites, preach the Gospel to the Saxons together with him, and acknowledge him for their Arch-bishop. As if these Ceremonies and solemnities in Admi|nistring the Sacraments were unknown either to the Grecian or Brittish Churches: When as S. Chrysostom severall ages before this time, who was an Asiatick Preist and Grecian Bishop, testifies of the ancestours of these Brittains, that they had experience of the power of the Gospel:Chrisost homil advers. Gentil. c. 5. For Churches were founded among them, and Altars erected, c. And hundreds of Examples have already been re|lated in this History of the like.
3. Such Impudent calumnies may be expected from Writers, who had no other designs in their labours. But they are not not pardonable in Sir H. Spelman, a man versed in antiquity, and who ordinarily is ingenuous in his Writings: yet he likewise imputes to S. Augustin a design of subduing the Brittish Churches,Spelm. to. i. Concil. f. 104. For the first thing de|manded by Augustin in this Synod (saith he) was Obedience to the Roman Church. And to that purpose he annexes to the sayd Synod a Writing translated out of Welsh, and com|piled by an unknown Authour in an

unknown age, as himself confesses, but suppos'd to be the Answer of an Abbot of Bangor to Saint Augustin, wherin he tells him, Other obedience besides that of Cha|rity I doe not acknowledge due to the man whom you call Pope, c. Besides this, We are already under the government of the Bishop of Caer-leon upon Vsk, who under God is to have inspection over us, to make us observe the spiri|tuall rule and way.
4. This New found Schedule, though by him earnestly endeavourd to be iustified, has been by many Catholick Writers sufficient|ly disprov'd: and there needs no more to make it appear a Forgery, then that passage wherin the Bishop of Caer-leon is sayd to have the principall care of the Welsh Provinces: Since by all Histories it is evident that very many years before this the Metropoliticall Iurisdiction had been transferd from that Church to Menevia: And moreover neither at the time when this Synod was held, nor many years before was there any Bishop at all at Caer-leon.
5. But all these discourses either about the Popes, or Saint Augustins authority over the Brittains, pretended to have pass'd in this Synod, are meer fictions invented first by Bale an Apostat, and the Centu|riatours without any warrant from our Ancient Histories. It is true, Saint Gregory had invested Saint Augustin with such authority over the Brittains: but that he wisely dissembled it at this meeting, and onely required a conformity from the Brittish Bishops in the celebration of Easter and administration of Baptism, with a re|quest that they would ioyn with him in spreading the Gospell, is manifest from Saint Beda, from whom alone we can se|curely be informed of the passages of this present Synod: And whose Narration shall here entirely be sett down.
Bed. l. 2. c. 26. Augustin, saith he, began with a bro|therly admonition to perswade them to entertain Catholick peace and Vnity with him, and for our Lords honour to undertake the common labour of preaching the Gospell to the Pagans. He told them likewise that they did not observe the day of Easter~ in its due time, but reckoned the Sunday from the fourteenth day of the Moon to the one and twentieth. Which Com|putation is containd in a Circle of eighty four years. And many other things beside they did contrary to the Vnity of the Church. This was the Substance of Saint Augustins discourse to the Brittains in the first Session of this Synod. Here is not a word of the Primacy of the Roman See, or the submission of Brittany to it, and much lesse to him. But what effect these Christian exhortations had on the minds of the Brittains, the same holy Writer thus further declares:Id. ib.7. When the Brittains, saith he, after a long disputation would not be moved to give their assent, neither by the exhortations nor increpations of Augustin and his companions, but would needs preferre their own Traditions before the consent of all Christian Churches in the world:The Holy Father Augustin brought the tedious and laborious Dispute to this conclu|sion, saying, Let us beseech our Lord who makes brethren of one mind in the house of his Father, that he would vouchsafe by celestiall igns to make known unto us, which of these Traditions is to be followd, and which is the right path leading to his Kingdom. Let some sick person be here produced among us, and he by whose Prayers he shall be cured, Let that mans faith and practise be beleived acceptable to God, and to be ollowd by men.
8. This proposition being at last with much adoe and great unwillingnes accepted by the adverse party, a certain English man who was blind was brought before them: and was first offred to the Brittish Bishops, but by their en|deavours and ministery found no cure or help. At length Augustin, compelled hereto by iust necessity, kneeld down, and address'd his Prayer to God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ that he would vouchsafe to restore sight to that blind man, and by a corporall illumi|nation of one to kindle the Light of spirituall Grace in the hearts of many beleivers. Ha|ving said this, immediatly the blind man re|ceived sight, and Augustin was proclam'd by all a true Preacher of celestiall Light. Then at last the Brittains confess'd that they now per|ceived that the way of iustice ught by Au|gustin was the true way: but without the con|sent of their countreymen they could not renoune their ancient customes. Therfore they re|quested that a second Synod might be assem|bled, at which greater numbers might meet.
9. This is the simple and true Narration of the Gests of this first Session:Hunting. l. 3. f. 529. the summ of which is likewise deliverd by Henry of Huntington. And here we see the way taught by Saint Augustin confirm'd by a divine Miracle, and consequently what|soever the Brittains taught in contradiction to that way reprov'd from heaven. So that it is against God himself that they fight, who calumniate the faith deliver'd to the Saxons by him. Be it granted therefore to our Pro|testant Writers, that in this Synod Saint Au|gustin requir'd obedience to the Roman See from the Brittains, and to himself sent from thence: they must then be compelld to ioyn with the Brittains in acknowledging that the way of iustice taught by him was the true way.
10. The principall, if not, as Huntington implies, the only point about which such earnest contestations pass'd in this Sy|nod, was the celebration of Easter, or the Paschall solemnity. This Feast, as ob|served by the Iews, was to be celebrated exactly on the fourteenth day of the first Moon after the Vernal Equinox, on what day of the week soever it fell: and it was instituted in memory of the de|liverance

of the Iews by means of sprink|ling the blood of the Paschall lamb on the posts of their dores,A. D. 603. in the night wherein the first born of every family among the Egyptians was slain by an Angell. Now that Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb only typifying the offring of Christ our true Pasch, the Chri|stian Church from the Apostles times in me|mory of Christs deliverance from death after he had offred himself, instituted this Chri|stian Pasch almost at the same time with the Iewes. But to distinguish it from the shadow of a Iewish observation, they ordain'd that it should be solemnised only on a Sunday, yet not that on which the fourteenth day of the Moon fell, but the Sunday following: and therefore counted always from the fifteenth day to the two and twentieth, excluding the the day of the Iewish Pasch.
11. The Errour therefore of the Brittains consisted not, as generally Protestant Writers conceive, in conforming to the Asiatick manner of the Quarto-decimani, who kept their Easter always the same day with the Iewes, whether it were Sunday, or not: But they made their computation from the fourteenth of the Moon to the one and twentieth (as Saint Beda properly expresses their errour) by which means it came to passe, that if the fourteenth of the Moon proved to be a Sunday, the Iews and Brit|tains once in seaven years would observe their Paschall Solemnity together, which was contrary to the universall practise of the Church, and utterly forbidden by the first Generall Councill of Nica. This difference is observed by Bishop Vsher alone, of all Protestants:Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. who therefore never charges the Brittains with the Asiatick Errour.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. The Second Session of the Synod.
3.4. c. The Brittish Bishops consult an Anchoret: His answer: and the Suc|cesse.
6. What S. Augustin required of them: Not subjection.
7.8. The Brittains erroneous about Bap|tism: and how.
9. Saint Augustins Prophecy against them.

1. SVCH having been the Successe of the first Session of this Synod, the same Saint Beda proceeds in the Narration of what befell at their Second meeting not long after,Bed. l. 2. c. 2. saying, The Brittains requested that the Synod might meet a second time, when a greater number might be present. Which being appointed, there came (as the report is) seaven Brittish Bishops,A. D. 604. and besides them many other very learned men, especially from that most Noble Monastery of theirs which in the English tongue is called Bancornabury, the Abbot whereof at that time is sayd to have been named Dinooth.
2. Whether there were seaven Brittish Bishops, or no, we see Saint Beda, writes doubtingly, on uncertain report: But none of our ancient Historians pretend to give the names of their See. Onely Bale, a Modern Aposta, as confidently names them, as if he had been present at the Synod: These were, saith he, the Bishops of Hereford, Landaff, Saint Paters, Bangor, Cluy or Ely, Wrcester and Glamorgan.Spelm tom. 1. Concil. f. 25. But Henry of Huntingdon could only name three Sees at this time in Wales, Saint Davids, or Menevia, Bancor or Elwy, and Landaff under which is com|prised Glamorgan. In this Synod no mention is made of the Arch-bishop of Menevia, saith Sir Henry Spelman: And probably he there|fore came not to the Synod, least he should against the Canons submit his own Metropoliti|call dignity to a stranger Metropolitan in his own Province. But more probably there was then no Bishop of Menevia at all: for since the time that Saint Sampson caried the Pall over Sea into Lesser Brittany, in the year five hundred and sixty, we doe not find any constant report among Authours that he had any Successours.
3. How many soever, and who soever these Brittish Bishops were,Bed. l. 2. c. 2. Saint Beda in the first place relates, how before they came to the Councill, they repaired to a cer|tain holy and prudent an who lived an A|nachoreticall life among them, to demand his advice, whether upon the exhortation of Au|gustin they should suffer themselves to be perswaded to desert their Traditions.His answer was, if he be a man of God, follow him They replyed, What proof may we have whether he be a man of God, or no? He answerd, Our Lord saith, Take my yoak upon you and learn of mee, for I am meek and humble in heart. If this Augustin therefore be meek and hum|ble in heart, it is to be beleiv'd that as he himself bears the yoak of Christ, so it is the same yoak that he would impose upon you. But if he be discourteous and haughty, it is cerain that he comes not from God, neither are his speeches to be regarded by you. They replyed again, But how shall we know whether he be haughty, or no? His answer was, Take order that he with his companions be the first comers to the Synod, and if when you appaach, he rise up to you, iudge thereby that he is a ser|vant of Christ, and be obedient to what he shall ordain. But if he in contempt shall refuse to rise up to you being more in number, let him likewise be despised by you.
4. This was certainly a very casuall sign given by the Hermite and the defect of a co~plement was a ground very insufficient to excuse their dissent from such things as they

had seen and acknowledged to have been confirm'd by a Divine Miracle. But far more culpable are some Protestants, who from the personal outward carriage of a man will condemne not only all his Sacred Rites, but the substance of his Faith too. This the an|cient Brittains never did. They had proba|bly heard that S. Gregory had invested him with Ecclesiasticall authority over all Britta|ny, though he never challenged it from them: and they suspected that if they yeilded to him in changing any of their Traditons, they should become subject to him in all: and for this reason they refused their assent to every thing proposed by him.
Bed. ibid.5. Let us therefore see the successe of this advice of the Welsh Hermits which Saint Beda thus relates: It came to passe that when the Brittish Bishops and Doctours came to the place, Augustin was sitting on his seat: which they seeing, presently they were fill'd with rage and indignation, imputing that to his pride: so that they earnestly contradicted him in all things that he said.Synod Ephes. sess 2. It was the custome in Gods Church that the President of a Synod should be cloathd in his solemn Pontificall robes (as we read of S. Cyrill in the Councill of Ephe|sus) in which posture it is not becoming to practise those civilities, which are other|wise fitting: This may likely have been a cause of this behaviour of Saint Augustin at this time. Or his mind might have been wholly taken up in thoughts about the pre|sent affairs, that he did not attend to out|ward objects. If any charity had possessed the minds of the Brittains, they ought ra|ther to impute this behaviour to any thing then pride, considering that pure charity to the soules of an Idolatrous Nation had forced him to undertake so tedious and hazardous a iourney: that being come, he earnestly de|sired to ioyne hands of amity and peace with these angry Bishops, not requiring any subjection from them, but offring them an equall share in the merits of his Apostolick Office.
6. Many things there were in which these Brittish Bishops and Churches had va|ried from their former practises, confor|mable to the generall custom: as we had heretofore an example in the point of Ordi|nations. And no wonder, considering the late tumultuous times, the fayling of Me|tropoliticall Iurisdiction, the want of Synods and Visitations, c. Yet such was S. Au|gustins condescendence and love of Vnity, that in case they would comply in three points only, he would require no more.Bed. ibid. Augustin told them (by S. Beda's relation) that there were many things in which they practised contrary not only to the Roman custom, but of the Vniversall Church likewise: But if they would conform in three points only, he would With equanimity tolerate all other mat|ters in which their practises were contrary: Which three Points were, First the celebrating the Paschall Solemnity in its due time: Next, the administration of Baptism according to the custom of the Holy Roman and Apostolick Church: And the third was to ioyn with him and his companions in preaching the Gospell to the Saxons. Hereby it is evident that there was no difference at all between the Faith profess'd by S. Augustin, and by the Brittains, no contrariety in Dostrines. And again, that S. Augustin did not insist on, nor so much as mention any subiection expected by him from the Brittih Churches. So that all the accusations charged by Protestants upon Saint Gregory and S. Augustin for endea|vouring to bring in among the Brittains a New Religion; and all their complaints against his ambition and thirst of Superi|ority and tyranny over them, fall to the ground. There are onely three Points
wherin he requires a conformity, in none of which that of Iurisdiction is inclu|ded.
7. Wee have already seen wherin the erroneous practise of the Brittains about the celebration of Easter consisted. But we doe not find their particular defect in admini|string the Sacrament of Baptism. Certain it is notwithstanding that they did not cele|brate it so nakedly destitute of solemne Rites, as it is of late in the Churches which call themselves Reform'd: For besides the sign of the Crosse (without which no Sacrament is ad|ministred, saith S. Augustin) they used Holy Chrism, the benediction of Water and salt, c. Most probable therfore it is, that the like defects were in practise among them, which are complaind of by S. Leo in his De|cretal Epistle, to wit, the celebrating of it with|out necessity out of the solemn times prescrib'd by the Church,Leo. Epist. Decretal. 80. Easter, Whitsontide, c. or without sufficient previous instructions, for want of which the Exorcisms and imposition of hands on persons of age converted, would want their due effect. But concerning this matter, for want of light from Antiquity, we can onely give coniectures.
8. These most equall conditions of bro|therly affection and Vnity, were reiected by the Brittains: For saith S. Beda, Their answer was, that they would not doe any one of these things:Bed. ibid. Neither would they receive him for their Arch-bishop. This latter clause of their Answer proceeded meerly from the spirit of faction in them, since the receiving him for Arch-bishop was not included in the conditions of Vnion, nor so much as pro|posed by Saint Augustin: Which ill spirit is denoted by the following words of the same Authour,For conferring among them|selves, they said, If he would not vouchsafe euen now to rise out of his seat in civility to us,ibid. how much more will he contemne us in case we begin to yeild subiection to him?
9. The Brittains therefore obstinatly re|fusing compliance in every thing, the Treaty between them necessarily ended: But

before the dissolution of the Assembly, Saint Augustin by inspiration from God prophe|cied a heavy iudgement shortly to befall them for their uncharitablenes. The man of God Augustin,Id. ib. saith S. Beda is reported to have foretold the Brittains by way of threatning, That since they would not accept of peace with their brethren, they should receive war from their Enemies: And since they refused to preach the way of life to the English Nation, they should by the hands of the same Nation suffer no lesse a revenge then death. Which Prophecy of his in all the circumstances of it was through the just iud|gement of God fulfilled upon them. The man|ner how this came to passe shall in its due place be related: where likewise we will clear S. Augustin from a most horrible ca|lumny imputed to him, as if by his impul|sion many thousands of Religious Monks were murdred.


XX. CH.XX. CHAP.

1.2. c. Sebert King of the East Saxons converted.
4 5. c. The Church and Monastery of Westminster built.
7.8. c. The wonderfull consecration of it by S. Peter: attested by Authours of eminent credit.

1. THIS Synod (of Worcester, as some call it) being thus ended without producing any good effect,A. D. 604. the minds of both parties being rather far more exulce|rated: S. Augustin returned into Kent, where he laboured diligently in propagating the Gospell. Neither were his endeavours in vain: on the contrary Almighty God to shew that the uncharitablenes of the Brittains could not prejudice his designs of good to the Sa|xons, so wonderfully exalted his Divine Truth among those Pagans, and so depressed the Brittains that the words of our Saviour may seem to have been fullfilled in them, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. For from the Brittish Churches, which hitherto had with so much devotion and gratitude honoured the Apostolick See, but now rejected it, scarce any thing memo|rable is afforded to furnish our Ecclesiasticall Story: Whereas every year almost will sug|gest new matter to glorify God in the heroi|cally Christian actions of Saxon Princes, the sanctity of Bishops, and the wonders which God wrought for the testifying of both.
2. In the next confining Kingdom to Kent, divided from it by the River Thames, raigned a Prince called Sigibert, or Sebert, or Saberet, King of the East-Saxons, whose Father had married Ricula the only Sister of King Ethel|bert. This Prince moved either by the au|thority of his Vncle, or the admiration of the Sanctity of Saint Augustin and his companions, signified his desire to be instru|cted in Christian Religion. Whereupon Saint Augustin readily sent him Preachers, who found little difficulty in perswading him to relinquish his Idolatry and embrace the Faith of Christ.
3. Presently after Saint Augustin him|self repaired to him, and administred the first Sacrament of Baptism to King Sebert and his Queen Ethelgoda. And many of his Subject following his example gave up their names to Christ: insomuch as Saint Augustin for the government of this New Church consecrated Mellitus, the Roman Abbot sent him by Saint Gregory, Bishop of London. That these things hapned this year presently after the Synod of Worcester, Saint Beda is witnes, as likewise an ancient Historian named Iohn Fleet, whose words are these, King Sebert having been baptised by Saint Augustin in the Western part of Lon|don, demolished a certain Idoll-Temple dedi|cated to Apollo, in a place called Thorney, and in the room thereof built a Church to the ho|nour of God and Saint Peter: which he recom|mended to Saint Mellitus to be by him conse|crated.
4. Others refer the foundation of this Church to King Ethelbert, whose Tributary not only King Sebert was, but all other Saxon Kings as far as the River of Humber, by the testimony of Saint Beda. But in the Charter of King Edgar afterwards granted to this Church of Westminster, it is more properly said to have been built by Sebert a very rich Prince on the perswasion of Ethelbert the first English Christian King.Displom. R. Edgr. in  Bene+dict. 72. And in the same Charter the place where it was built called Thorney, is said to have been a ter|rible place, probably not so much for the Savage rudenes of it, as because wicked Spirits formerly worshipped in Apollo's Temple had possession of it.
5. To this Church of Saint Peter the Holy Bishop Saint Mellitus adioyned a Monaster,Malmsbu. de  l. 2. . 24. being admonished to doe so as the fame is, by S. Peter himself, saith William of Malmsbury. Indeed in these ancient times scarce any illustrious Churches were built without a Congregation of Monks to attend Divine Service there: A mark whereof remains to this day, for our Cathedrall Churches are vulgarly called Ministers, or Monasteries. And this was according to the advice given to Saint Augustin by Pope Gregory,Bed. l. 1. c. 27. to institute in his Churches a conversation of religious per|sons like that in the primitive Church of Ieru|salem, in which none accounted those things which he possessed his own, but all things were common among them, as hath been declared already from S. Beda.
6. How this Church was consecrated im|mediatly and miraculously by S. Peter him|self, though my intention is to be modest

in recounting such wonders, I will ad|venture to declare from an Ancient Writer Ealred Abbot of Rievall: But because such things seem dreams to Protestants; for mine own iustification, or at least excuse, I con|ceive fit to premise,vid. Vsser. in Prim. f. 742. That the Tradition of this wonder has been confirmd moreover by Sulcard in his Chronicle of Westminster, by William of Malmsbury in his second Book of English Bishops, by Richard of Cicester in his Annals: Yea moreover by other Witnesses of higher rank and authority, Saint Edward the Confessour in his Charter given to that Church nine days before his death, in the year of Grace one thousand sixty six: and before him by King Edgar repairer of the same Church in his Charter dated in the year nine hundred sixty nine,Apostolat. Bened f. 71. tract. 1. and lastly by Pope Ni|cholas the second in his Rescript to King Edward.
7. The Narration of the foresaid Abbot Ealred in his life of S. Edward touching this Miracle is as followeth:Ealred. in vit S. Eard Conf. In the time when King Ethelred by the Preaching of Saint Augu|stin embraced the Faith of Christ; his Nephew Sibert who governed the East-Angles (rather, East-Saxons) by the same Holy Bishops Mini|stery also received the same Faith. This Prince built one Church within the walls of London, the principall Citty of the Kingdom, where he honoura|bly placed Melltus Bishop of the same Citty. Without the walls likewise toward the West he founded a famous Monastery to the honour of S. Peter, and endowd it with many possessions. Now on the night before the day design'd for the dedication of this Church, the Blessed Apostle S. Peter appearing to a certain Fisherman in the habit of a stranger, on the other side of the River of Thames which flows beside this Monastery, de|manded to be wafted over: which was done. Being gone out of the boat, he entred into the Church, in the sight of the Fisherman: And presently a heavenly light shone so clear, that it turnd the night into day. There was with the Apostle a multitude of heavenly Cittizens coming out and going into the Church, a divine melody sounded, and an odour of unexpressible fragrancy was shed abroad. Assoon as all things pertaining to the Dedication of the Church were perform'd, the glorious Fisher of men returnd to the poo Fisher|man, who was so affrighted with his Divine splendour that he almost lost his senses: But Saint Peter kindly comforting him, brought him to himself. Thus both of them entring into the Boat, Saint Peter asked him if he had any provision: Who answerd, that partly being stupified with seeing so great a light, and partly detaind by his return, he had taken nothing, being withall assured of a good reward from him. Hereto the "Apostle replied, Let down thy Netts. The Fisher|man obeyd, and immediatly the Nett was filld with a multitude of fishes. They were all of the same kind, except one Salmon (Esocium) of a wonderfull largenes.Having then drawn them to shore, Saint Peter sayd, Cary from mee this geat Fish to Mellitus the Bishop, and all the rest take for thy hire: and moreover be assured that both thou all thy life time, and thy children after thee for many years shall be plentifully furnish'd with these kinds of fishes: Onely be carefull you fish not on our Lords days. I who speak now with thee, am Peter: and I my self have dedicated this Church built to my fellow-cittizens and to my ho|nour, so preventing by mine own authority the Episcopall Benediction. Acquaint the Bishop therfore with the things which thou hast seen and heard, and the signs yet marked on the walls will confirm thy speeches. Let him therefore sur|cease from his design of consecrating the Church, and only supply what I have omitted, the celebra|tion of the Mystery of our Lords Body and Blood, and the instruction of the people. Let him likewise give notice to all that I my self will oftimes visit this place, and be present at the prayers of the faithfull: and I will open the gates of heaven to all who live soberly, iustly and piously in this world.
As soon as he had sayd this, he presently vanish'd from his sight.
8. The next morning as the Bishop Mellitus was going in procession to the Church with an intention to dedicate it, the Fisher-man mett him with the Fish, and related to him what|soever Saint Peter had enioynd him. At which the Bishop was astonish'd, and having unlock'd the Church-dores, he saw the pavement mark'd with Letters and inscriptions both in Greek and Latin, and the wall annointed in twelve seve|rall places with holy Oyle: He saw likewise the remainders of twelve torches sticking to as many Crosses, and the Church every where yet moyst with aspersions. All which being observ'd by the Bishop and people present, they rendred prai|ses and thanks to Almighty God.
9. A further testimony and proof to this Miracle is afforded by the whole progeny of that Fisherman: For his children according to the command receiv'd from their Father brought the tythes of all their gains by fishing, and offred them to Saint Peter, and the Preists attending Divine service in his Church. But one among them having presum'd to defraud the Church of this Oblation, presently was deprived of the wonted benefit of his trade, till having confess'd his fault, and restord what he had reserv'd, he promis'd amendment for the future. Thus wrote Ealred above five hundred years since: The summ wherof was delivered some what before him by William of Malms|bury, who adds this particular,Malmsb. de Gest. Ponti|fic. l. . That the Fisherman, who was very simple, and as yet not a Christian, described to the Bishop very exactly the shape and line aments of Saint Peter, well known to the Bishop by his Picture publickly extant at Rome, which long before this S. Silvester shewd to the Emperour Constantin.
10. The beleif of this miraculous Story was the cause that this Church was wonder|fully enrich'd by following Princes, as King Offa and Kenulph, mentiond in the fore nam'd Charter of King Edgar. And for the same reason it was chosen ancient|ly for the place of the inauguration of

our Kings. And a proof full of evidence demonstrating the Truth here related was S. Mellitus his forbearing to repeat the Cere|monies of the Dedication, which by certain signs he perceived to have been performed before. And moreover because going awhile after to Rome he related these particulars to a Synod there assembled, and demanded their advice whether any more was to be done to the Consecration of the same Church. These particulars being related by our Authours of the prime Classe, it argues a great contempt of the authority of our Ancestors, in Protestants who without any proof from Antiquity, will confidently pro|scribe such Traditions; as dreams and fables.


XXI. CH.XXI. CHAP.

i.2. c. The Church of S. Paul in London, built: and endowed.

A. D. 604.1. THE same year, in the same Citty of London and by the piety of the same King Sebert another Noble Church was erected in the midst of the Citty to the ho|nour of the other Prince of the Apostles, Saint Paul. Yet some Writers ascribe this mu|nificent work to King Ethelbert, whose Tributary King Sebert his Nephew was. Yea Polydor Virgil addes,Polyd. Virg. l. 4. that the Citty it self a little before this was become part of King Ethelberts own Dominion.Camd. in Tri|bant. And Camden to the like effect writes thus, Ethelbert King of Kent, under whom Sebert raigned as by cour|tesy in this Tract, built a Church at London to the honour of Saint Paul the Apostle: which in after times being enlarged and beautified grew to that vastnes and magnificence as we now see it, as likewise to such rich endowments, by which are plentifully maintained besides the Bishop, a Dean, Precentour, Chancellour, Treasurer, fower Arch-deacons, nine and twen|ty Prebends besides many others of inferiour rank.
2. As Saint Peters Church in Westminster was erected upon the ruines of the Pagan Temple of Apollo: So was this dedicated to Saint Paul, upon those of a Temple to Diana. Some marks whereof to this day remain, saith the same Authour, for an|cient adjacent Lodgings in the Archives of the Church are called Diana's Chamber:Id ibid. and in King Edward the firsts time an incredible number of beeves heads was digged up in the Church-yard, the ancient Sacrifices (Tauropolia) solemnised to Diana, c.
3. In this Church by the Kings appoint|ment the Bishop and his Successours had their fixed seat: The Church service being sung, not by Monks, but other Church-men who lived Canonically in community.
Beda l.4. To the Bishops of this Church, saith Saint Beda, King Ethelbert offred many rich gifts: and for the maintenance of those who lived with the Bishops he added many territories and possessions. Particularly the Lordship of Tillingham is named in the Formule of Donation supposed by Stow and Speed to have been written by Ethelbert, in this manner, King Ethelbert by Divine In|spiration hath given to Miletus (rather, Mel|litus) for the remedy of his soule, the land called Tillingham, for the use of the Commu|nity (Monasterium) of Saint Paul. Which Donation in after ages King William the Con|querour confirmed, in these words, Know ye that I grant to God and Saint Paul and his Ministers the four and twenty Hydes of land which King Ethelbert gave near the Citty of London to the Church of Saint Paul at the first foundation,Vd. Stovv. n Last-Sax. to be free and quitt of all Gilds, and of all expedition, worke, c. Where we find what quantity of ground that terri|tory of Tillingham contained, to witt four and twenty Hydes of land, each hyde being as much as could be cultivated yearly by one Plough. And therefore in a Donation made by Saint Dunstan we read it expoun|ded thus, I grant a portion of seaven Ploughs of land, which in English is called seaven Hides. A Hyde by Saint Beda is called a fa|mily or Manse,


XXII. CHAP.XXII. C.

1.2. An Episcopall See erected at Ro|chester.
3.4. c. The Bishop of Landaff con|secrated by the Arch-bishop of Can|terbury.

1. THE same year another Episcopall See was erected in the Province of Kent, in a Citty by the Romans called Durobrum, by Saint Beda Durobrevis, in after times Roffa or Rochester, from the name of a principall Saxon to whom it belonged. Where King Ethelbert built a Church to the honour of Saint Andrew the Apostle, the Episcopall See of S. Iustus the first Bishop, who lately came from Rome with S. Mellitus. Of whose Con|secration S. Beda thus writes:2. S. Augustin ordained Iustus a Bishop in Kent it self, in the Citty of Durobrevis, which the En|glish Nation from a prime Noble person inhabi|ting there called Rotchester. There did King Ethel|bert build a Church to the honour of S. Andrew the Apostle: and bestowed on that B. as he had done on the Church of S. Paul, many Gifts: adding withall possessions and lands for the maintenance of those who attended on the Bishop and Church. Thus in a few years the Province of Kent obtained two Episcopall Sees.
3. The two Sees of London and Rochester

acknowledged subiection to that of Canter|bury: And which is strange, the like was at this very time done by the Brittish See of Landaff, notwithstanding the late dissension of the Brittish Bishops in the Synod of Wor|cester. For we read that S. Oudoceus the Suc|cessour of S. Theliau (sirnamed Helios, or The Sun, for his learning and Sanctity) came for Ordination to Saint Augustin.
4. The same moreover appears by a Pro|testation made in the Synod of Rhemes by Vrban Bishop of Landaff to Pope Calixtus the Second of that Name in the year of Grace eleaven hundred and nineteen extant in B. Vsher. Which Protestation was by him thus conceived:Ap. Vsser in Primord. f. 85 From the ancient time of our Fathers (Holy Father) as the Hand-Wri|ting of our Holy Father Saint Theliau testifies, this Church of Landaff first founded to the honour of Saint Peter the Apostle was in dignity and Pri|viledges the Mistresse of all the Churches in Wales, till by seditions and warrs in the time of my Predecessour Herwold it was weakned, al|most deprived of a Pastour and annihilated by the cruelty of the inhabitants and invasion of the Norman Nation. Yet there always remaind in it Religious men serving God, both by reason of the neighbourhood of the English by whom they were instructed, though differing from them in the Ecclesiasticall Ministery; as likewise be|cause from very ancient times, that is, from the days of Saint Eleutherius Pope, and after the coming of Saint Augustin into Brittany, the Bishop of this place hath always been subiect and obedient in every thing to the Arch-bishop of the Metropolitan Church of Canterbury and to the King of England.
5. For what concerns the present year, the same learned B. Vsher in his Chronologicall Index writes,Id. in Ind. Chronol. how Saint Theliau Bishop of Landaff and Caer-leon being dead, Saint Oudoceus his Sisters Son succeeded him, whom at his return from the Citty of Canterbury (where he had been consecrated by Saint Augustin the Arch-bishop) Mouric Prince of Glamorgan honourably received, and by his authority confirmed the Priviledges of the Church of Landaff.
6. The same Authour further declares the grounds upon which the Church of Landaff became subiect to that of Canterbury:Id. ib. For, sayes he, The Bishops of Landaff, as heyrs of those of Caer-leon, disdaind to be subiect to the Bishops of Menevia (to whom the Metro|politicall Iurisdiction had been transferd from Caer-leon:) And therfore from this time they rather chose to receive their Consecra|tion from the Arch-bishop of Canterbury. And the Church of Caer-leon was so annexed to the neighbouring Church of Landaff, that the Dio|ceses were not only ioynd, but the Territory likewise belonging to the Churches of Saint Iulius and Saint Aaron was given to Nuddus the one and twentieth Bishop of Landaff and his Successours, as we find express'd in the Register of that Church.
7. Now if there be any truth in these Records,A. D. 605. it will follow that those Protestant Writers are much mistaken who affirm that all the Brittish Bishops oppos'd S. Augustin. On the countrary the most illustrious among them, S. Theliaus and his Succes|sour S. Oudoceus either were not present at the Synod of Worcester, or did not ioyn in the faction rais'd by younger passionat spirits, who frequently in such meetings by tu|mults and clamours over-power the coun|sells of such as are more wise and ver|tuous.


XXIII. CHAP.XXIII CH

1.2. c. Two Charters of King Ethelbert to the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul in Canterbury.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and five King Ethelbert;A. D. 605. who had express'd such munificence in the foun|ding and endowing the Churches of S. Paul in London, and S. Andrew at Rochester, shewd more zeale in adorning and amplifying the Church and Monastery by him first erected in his own Royall Citty of Canterbury, on which he bestowd many donations, and noble Priviledges. And moreover to secure all these from the Sacrilegious invasions of his Suc|cessours, or any other, he confirmd them with a Charter, ratifyed both with Regall and Ecclesiasticall authority. The Copy wherof we will here sett down, with the more con|fidence because the following Monarks of our Nation beleiv'd and acknowledged it for the true Authentick Act of this King. For the two Norman Edwards,Append. ad Apostolat. f. 56 the first and Second in their Letters, from the first word in them calld Inspeximus, have not only men|tiond this Donation, but express'd likewise the Tenour of it.
2. This Charter of Donation is recorded by William Thorn in his History of the foundation of the Church and Monastery of Canterbury,Ibid. Tract. 1 f. 49. Spelm. f. 126. from whence we will here exscribe that which pertains to this matter: Viz. In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and five, King Ethelbert confirmd in the Catholick Faith, together with his Queen Bertha, and their Son Eadbald, as likewise the most Reve|rend Prelat Augustin and other Nobles of the land, celebrated the Solemnity of our Lords Na|tivity at Canterbury. Where convoking a publick assembly as well of the Clergy as people, on the fifth day before the Ides of Ianuary, with the appro|bation of all and every one of them, he by the Bles|sed Bishop S. Augustin himself surrendred and delivered to God and the Monks there perpetually serving our Lord, the said Monastery, on which he conferrd a liberty from all burdens for ever,

moreover enriching it with many possessions and other magnificent Gifts: In the same Monastery likewise he placed a Congregation of Monks, over whom he constituted Abbot a Monk named Peter. And that these things may more mani|festly appear to the Readers, I thought expedient to adioyn hereto the Tenour of the Charter of King Ethelbert and Saint Augustin, as fol|loweth:3. In the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ. Every man who lives according to Gods Law and hopes to be rewarded by him, ought chearfully and from his heart to promote pious prayers and Devotions to him, it being certain that he shall so much more easily obtain the effect of his own prayers to God, as he more willingly bestows any thing on God. Wherefore I Ethelbert King of Kent, with the consent of the Venerable Arch|bishop Augustin and my Nobles, doe give and grant for the honour of Saint Peter a certain portion of land belonging to mee, which lyes on the East of the Citty of Canterbury: to the end that both the place where the Monastery is built, and the fore said land remain in the power and possession of the Abbot who shall be there or|dained. Therefore I adiure, and command in the name of our Lord and Omnipotent God, who is the just Iudge of all, that the foresaid land be for ever confirmed by this Donation here subscribed, so that it may not be lawfull either for mee, or any of my Successours Kings and Princes, or any other Dignities or orders Ecclesiasticall or Civil to defraud or diminish any thing of it. But if any one shall attempt to prejudice or make voyd any thing of this our Donation, Let him for the pre|sent be separated from the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, and in the Day of Iudgement for a iust reward of his Malice and in|iustice let him be severed from the Fellowship of Gods Saints. The said land is encompassed with these limits: On the East with the Church of S Martin: on the South with the way of Burghate: On the West and North with Druting-street. Acted in the Citty of Canterbury (Dorobernia) in the six hundred and fifth year after our Lords Incarnation, and the eighth Indiction. In the End there is added the sign of the Crosse (omitted by Sir H. Spelman) in this manner,  I Ethelbert King of Kent, being in sound mind and with deliberate Counsell have confirmed this with the Sign of the Crosse made with mine own hand. I Augustin by the Grace of God Arch|bishop in testimony of my consent have willingly subscribed. Edbald. Hamegisilus. Augemundus Referendery Hocca. Tangil. Pinca. Geddy.
4. This was the first Charter granted by King Ethelbert: to which he added a Second: The Tenour whereof likewise shall for the Antiquity of it be sett down, with a desire of the Readers pardon, who shall very seldom be interrupted or detained by such Forms: for I will content my self with delivering the substance of them, when occasion is to mention them. This Second Charter is by Sir H. Spelman inscribed, A Donation of the land of Langeport: the Form whereof followeth:5. In the name of our Lord Iesus Christ. Be it known to all both present and to come,Id. lid. that I Ethelbert by the Grace of God King of the En|glish Nation, having from an Idolater been made a Christian by Augustin my Father in the Gospel, have given to God by the same Prelat a certain portion of land belonging to mee lying under the Eastern wall of the Citty of Can|terbury, namely about the place where by my said Instructour in Christ I built a Monastery to the honour of the Princes of the Apostles Peter and Paul: Which Monastery with the said land and all other things pertaining thereto I have endowed with free liberties; So that it may not be lawfull for mee, or any of my Succes|sours, or any other Power Ecclesiasticall or Secu|lar to usurp any thing of it, but that it remain in the free power and possession of the Abbot. If any one therefore shall attempt to diminish or make voyd any thing of this our Donation, Let him by the Authority of God, and Blessed Pope Gregory, as likewise our Apostle Augustin, and our own imprecation be separated from all Com|munion of Holy Church, and in the Day of Iudge|ment from all Society of Gods Elect. The sayd land is on all sides encompassed with these bounds. On the East with the Church of Saint Martin and likewise with Siblendoune (Al. be si Wen|downe:) And so to the North be Wikengesmarke. Likewise at the East by Kingesmarke. Also at the North and East by Kingesmarke. So on the West to Rideschape. And so to the North to Dru|tingstreete. This was done in the Citty of Canter|bury in the six hundred and fifth year from the Incarnation of Christ, and the eighth Indiction.  I Ethelbert King of the English Nation have confirmed this Donation with the sign of the Holy Crosse with mine own hand.  I Augustin by the Grace of God Arch-bishop have willingly subscribed.  I Eadbald Son of the King have favoured this.  I Hamegisilus Duke have com|mended it,  I Hocca Count have consented.  I Augemund Referendary have approved it.  I Graphio Count have blessed it.  I Tangi|silus one of the Kings Nobles have confirmed it.  I Pinca have consented.  I Geddi, have cor|roborated it.
6. Such were the Forms of these two Prime Charters conferred on this Prime Saxon Mo|nastery founded three years before.Spelman. ib. And whereas Sir. H. Spelman seems to suspect the second by reason that in it Ethelbert calls him|self King of the English Nation, whereas properly he was not so much King of the Angli, as of the Iutes and Saxons inhabiting Kent, for which reason in his first Charter he stiles himself only King of Kent: Notwithstrnding if we con|sider that in those times among the severall Saxon Princes in Brittany, he who had, as King Etelbert at this time, an Empire over the rest, was wont to entitle himself King of the Angli, which Title also S. Gregory in his letter to him gave him, we shall not much be moved with this suspicion. So King Lucius was called King of the Brittains, though beside him there were

many other lesser Princes raigning there:A. D. 607. his own peculiar Dominion being the Pro|vince of the Iceni, containing Norfolk, Suf|folf, c.
9. This Monastery thus endowed and pri|viledged remaind flourishing for the space of above nine hundred years, much enlar|ged in the Buildings and Revenews by the piety of succeeding Princes, Nobles and Ab|bots, and peculiarly cherish'd by Popes, as immediatly subject to them, who bestowd many more liberties and Indults upon it, extant in our Records. And though at first it had the Name from S. Peter and S. Paul, yet after the death of S. Augustin it passed into an appellation from his Name.


XXIV. C.XXIV. CHAP.

1.2. Peter the first Abbot of Canterbury, drowned.
3. A Church built at Ely.
4 The Inhabitants of Cernel, converted by Saint Augustin: The Saxon Idol, Heyl demolished.

1. TWO years after the date of the fore|mentioned Charters the Abbot of the said Monastery was drownd in passing the Sea toward France.A. D. 607. Concerning whom S. Beda thus Writes:Bed. l. 1. c. 33. The first Abbot of the Monastery of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul was called Peter, a (Roman) Preist: who having been sent upon a message into France, was drownd in a bay of the Sea called Ampleat: and by the in|habitants of those coasts ignobly buried. That bay of the Sea, saith Malbranque is now cal|led Ambletea:Malbranc. in Morin. l. 3. c. 4. and touching this Holy Abbot he adds, That Almighty God to publish the great merits of the man caused a heavenly light to appear every night over his sepulcher, till the neighbours observing it, judged the person there buried to have been a Holy man: and making inquisition whence he came, and who he was, they took the Body thence, and committed it to an honourable sepulture in the principall Church of the Citty of Bouloign. This was done by a Count of that place called Fumertius.
2. His Memory is celebrated in the Galli|can Martyrologe on the thirtieth day of De|cember: But in ours on the sixth of Ianuary.Marty. Angl. 6. Ianuar. To him succeeded in the Office and dignity of Abbot, Iohn, who in the first Mission of S. Augustin was sent one of his compa|nions.
3. The same year were layd the first foun|dations of the Famous Abbey of the Isle of Ely in Cambridgshire, by the perswasion of S. Augustin, and the assistance of King Ethel|bert. Yet Harpsfeild writes doubt fully of its antiquity, saying, That Monastery was in the beginning founded by S. Augustin Arch-bishop at the costs of Ethelbert King of Kent as some report, and dedicated to the honour of the Blessed Virgin Mary:Hapsf. Saec 7. c. 24. where was placed a Congregation of Monks of the Order of S. Benedict. But I am not satisfied of the truth of this Tradition. It may be this is the place intended in a passage out of the Book of Ely quoted by Camden, where he saith, The Book of Ely relates how our S. Augustin built a Church at Cradiden, which Penda King of Mercia subverted.Camden i Cambridg|shire. Proba|ble therefore it is that out of the ruines of this Church was afterward raised that so fa|mous Monastery.
4. William of Malmsbury reports likewise another example of the labour and industry of S. Augustin in propagating the Gospell:Malmbur. de Ponti. l. 2 f. 10.How passing through all the Provinces of Brittany, as far as the Empire of Ethelbert extended it self, he came to a certain village in Dorsetshire, where preaching the word of God,Camden. i Dorsetsh. he gained many soules to Christ from the Devills Tyranny. There likewise (saith Camden) he brok in peices a certain Idol called Heil (answering to Aesculapius) to which was attributed a power of healing diseases. Hereat the Devill being enraged, inflamed with fury the minds of the Pagans against him, who sett upon him and his companions, and after many indignities forced him to retire three miles from thence, Where whilst he was quietly attending to Prayer, he with the eye of his mind perceiv'd the Divine presence: and presently with a chearfull countenance sayd to his compa|nions (Cerno Deum, c.) I See God, who will shortly recompence our endeavours, and will inspire into those raging people a more moderate and repenting mind. Assoon as he had said this, those Pagans came in great hall to him, and demanding pardon of their fault promised to submitt themselves to his teaching. Whom after he had instructed, he intended to baptise them: but wanting water, at the Holy Bishops command a fountain broke forth of secret passages, which to this day for the merits of S. Augustin is held in great esteem by the people. And from the word Cerno (I See) spoken by him with the addition of the Hebrew word El, si|gnifying God, the said village was afterward called Cernel, but vulgarly Cern. In that place, saith the same Authour, Edwald after a life spent in great piety was buried, with a high esteem of Sanctity: which in after times gave occasion to a certain very rich man call'd Egilwald to build a Monastery there dedicated to S. Peter.



A. D. 608.
XXV. CH.XXV. CHAP.

1.2 c. King Ethelberts Ecclesiasticall Lawes.

Bed. l. 2. c. 5.1. BEFORE we finish the course of the present story of Saint Augu|stins Gests, it is expedient that we first relate how by his advice King Ethel|bert administred his kingdom with great Piety and justice. For, saith Saint Beda, among other eminent benefits by his prudence conferred on his kingdoms, he with the counsel of his wise men instituted Orders and De|crees of Iudgments, according to the Ex|amples of the Roman Laws and policy. Which Decrees were written in the English tongue, and are to this day extant and in practise. Among which he in the first place set down what satisfaction should be made by those who stole or by fraud usurped any thing be|longing to the Church, to Bishops, or other Ecclesiasticks of inferiour degrees: For his desire was to give his protection especially to those whom he had so reverently received, and whose Doctrine he had embraced.
2. What those Decrees and Forms of Iudgments were may be seen in that ce|lebrated Manuscript called the Text of Ro|chester, which in the days of King Henry the first was composd by Enulphus Bi|shop of that Citty, under this Title, These are the Decrees or Iudgements which King Ethelbert constituted in the life time of Saint Augustin. Here I will sett down onely such Laws as regard the Church, and which Saint Beda seems to mention. The which have been brought by Sir H. Spel|man into the first Tome of English Coun|cils, and expressed both in the Saxon and Latin tongues. The sence of them here follows:Ap. Spelman tom. 1. Concil f. 127.3. Whosoever shall uniustly take away any thing belonging to God and the Church, shall make satisfaction by a twelve-fold restitution. If such things belong to a Bishop, he shall restore eleaven fold: If to a Preist, nine fold: If to a Deacon, six fold: If to an in|feriour Clark, three fold. If the peace of the Church shall be violated by any one, let sa|tisfaction be made by paying double: and the like for disturbing the peace of a Monk. If when the King shall call an Assembly of his people, and any iniury shall be offred them, the Offender shall restore double, and moreo|ver pay to the King fifty shillings (Solidos.) If when the King shall be entertained in any house, any dammage shall be done there, let it be recompenced double, c.
Ibid.4. Besides these (saith the same Sir H. Spelman in his Annotations to these Decrees) there follow many other Laws per|taining to honesty of life and correction of manners: but these are all which regard the Church. The precise time when these Decrees were published does not appear: but as the Title declares, they were made whilst Saint Au|gustin was alive, and as the care of the Church manifests, they were published after King Ethel|berts conversion.


XXVI. CHAP.XXVI. C.

i S. Augustin ordains S. Laurence his Successour.
2.3. c. His Bull confirming the Mona|stery of Canterbury: suspected.

1.A. D. 608. THERE is among our Histo|rians great variety of iudgments touching the number of years spent by Saint Augustin in Brittany, and in what year he dyed. Those who place his death in the third year of this Century, as Iohn Stow, or in the fourth, as Baronius en|deavours to collect from Saint Beda, doe too-much hasten his end: For the Char|ters of King Ethelbert before mentioned declare that he was alive in the fifth year. On the other side those prolong his life too-much who affirm that he dyed not till the year of Grace six hun|dred and fifteen, as some Authours quo|ted by F. Reyner in his Apostolatus; or thirteen, as Sir Henry Savill in his Chronologicall Fasts: or twelve, as Malmsburiensis; or elea|ven, as Polydor Virgil: For Pope Boniface in his Letters dated six hundred and ten does suppose him dead. Therefore in such variety of opinions Sigebert and Mathew of Westminster most probably place his death in the year of Grace six hundred and eight.
2. A little before his death Saint Augustin consecrated Laurence a Bishop, designing him his Successour in the Ar|chiepiscopall See. Which he did after the example of many former holy Bishops, who upon their view of death approa|ching, relinquishing the care of others, attended devoutly to the contemplation of that one necessary thing. This same passage is thus related by Saint Beda:Bd. l 2. c. 4. Laurence suc|ceeded Saint Augustin, having been ordai|ned Bishop by him whilst he was yet alive, out of an apprehension least after his death the State of the Church as yet tender, being destitute of a Pastour though but fo a moment, shuld begin to falter. And herein he fol|lowed the Example of the Prime Pastour, of Gods Church, namely Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, who having founded the Church

of Christ at Rome, is reported to have made Saint Clement his Coadjutour in preaching the Gospell, and consecrated him his Succes|sour.
Ap Spelm. tom. 1. Concil. f. 123.3. The last publick Act attributed to Saint Augustin was the Confirming by a Solemne Bull all the Rights and Priviled|ges of his Beloved Monastery of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, exempting it from all Episcopall Iurisdiction, from all tribute, ser|vitude, c. Prohibiting all Bishops to say Masses, exercise Ordinations or Conse|crations, c. as by their own autho|rity or Iurisdiction in that place, deputed for the Treasury of Saints and burying place of succeeding Arch-bishops and Princes: And assigning the Election of Abbots to the free Suffrages of the Monks, c. All which Priviledges he confirmed with a denunciation of eternall damna|tion to transgeessours of them by the authority of Saint Peter and his Vicar the Bishop of Rome, Saint Gregory. This Bull was published in the presence and with the approbation of King Ethelbert, his Son Eadbald, all the Nobility of the Kingdom, his Successour Laurence, Mel|litus Bishop of London, Iustus Bishop of Rochester, and Peter the Abbot and Monks of the same Monastery.
Ibid.4 To which Bull there was appended a Seale of Lead. Neither is it a wonder, saith the Transcriber of the said Bull, that Saint Augustin being a Roman, an Apostle of the English Nation and a Legat of the Apostolick See, indued with a plenary Authority to erect Bishopricks and conse|crate Bishops, all which were to be sub|ject to him, should have the power and right to make use of a leaden Seale: Though for the space of five hundred years the like priviledge was not after|ward granted to any of our Bi|shops.
5. Notwithstanding Sir H. Spelman not unreasonably suspects this not to be a genuine Bull, because the fabrick of the Seale expresses not so great antiqui|ty; and the Sculpture of it more ele|gant then suited with that age; like|wise the Image of our Saviour and the form of a Church engraved in it, res|sembles the exactnes almost of these later times: Moreover the Letters of the Inscri|ption are such as were used in far later ages, about the raign of King Henry the se|cond or Richard the first. And lastly the Seal is appended to the Bull not after the Ro|man fashion, with a Chord of Silk, but with a Skrole of parchmin after the Nor|man custom. To these we may add, that by mentioning in the same Wri|ting together both Laurence his Succes|sour and Peter the Abbot, who was drow|ned above a year before that designation of a Successour, the order of times is ma|nifestly crofounded, and the authority of the Bull prejudiced.
6. However that most of these Privi|viledges were even from the beginning conferred on that Monastery, yea by Saint Augustin himself in vertue of a delega|ted authority from the See Apostolick, though the simplicity of that age did not need such Legall Instruments and formall clauses, the constant Tradition of that age doth justify. Which Priviledges in succee|ding times were frequently ratified by fol|lowing Popes and Princes.


XXVII. CHAP.XXVII. C.

i.2. c. The Death of our Apostle, S. Augustin.

1. THE same year of our Lord,Westmnst. hic. six hun|dred and eight, saith Mathew of Westminster, Saint Augustin the first Arch|bishop of Canterbury ended his life on the seaventh day before the Calends of Iune. The same is more expressly related by Saint Beda.Bed l. 2. c. 3. Our Holy Father Augustin, belo|ved of God, dyed, and his Body was com|mitted to Sepulture abroad, near the said Church of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, because as yet it was neither finished nor dedicated. But shortly after when it had been dedicated, the Sacred Body was brought into the Church, and decently bu|ried in the Northern Porch. In which place the Bodies of all succeding Arch-bishops hi|therto were likewise buried, except only two, namely Theodor and Berthwald: Whose Bo|dies were layd within the Church it self, by reason the foresaid Porch could receive no more.
2. In all Martyrologes the same day, to wit, the seaventh before the Calends of Iune is deputed for celebrating his Memory: In the Roman Martyrologe we read thus:Martyrol. Rom. 16. Maij. At Canterbury in England is this day commemorated Saint Augustin Bishop of that Citty: who together with many others was sent into Brittany, and preached the Go|spell of Christ to the English Nation: Where being glorious for his vertues and Miracles, he reposed in our Lord.
3. The certainty of Miracles wrought by him hath been sufficiently established before in this History. We will here only add a compendious draught of his Gests consecrated by this Island to Posterity in an Inscription on his Tomb: Of which Saint Beda thus Writes, There was inscribed on the Sepulcher of Saint Augustin this Epitaph: Here rests Dom Augustin first Arch|bishop of Canterbury, who heretofore was di|rected hither by Blessed Gregory Bishop of the

Church of Rome, and being supported by God with the operation of Miracles, converted both King Ethelbert and his Nation from the Worship of Idols to the Faith of Christ: and having finished the dayes of his Office in peace dyed on the seaventh day before the Calends of Iune, in the time of the raign of the same King.
Ap. Capgrav. in vit. S. Au|gusti.4. He was (saith the Authour of his Life in Capgrave) tall in stature, inso|much as he exceeded the ordinary height of men by the head: He was in his countenance amiable and reverendly grave: Of the signs and cures which he wrought among the people, no man can recount the number, they were so many. He travelled always on foot: and oft without shooes: thus he passed through all Provinces of this Island: By reason of his frequent kneeling he had his knees covered with a thick hard skin, c. And yet one of his pretended Successours, after he had rela|ted all this, affords him the Character of a Soft,Antiq. Brit. f. 49. nice or effeminate man. The great Veneration in which he was held by our succeeding Princes, c. I will de|clare in due place.





THE FOVRTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1. S. Laurence his Gests.
2.3. c. His Letter to the Scottish Clergy, c.

1. _SAint Laurence (saith S. Beda) being seated in the Archiepisco|pall throne did strenuously endea|vour to augment the Church of Christ in Brittany,A. D. 609. Bed. l. 2. c. 4 whose foundations had been so carefully layd, and by his dayly exhortations and examples of piety he sought to exalt it to its perfect height.
2. Neither did his Pastorall care extend only to the new Congregation of Christians collected among the English-Saxons,Id. ibid. but likewise to the ancient Brittish Christians, moreover to the Scots in Brittany and such as inhabited the neighbou|ring Isle of Ireland. For knowing well that the life and Profession not only of the Scots abroad, but of the Brittains also in this Island swerved from the Rule established in the Catholick Church, principally in as much as they observed not the Paschall Solemnity in its due time, but, as hath been said, they kept the Sunday reckoning from the fourteenth day of the Moon to the one and twentieth (so including the day of the Iewish Pasch in their Circle:) Wherefore he, with his fellow Bishops, wrote an Exhortatory Epistle to them, beseeching them to hold the Vnity of peace and Catholick Observance with the Catholick Church spread over the whole earth.
3. The speciall cause moving them to write the said Letter is thus related by the Centuriators of Magdeburg,Magdeb. Cen+tur. 7. f. 518. The Scots sent Da|ganus their Legat to Laurentius to commune with him about Ecclesiasticall affairs and differences. But he was so averse both from Laurence and the rest who depended on the Pope, that he refused to eat at the same Table, or to sleep in the same house with them.
4. What ever was the cause of this Scott|tish Abbots scrupulous uncharitablenes,Bed. ibid. Saint Laurence and the other Bishops were forced to write this Epistle, To our Lords the Bishops our most dear Brethren, and to the Abbots through all Scotland, Health. The See Aposto|lick having directed us to preach the Gospell to Pagans in these Western parts, as it has usually done through the whole earth, assoon as we were arrived in this Isle of Brittany, we with great reverence were ready to expresse all respect and charity to the Brittains and Scotts, beleiving then their practises to have been conformable to the Vniversall Church. And after we perceived the Brittains to swerve therefrom, yet we thought the Scotts were better disposed. But we now perceive that the Scotts also, we mean Da|gan a Bishop sent by them into this Island, and Co|lumban an Abbot who is gone into France, doe in their conversation and practises differ nothing from the Brittains. For the said Daganus who

came to us,A. D. 610. would not so much as eat with us, nor sleep in the same lodging. Thus far S. Beda recites this Epistle, the remainder of it being lost.
Magd. Cent. 6. f. 754.5. This Daganus was not, as the Centu|riators, from Bale, affirm, a Brittish Monk, taken out of the Monastery of Bangor in Wales to be a Scottish Bishop, but an Irish Monk of the Monastery of Banchor in Vlster and thence made a Bishop in Ireland: for by the te|nour of this Letter he was sent from beyond sea into Brittany. Yet was he not the same Abbot Daganus, who ten years before this went to Rome to S. Gregory (as we read in Bishop Vsher) and shewd him the Rule which S. Molva (otherwise called S. Lugid) wrote and ordained for his Monks:Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. 920.Which having read, S. Gregory said publicly, The Holy man who wrote this Rule has planted a hedge about his family, which reaches up to heaven.
For be|sides that he is called an Abbot onely, if he had so much respect to Rome, he would not have been so averse from these Ro|man Missioners.
6. At the same time S. Laurence with the same his Fellow-Bishops (saith S. Beda) wrote letters also to the Brittish Preists,Bed. ubi sup. (Sacerdoti|bus) beseeming their Episcopall gravity and pru|dence: by which they endeavoured to settle them in Catholick Vnity. Hereby we may observe that the Brittish Clergy were not broken out into a formed Schism, as Ba|ronius suspects, and others who make men|tion of an Interdict imposed by S. Gregory on the publick Schooles in Brittany, of which no ground can be found in our ancient Writers. But why this Letter should be written to the Brittish Preists, and not their Bishops, it does not appear.
7. The same Saint Beda discoursing of the pious industry of our Holy Bishop in promoting Vnity, thus concludes, How much good he wrought by these his endea|vours and labours, the present times declare. By which expression he implies, that the ceasing of those Controversies, which in S. Beda's time were quite silenced, was much to be imputed to the care and in|dustry of S. Laurence. For we shall see him shortly not contenting himself with writing letters, but undertaking a voyage into Ireland, c. to promote Ecclesiasti|call Vnity, and that with good successe.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

i.2. c. S. Mellitus his iourney to Rome touching Monks, that they might have a power of Elections: And to know whe|ther they might be employed in Pasto|rall Functions, c.

1. THere is extant in Sir Henry Spelman the Copy of a third Charter of King Ethelbert,Spelm. tom. 1. Concil. f. by which he gave to the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul a village named Sturiga, otherwise Cistelet, together with many other precious Gifts, all which he offred for the redem|ption of his soule, and out of hope of eternall re|tribution. Adding, that in the same Church he provided a place of buriall for himself and Successours, hoping that he should be loosed from the chains of his sins, and conducted into the gate of eternall happines by the Prince of the A|postles, to whom our Lord delivered the Keyes of heaven giving him the power of binding and loosing, c. Which Charter is dated the year six hundred and ten, which was the fiftieth year of the same Kings raign.
2. At the same time (saith S. Beda) Mellitus Bishop of London went to Rome, there to treat with Pope Boniface about affairs nearly concerning the English Church.Bed. l. 2. c. 4. Being arrived, the Pope assembled a Synod of the Bishops of Italy with an intention to make ordinances concerning the life and secure quietnes of Monks. In which Synod Mellitus sate among the Italian Bishops, and by his authority subscribed and confirmed the De|crees regularly ordained, which at his return into Brittany he caried with him, that they might be observed there. The same Pope likewise wrote Epistles to the Holy Arch-bishop Laurence, and to the Clergy, as also to King Ethelbert and the English Nation. This Synod was celebrated in the eighth year of the Empire of Phcas, and the thirteenth Indiction.
3. In this Narration we find insinuated the principall Motive of Mellitus his iourney to Rome, which was to provide for the life and quiet of Monks: Which will more manifestly appear by Pope Bonifacius his Letters to the King and Arch-bishop, but especially by a Decree of the said Pope.
4. There were two speciall Points concer|ning Monasticall Institution, the clearing of which did much concern the present State of the English Church: the first was a care to make them immortall by a succession, by permitting the present Monks to chuse and assume into the same Profession such among the Brittains, as they found well disposed thereto. This permission and power King Ethelbert by Mellitus desired to be confirmed by the Pope: which he easily obtained, as appears by Bonifacius his answer extant in a Letter of Pope Alexander many ages after

written to S. Lanfranc Arch-bishop of Canter|bury, in which we read this passage extracted out of it,Ap. Eadmer. l. 1. Novr. That which thou, O glorious Son, hast desired of the Apostolick See by our Fellow|bishop Mellitus we willingly grant and by our Apostolick authority decree, namely that your Royal benignity may appoint an habitation of Monks living regularly, and that the present Monks who were the Preachers of Salvation to you may associate to themselves a congregation of Monks and adorn them with holy Instituts in the Monastery which your Holy Doctour Augustin the Disciple of Gregory of Blessed Memory did consecrate in the Citty of Canterbury to the Name of our Holy Saviour, in which at present our be|loved Brother Laurence is Prelat. This our pre|sent Decree, if any of your Successours Kings or Bishops, c. shall attempt to make voyd, let him be subject to Anathema, c. This part of Pope Bonifacius his Letter is recited out of Pope Alexanders by Eadmer the Monk: and the entire Letter is extant in the Annals of Pe|terborough.
5. The other Point seems to have been tou|ching the employing of Monks in the Office of preaching, administring Sacraments and other Pastorall Dutyes, which some thought improper for Monks who are obliged to So|litude. But this Controversy had been before decided by S. Gregory in his employing onely Monks in the English Mission, and was con|firmed by Pope Boniface the fourth in a So|lemne Decree, by which he declares from the Examples of S Martin, S. Gregory, and the late S. Augustin that the power of binding and loosing may worthily be administred by Monks: Neither, saith he, did S. Benedict the glorious Institutour of Monkes in his Rule forbid this: but only commanded them to abstain from secular af|fairs. Which last Clause strongly proves against Baronius, that S. Augustin, Saint Lau|rence, S. Mellitus, S. Iustus and the rest, yea S. Gregory also were Disciples of S. Benedict and subject to his Rule. The Summe of this Decree is referr'd into the Canon Law by Gra|tian, Cap. Sunt nonnulli. 16. q. 1. And other authorities added, fro~ whence he concludes thus, By all these authorities it is clearly de|monstrated, that Monks may lawfully give Pen|nance, baptise and administer other Preistly Of|fices.
6. If the Acts of this Roman Synod had not been lost, we should no doubt have read their judgment touching the Consecration of the Church of Westminster,Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2. f. 155. performed, as hath been declared, by S. Peter himself. But the result of it appears by what William of Malms|bury writes: It is believed, saith he, that the Mystery of its Consecration was never repeated, which was shewd to have been perfected by so many Candles lighted in the Church, Crosses made, Holy Water sprinckled, and marks of Sa|cred Oyle in the due places. Human diligence therefore gave place to an Office divinely admini|stred, prophetically declaring how illustrious that Church and Monastery would prove, in which the Apostle himself exercised the Pontificall Office.A. D. 611.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP

1. Of Saint Golven a Bishop in Lesser Brittany.
2. Of S. Baldred, or S. Balter.
3. S. Mellitus his return from Rome.
4 Ceolulf King of the West-Saxons dying, Kinegils succeeds.

1. THE same year dyed S. Golvin Bishop of Leon in Lesser Brittany,A. D. 610. who in our Martyrologe is sayd to have been an English|man: But whether thereby be meant a Brit|tain I cannot define. In the Gallican Marty|rologe his Commemoration is thus expressed:Marty. Gall. 1. Iulij. On the first of Iuly at Leon in Armorica under the Arch-bishoprick of Tours is celebrated the Memory of the Deposition (or death) of S. Golven Bishop and Confessour: who succeeding S. Paul weaned the Church committed to him from its childish nourishment, and strengthned it with the solid meat of holy Teaching, illustrated it with the light of pious conversation, and advanced it to the perfect form of vertue. So rendring him|self gratious to our Lord by his care to adorn his Spouse, he in white robes ascended to the Mariage of the Lamb, celebrated in the Heavenly Ie|rusalem. The Holy Bishop dyed at Rennes, and was buried in the Monastery of S. Melanius.
2. But the Originall of S. Balred is more assured, a holy man born in the Northern parts of Brittany, who dyed this year, and his Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the twenty ninth of March.Marty. Angl. 29. Mart. Where it is sayd that he was wonderfully buried in three places, seing three Towns, Aldham, Tinnigham and Preston, contended for his Body. Probably this is the same who by our Historians, Ma|thew of Westminster Hoveden, is called S. Bal|ter, whose Church having been impiously layd wast by Analef the Dane, he was shortly after punished for his Sacriledge by a mise|rable death.
3. The year following by the return of S. Mellitus,A. D. 611. and the Decrees of Pope Boniface and the Roman Synod peace was restored and confirmed to the English Church, and quiet|nes to Monasteries.
4. In the year of Grace six hundred and twelve Ceolulf King of the West-Saxons,A. D. 612. Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2. after a raign of fourteen years, dyed. He had spent all his life in war, saith William of Malms|bury, and never allow'd himself any rest, but was always employed either with defending or enlarging his Provinces. Two Princes succeeded together in his Throne, both of them valiant, and both contending with one another in all of|fices of kindnes and freindship: their names were Cinegislus and Quincelmus. And for their con|cord,

unusuall among Kings,A. D. 613. they were a miracle to their own times, and an example for suc|ceeding. Many wars they managed so, as it was doubtfull whether they shewd therein greater courage or moderation. Sometimes they fought against the Brittains, sometimes against Penda King of the Mercians, a Prince exercised in all the sleights of war. This Quicelmus is by some Writers said to have been the Brother of Cinegislus, but others more probably say he was his Son, and assumd into a participation of his Throne.


IV. CH.IV. CHAP.

1.2. c Ethelfrid King of the Northum|bers kills above twelve hundred Brit|tish Monks.
7.8 S. Augustin uniustly accused of this slaughter by Protestants: and defended. W. Prinns horrible calumnies.

A. D. 613.1. THE year of our Lord six hundred and thirteen was blackned by a greivous calamity hapning to the Brittains, and among them principally to those who least deserved it, the Religious Monks of the fa|mous Monastery of Bangor. Which calamity was brought upon them by the barbarous King of the Northumbers, Ethelfrid, who well deserved the sirname given him of (ferus) cruel or Savage. His Character we have alrea|dy delivered from Malmsburiensis, and how he broke the power of Edan King of the Scotts. The present Story is related by Saint Beda in the manner following:Bed. l. 2. c. 2.2. The most powerfull King of the Angli E|delfridus having gatherd a mighty army made a terrible slaughter of the perfidious Nation of the Brittains at the Citty of the Legions, in the En|glish tongue calld Legacester, but more rightly in the Brittish Car-Legion (Chester.) When he was ready to begin the battell, he saw their Preists who were mett to pray to God for their army, standing a part from it in a place of grea|ter safety. Whereupon he ask'd, who those men were, and for what design they were assembled in that place? Now most of them were of the Mo|nastery of Banchor, in which the Number of Monks was so great, that being divided into seaven companies, each under a particular President, every company consisted of no sewer then three hundred: and all lived by their labour. Now the greatest part of them were mett together in this Army to pray for it, where they likewise cele|brated a Fast three days together: and a certain Captain calld Brochmal was appointed with conve|nient forces to protect them from the swords of their barbarous Enemies, whilst they should be intent to their Proyers.
3. King Edilfrid therfore having understood the cause why those Monks were come together, he said,If it then be so that they they cry unto their God against us, they doe truly fight against us, though they wear no arms, since they persecute us with their imprecations. Thereupon he gave com|mand to sett upon them first: which was performd: and after their slaughter, he destroyd all the other forces of the perfidious Brittains, though with a considerable losse to his own Army.
4. The report is, that of those Monks which came to pray, there were slain no fewer then twelve hundred, and that fifty onely escaped by flight. For Brocmal at the first charge of the Enemy, fled with all his soldiers, so leaving those, whom he ought to have defended, naked and unarmd to the swords of the barbarous Saxons. And thus was fulfilld the Prophecy of the Holy Bishop Saint Augustin, though himself a long time before was gone to heaven, That for their perfidious refusall of his counsel and offer of eter|nall Salvation, they should feele a Divine re|venge by their temporal destruction.
5. This cruelty of the Pagan King was notwithstanding presently after iustly pu|nish'd, for Nicholas Trivet a French Chronolo|gist, from I know not what Records writes, How Ethelfrid after this combat marching for|wards toward Bangor was mett by three Brittish Princes,N. Trivet. Chronic. Blederic Duke of Cornwal, Margaduc Prince of Southwales (Demetiae) and Cadwan Duke of Northwales (Venedotiae.) who fought with him, and killd of his army ten thousand and sixty men. Vpon which victory Cadwan was by ioynt consent made King, who pursued Ethel|frid to the River of Humber. But when Ethel|frid returnd with his own and other Saxon auxi|liary forces, a composition was made between them by freinds, on these conditions: That Cadwan should enioy the Provinces towards Wales on the south of Humber, and Ethelfrid all on the North side.
6. This is the true Narration concerning the slaughter, wee may call it Martyrdome, of the twelve hundred innocent Monks of Bangor, attested generally by the con|sent of all our ancient Historians. Onely Sigebert affirms this calamity to have befalln the Scottish Monks (so he misnames them) in the war between Edilfrid and Edan,igebert. hron. ad. A. D. 615. which he refers to the year of Grace six hundred and fifteen: which was seaven years after the death of Saint Augustin. But true Chronology confirmed by our best Writers place this massacre two years before: and thus (saith B. Vsher) doe the Annals of Vlster refer to the year of Christ six hundred and thirteen the war of Kaerlegion,Vsse. I. Chronol. ad A. D. 63. where the Saints were killd, by the Saints intending these Monks of Bangor.
7. Which consent of Historians evidently disproves the blasphemous calumnies by some Protestant Writers,Antiquit. Brit. f. 38. Apolg.  1. p. 11. Catalog. de Cones. Brit. c 4. B. Parker, B. Iewel and B. Godwin cast on the memory of our glorious Apostle Saint Augustin, to whom they impute this horrible Massacre, as if by his instigation that Pagan King had by this cruelty revenged their refusall to

submitt to his Metropoliticall authority: Whereas by the ioynt testimony of our Historians, and the expresse words of Saint Beda Saint Augustin was dead long before, to wit, five years, at least.
8. But they reply that those words of Saint Beda (quamvis ipso iam multo ant tem|pore,Id. ib. ad caelestia regna sublato) that is, though Saint Augustin himself a good while before this, was translated to Heaven, inclu|ded in a Parenthesis, were added by Papists to salve Saint Augustins honour, and are not found in the Saxon Translation of Saint Beda made by King Alfred. True it is, that in the Latin and Saxon Edition pu|blish'd by Abraham Whelock in the year 1643 those words appear not in the Saxon Copy: But the publisher, though a Prote|stant, ingenuously confesses that not only in all Impressions of Saint Beda's History, some of which saw the light before any Protestants were, but in all ancient Manuscripts extant in the Libraries of Cambridge that Clause of S. Beda was exta~t, and never included in a Paren|thesis, but only distinguish'd by Comma's.
7. Surely if we will iudge of Saint Au|gustin by the Spirit of his Father and Master Saint Gregory, we would not suspect him of so horribly murdrous a disposition. For Saint Gregory, though Rome and all Italy had been many years infested and wasted by the Lombards, yet was so fearfull of being in any measure accessory to blood, that he durst not concur to the death of any one of their Princes, though he was assured therby to free the whole countrey from their Ty|ranny. And S. Augustin himself, as hath been shewed, taught King Ethelbert a quite contra|ry Lesson, That in the cause of Religion, no violence or compulsion ought to be used.
8. If any credit may be given to Ancient, and till this age never questiond Tradition, Saint Augustin was a man of eminent piety, of admirable zeale for the rooting out Pagan Idolatry and planting the Gospell in this Island: And even Protestants themselves ack|nowledge that Almighty God gave testimony to his Teaching by many great miracles. If he had been guilty of some defects, Christian Charity requires us either not to mention them, or to let a thousand great obligations we have to his Memory preponderate them: But upon meer ungrounded suspicions dis|proved by the current of Story, to charge with crimes execrable to Heathens a person, in the iudgment of the whole Church for almost a thousand years, now raigning with Christ in glory, is certainly a presum|ption of which God, with whom the death of his Saints is precious, will one day require a severe account,
9. Yet of late this poysonnous humour of calumniating Gods Saints is become the principall Character of the New reformed Gospell. I will adde one example more of a calumniatour, at least parallel to these: witt, M^r William Prinn alate stigmatized Presbyte|rian;W. Prinn. who in his not long since publish'd Censure of Arch-bishop Whitgift charges Saint Anselm that he induced Sir Walter Tir|rel to murder King William Rufus. Now by the consent of all our Historians Tirrel himself was no murderer, for it was by the unhap|py casuall glancing of an arrow that the King was slain. However it hapned, yet certain it is that at that time Saint Anselm was an exild person in France: and whereas at that Kings burial many Noble men mett,Bromton. uller. Eccl Hist. l. 3. but few mourned for his death, yet saith a late Pro|testant Historian, of all mourners Anselm ex|press'd most cordial sorrow at the news. That blasphemous tongue therefore must expect that such envenomed darts as these, shott against heaven it self, will, if he repent not, one day descend upon his own head, and the wounds made by them never be cured. But alas, what Repentance can be expected in such a person who is inveteratus dierum malorum, when wee see in his decrepite age his ran|corous tongue against innocent Catholicks yet more violently sett on fire of hell, so far as to solicite a generall Massacre of them by pu|blishing himself, and tempting others to damne their soules also by publishing through the whole kingdom that in the last fatall calamity by fire hapning to London they were the onely incendiaries. This he did, though himself at the same time confessed that not the least proof could be produced against them: But, said he, it concerns us that this report should be beleived. Complaints of this most execrable attentat were made, and severall Oathes to confirm this were offred. But in vain. However, surely there is a reward for the innocent oppress'd: And, what soever Mr Prinn may think, doubtles there is a God who iudges the world. Let him therefore remem|ber what the Spirit of God sayes, (Quid detu tibi, aut quid apponatur tibi, ad linguam dolosam? Sagittae potentis acutae, cum carbonibus desolato|riis.) that is, What must be given to thee, and what must be assigned to thee for thy portion, O deceit|full Tongue? Sharp darts cast by an Almighty arme, with devouring coales (of juniper)
10. With as good reason therfore S. Au|gustin may be accused of the slaughter of these Brittishs Monks, as S. Columban a Holy Irish Monk in France might be charged with the most horrible death of Queen Bronichild hapning at this very time, for he also by the Spirit of Prophecy forewarn'd her of it. And so far may we esteem the ancient Prophets guilty of the calamities befalling many Princes and Stares, which by Divine Inspiration they fore|told.
11. To all this wee may adde, that there was no such freindly correspondence between the Kings of Kent and the Northumbers, as that this latter should be employed by the former as an instrument of his unworthy revenge. On the contrary wee read that Ethelfrid bore so mortall a hatred to all Christians,

that he denounced to the Kings of Kent and Essex,A. D. 615. that he would be no lesse an enemy to them, because they had forsaken the Institutes of their Fathers, then he was to the Brittains and Scotts. And to conclude, according to the plain Narration of S. Beda, the Pagan King Ethelfrid came with no design against the Brittish Monks, but their slaughter was caused by occasion of his seing them on a hill together, and being told that they were assembled there to pray to God against him. So that the Pagan Authour himself of the slaughter absolves both King Ethelbert and S. Augustin, unjustly condemned by par|tiall and ungratefull Christians.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1. Kinegils the West Saxon King overcomes the Brittains.
2.3 The death of Sebert King of the East-Saxons: His Successours.

A. D. 614. Florent. hic. Auntingd. l. 2.1. IN the year of Christ six hundred and fourteen Kinegilsus King of the West-Saxons after he had raigned three years as|sumed his Son (others say, his Brother) Quicelmus a companion in his Throne: And presently after they both fought a battell against the Brittains at Beandune (Bindon) in Dorsetshire: But at the first onsett the Brittains affrighted with their large swords and long bucklers were quickly putt to flight, without any considerable losse on the Saxons side: who upon a survay found the bodies of two thousand and six hun|dred Brittains slaine. These large swords, called by Huntingdon Secures, and by Wite|chind, large knives, were in the Saxon tongue called Saxa, from whence that Nation is sayd to have received its name.
A. D. 615.2. The year following according to Wal|singhams account dyed the vertuous and de|vout Sebert King of the Trinobantes, or East-Saxons, and with great and general mour|ning was buried in the Church of Westmin|ster built by himself, which in succeeding times was magnificently enlarged and ad|orned, and made the common Sepulcher of our Kings.
3. How acceptable to God was the Sancti|ty and merits of this good King, appeared by a lasting Miracle: For in the days of King Ed|ward the first of the Norman Race,Walsingh. in Edvv. 1 f. 93. the Monks of Westmnster having a resolution to translate his Body from the Old Church to the New, assoon as with great devotion they had opened his Sepul|cher they found his right hand to the middle of his arm entire in flesh, skin, nayles and bones compacted. This was seaven hundred years after he had been there buried. Thus writeth Walsin|gham. In his place succeeded his three sons Sered, Seward and Sigebert, ioynd equally in the Government: but much degenerating from their fathers piety.


VI. CHAP.A. D. 616
VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The death of King Ethelbert: and of the Holy Bishop Lethard.
4.5. The Sanctity of King Ethelbert acknow|ledged.
6.7. His Children.

1. PResently after, if it was indeed after, dyed also Ethelbert,A. D 615. glorious in piety and merits, the first Protectour of the rising Christian Church of the Saxons. His death be|fell in the fifty sixth year of his raign,Bed l 2. c. . and the one and twentieth after he had embra|ced the Christian Faith. He was the third King of the English Nation whose Empire extended over all the Provinces Southward from the River Humber, saith S. Beda; adding that he was the first of those who went to heaven. (By which clause is implyed that he dyed before King Sebert. However certain it is, that a very small space of time intervend between both their deaths.) He was buried in the porch of Saint Martin within the Church of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul: where likewise the Body of his devout Queen Bertha (or Aldiberga) was layd.Id. ibid. Martyr. Rom. 24 Febr. And his memory is consecrated both in ours and the Roman Martyrologe, on the sixth of the Calends of March.
2. King Ethelbert had also another blessed companion in the place of his Sepulture, to wit, S. Lethard the Holy B. of Senli who came with Queen Aldiberga out of France into Brittany. Concerning whom William of Malmsbury thus writes,Malmsb. de Pontif. l. 1. f. 96. An ancient Authour called Gosselin celebrates the miracles of Saint Lethard who accompanied Queen Bertha into this Island, particularly his readines to afford rain in times of drouth, when his intercession is deman|ded: a pleasant example whereof was shewd about the same Writers time. For there having been a terrible fiery drouth about the height of Som|mer, the Sacred Body of the Saint was solemnly carried in Procession with Litanies. But no rain succeeding thereupon, the Cantor at his return with the Body with some indignation addressed his speech to the Holy Bishop, saying,Doest thou not see how great the tribulation of the whole countrey is by reason of this drouth, and yet thou art negligent in succouring us? These words of a seeming reproof were no sooner uttred, but pre|sently there fell such abundance of rain, that the most greedy desires were satisfied.
3. The vertues of King Ethelbert are com|prised by the Authour of his Life in these words:Ap. Capgra. in vit. S. E|thelbert. This blessed King, though his power exten|ded as far as Humber, yet in his conversation he shewd himself as perfectly one of Christ beggars, as if he had possessed nothing. It was a blessed sight to see this glorious King humbly serving the poore to see him who terrified Kings, to stand in fear

of Gods Preists, and to shew an humble respect to the meanest Ministers of the Church. How brightly he shone in repressing vice, exalting vertue, ful|filling the Divine precepts and in all works of piety is so much more clearly to be read in Gods heavenly Book, as human Writers have been ne|gligent in expressing, c. Antiquity and the favourable authority of former Saints is an irre|proachable Witnes of his Sanctity, since from the beginning his Solemnity has been celebrated by Gods Saints.
4. Among which Saints devoted to this Holy Kings memory S. Dunstan was one,Ap. Osbert. in vit. . Dun+stan. who in a certain night watching in devotion at the sepulchers of this King, of S. Augustin and other Holy Bishops his Successours, heard on a sudden voyces of certain persons singing this An|tiphone of the Ecclesiasticall Office (Gaudent in coelis animae Sanctorum, qui c.) The soules of thse Saints who have followed our Lords steps doe now reioyce in heaven, c. Whereat being astonish'd, he approach'd to the dore and looking through the clefts (for it was lock'd) he saw the whole Oratory shining with a wonderfull light, and a quire of persons in white robes melodiously and ioyfully singing that Antiphone, Such ho|nour is due to holy Kings and Prelats, c. This we read related by Osbern an ancient Compi|ler of the Life of Saint Dunstan. In which Narration, though Saint Ethelbert be not named, yet without question he reposing there, was principally intended.
Ap. Capgrav.  vit. S. Au|gustin.5. In proof of his acknowledged sancti|ty, c. there were in S. Augustins Church set up dayly five cierges continually burning, to wit, before the Tomb of S. Augustin, of S. Mred, of S. Adrian Abbot, before the great Altar, be|fore the Monument of King Ethelbert, and of S. Lethard Bishop, and a sixth in the Grott before the Image of the Blessed Virgin Mary, where S. Dunstan was honourd with many visions of her, as the Authour of S. Augustins lie testifies. And Polydor Virgil affirms,Polyd. Virg. l. 4. that even to his days the Sacred body of King Ethelbert was illu|strious by many Miracles.
6. He left behind only two children by his Queen Adilburga, Eadbald to whom he resign'd the Title of King, after he had ear|nestly admonish'd him to be carefull in pre|serving and promoting the Christian Faith: which admonition how he complyed with shall be shewd hereafter: And Edelburga, who was afterward married to Edwin King of the Northumbers, and of whose Conversion she was a principall instrument. To these two a third is added by Camden, Speed and other Modern Writers,Camden in Kent. namely the Holy Vir|gin Edburga, who among Saxon Virgins was the first which undertook the Profession of a devout Nunne. This holy Virgin, saith the Au|thour of her life,Auth. vit. S. Edburgae. after she had received Sacred Baptisme, gave praises to God day and night, fervently begging of him the grace to be esteem'd worthy to enioy the spirituall rewards of her onely Bride-groom Iesus Christ. She spent her life in serving God with all purity in the Church and Convent where her Neice S. Mildred was Ab|besse,A. D. 617. to whom likewise she succeeded in the go|vernment of it.
7. Among the praises of this holy King Ethelebrt we will in the last place mention his zeale to convert Redwald King of the East-Angles to the Christian Faith: though the event proved not so happy in him, as it had been in Sebert King o the East-Saxons.Bed. l 2. c. 15. Concerning which Redwald S. Beda writes, That in Kent, the Kingdom of Ethelbert, he had been imbued with the Mysteries and Sacraments of Christian Faith: But in vain; for when he re+turn'd home he was perverted and depraved from the sincerity of Faith by his Wise and other im|pious Teachers, so that his latter end was worse then his beginning: for like the old Samaritans he would both serve Christ and his old Pagan Gods together, placing in the same Temple a Holy Altar for the Sacrifice of our Lord, and an im|pure Altar for the Victimes of Devills.Brnt. Chron. col. 745. Which profane Altar Athelwolf, who lived King of that Province in the dayes of S. Beda, testi|fies to have remained to his time.


VII. CHAP.VII. CHA.

1.2. c. Apostacy of the Kings of Kent, and the East-Saxons.
5.6 S. Mellitus banished from his See at London
7 8. c. Laurentius determining to fly, is chastsd by S. Peter.
10. The Centuriators impudence.

1. CHristian Religion seemd to have been so firmly rooted in the two Kingdoms of Kent and the East-Saxons by the piety and zeale of the two late holy Kings,A. D. 617. Ethelbert and Sebert, that no danger could reasonably be apprehended of its fayling. But that it might appear that Faith is the free gift of God, his just Providence permitted the impiety of their children and successours to endanger the utter ruine of that heavenly Edifice which their Fathers had erected, insomuch as that the Pastours of Gods people were ba|nish'd, their Churches profan'd, and their Profession if not prohibited, at least discoun|tenanced.
2. The order and manner of these disor|ders was as followeth: King Ethelbert had left in Kent his Successour his only Son Ead|bald, who though in his Fathers dayes he seemd inclined to Christian Religion, for he was a Witnes and approver of his Fathers Charters by which he bequeathed to the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul severall posses|sions: Yet after his Fathers death he quickly returned to his vomit. The first step whereof was his unlawfull lust to his Fathers second Wife, whom he more unlawfully and in|cestuously married After which crime in|compatible with a sincere Christian Profession,

he publickly renounced Christianity, and again sett up Pagan Idols, inviting also and tempting his subjects to follow his Ex|ample, which the greatest part of them did. Yet he did not force either S. Laurence Arch|bishop of Canterbury, or S. Iustus Bishop of Rochester to abandon their Sees.
3. This unhappy change in Kent was ac|companied with a like, or worse change in London, and the rest of the East-Saxons King|dom. For the three Sons and Successours of Sebert, perhaps communicating counsels with Eadbald, relinquished their former see|ming profession of Christianity: an occa|sion whereof they took from the Holy Bi|shop Mellitus his refusing them the Holy Com|munion, which they demanded out of a foo|lish curiosity, or perhaps with an intention to make a quarrel. The particular Story is thus related by S. Beda:Bed. l. 2. c. 5.4. This storm and perturbation was much en|creased by the death of Sabereth (or Sebert) King of the East-Saxons, who at his departure out of this life to a better Kindgdom in heaven, left heyrs of his temporall kingdom his three Sons Sex|red, Seward and Sigebert, who had remained ob|stinate in their Heathenish Superstitions, though during his life time they had seemed to inter|mitt the exercise thereof But assoon as he was dead they publickly professed Idolatry, and gave free leave to their subjects to doe the same.
5. Now it hapned on a certain time that they saw the Holy Bishop Mellitus at the celebrating a Masse in the Church give the Holy Eucharist to the people.Whereupon they in a foolish pride sayd to him, Why doest thou not as well give us that white wafer which thou wast wont heretofore to give to our Father Saha (for so they usually cal|led him) and still continuest to give the people? His answer to them was: If you will be washed with that saving water with which your Father was purified, you may likewise, as he was, be par|takers of this Holy bread. But if you despise the water of life, you must by no means receive the Bread of life. But they replied, We have no in|tention to enter into that Font, of which we have no need: But however we will have our part of that Bread.When they were thus often and ear|nestly admonished by him that without a prece|dent purification by Baptism, it was not lawfull to give them part of the most holy Oblation; at last they grew into fury, and told him, If thou re|fusest to consent to us in a matter so easy as this, thou shalt stay no longer in our Kingdom.
Thus they banished him, commanding both him and all that belonged to him to depart out of their Province.
6. Mellitus being thus expelled from his See of London, came into Kent, with an intention to de|mand counsell of Laurentius and Iustus, what course for him was best in these extremities. And after serious deliberation, it was decreed by common advice among them, that their best way was rather to return into Italy their Native countrey, where they might serve our Lord with free minds, then to remain among such rebelles and Apostats from their Faith where no good could be done (conidering the malice of their Princes.) Mellitus therefore and Iustus forth|with departed, retiring themselves into France.
7. But S Laurence shewd a little more constancy: he could not so suddenly resolve to desert his flock, though extremely dimi|nished, of which he was the Cheif Pastour. Sometimes he would entertain hopes that God would not permitt so much labour, so prospered by him, to be lost. But on the other side a sad consideration of the incon|stancy of the people, the impiety and unre|straind lusts of the King, and that himself was now left alone without any to counsel or assist him, such thoughts as these peir|cing deeply into his mind, quickly extin|guished his former faint rising hopes, so that he resolved to quitt the ingratefull countrey likewise, and to folow his fellow-Bishops into France. And this resolution he had putt in execution, had not our Mercifull Lord by his Cheif Apostle prevented it. The manner of which prevention is thus descri|bed by S. Beda:8. When S. Laurence was upon the point to follow Mellitus and Iustus and to desert Brittany,Bed. l . c. 6. the night before his iourney was to begin, he gave order that a couch should be prepared for him in the Church of Saint Peter and S. Paul: Whereon when, after many prayers and tears powrd forth to God, he had layd him down to rest, and was falln asleep, there appeared to him the most Blessed Prince of the Apostles, who after many sharp stripes inflicted on him, askd him with an Apostolick Severity, Why he would forsake the flock with which he had entrusted him? And, to what Pastours care he would com|mitt the sheep of Christ, now encompassed with so many wolves?Hast thou forgott, said he, the example I have given thee, who for the good of those Lambs which our Lord, in testimony of his love, recommended to mee, suffred from Infi|dels and enemies of Christ bonds, stripes, prisons, torments, and in conclusion death it self, even the death of the Crosse, for which I am now crownd with him?
9. The servant of Christ Laurence, being en|couraged with these stripes and exhortations of the Blessed Apostle, as soon as morning appeared went to the King, and laying aside his vestment, shewd him how greivously his body had been torn with whipps. The King wondring at it, de|manded who durst be so presumptuous to treat so worthy a person so cruelly? But when he was in|formed that the Bishop had for his Salvation and eternall happines suffred so sharp torments, he was struck with great feare.
10. We will awhile interrupt the prose|cution of S. Beda's Narration of the happy effect of this Miracle, in the Kings conver|sion; to attend the iudgment given hereof by some Modern Protestants, especially the Centuriators of Magdebury,Magdeb. Cen|tur. 7. c. 3. whose censure is this, These things were prettily feigned by Lau|rence, to astonish a Pagan King: for none but su|perstitious

fooles will beleive that he was in ear|nest scourged by Peter. Saint Beda then, it seems was misinformed, S. Laurence was a cheating lyar, and all posterity superstitiously credu|lous: yea God himself, who prospered this in|vention with the Kings Conversion and the restitution of the Christian Faith, in these mens iudgment stood in need of a lye to perfect his own work. Certain it is that above eight hundred years since, Alcuinus, a man of admirable learning, made use of this argument of S. Laurence his being chastised by S. Peter,Alcuin. Ep. 97. to encourage a then Arch-bishop of Canterbury chased from his See:Ap. Anselm. l 3. Epist 2. And the same example was after|ward applied by Osbern a Monk, and Precen|tor of Canterbury to S. Anselm declining the burden of the same Church. But what proofs have those Censurers to disprove Saint Beda's Narration?Magdb. Cen. ibid. None at all but their bare asser|tion, That these lying Miracles were contrived to support an Opinion that Saints have power to hurt those with whom they are displeased. So that it seems in their opinion the reall scourging of a man is an act exceeding Gods Omnipotence.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Edwin Prince of the Northumbers, banished. His dangers.
7.8 He is comforted by an Angell.
9 10. His Enemy Ethelfrid, slain.

A. D. 617.1. WE must a little longer delay the re|lation of the happy effects which the visible marks of S. Laurence his stripes wrought in the mind of the Pagan King Ead|balous (which effects began to be publickly seen the year following:) to insert another illustrious Example of Gods Goodnes to our Nation in exalting to the Throne of the Nor|thumbers a Prince called Edwin, by the de|struction of that cruel King Ethefrd, the murderer of so many hundred innocent Monks of Bangor: Which Edwin not long after embracing the Christian Faith, raised up a glorious Church in those rude and bar|barous Provinces, which were indeed the first towards whom S. Gregory intended to expresse his Charity, upon the sight of a few beautiull young slaves from hence expo|sed to sale in the Market at Rome.
Bed. l. 2. Hunting. l. 2. eril. A. D. Wigrn Pol. Virg. l. 4.2. This Edwin was the Son of Alla King of the Deiri, or Northumbers, to whose name S. Gregory alluded, saying that Alleluia's should ere long be sung in his Kingdom. Now Alla dying in the year of Grace five hundred eighty nine, and leaving his only Son Edwin but three years old, the throne, due to him, was usurped by Ethelfrid sirnamed the Cruel or Savage.
3. Edwin living in this Tyrants Court grew up an example of all vertues and endow|ments: which rendred him agreable to all but formidable to Ethelfrid. Who yet though he haed him, as one who both had right to the Kingdom and deserved it, yet he durst not lay snares for his life, fearing in case such designs should want successe, least con|sidering the generall compassion and love born to Edwin, a party should declare in his behalf, and endanger his Crown. Therefore imputing to him some feign'd crimes he sent him into Exile, hoping that by po|verty, want of freinds and discontent he would quickly shorten his own life.
4. Before his banishment he had maried Quenburga the daughter of Ceorl King of the Mercians, who accompanied him in his exile, and brought him two sons, Offrid and Edfrid: after which she dyed, before his restitution. And Edwin fearing the Ty|rants trains, was forced to disguise himself, and shift from place to place in the habit of a peasant: Till at last going into the King|dom of the East-Angles, he committed him|self to the faith of Redwald King there: in whose Court he lived with great splendour, being acceptable both to the King and all others for his rare endowments: for he di|vided his time between reading and Martiall Exercises, and in both he so far advanced himself, that his fame was spread through the whole Island.
5. In the mean time Ethelfrid sought his destruction by all the ways he could ima|gine, sending spyes every where to disco|ver him, and assassins to murder him. But at last hearing that he was so kindly enter|tained among the East-angles, he resolved either with treasure to buy, or with an ar|my to procure his death. He sent therefore an Embassadour to Redwald, by whom at first he offred great summs of money to pur|chase the delivering up of Edwin: But those offers being rejected; he next threatned open war upon refusall. This threatning terrified Redwald, in somuch as chusing rather to ex|pose the single life of a stranger, then hazzard the destruction of his kingdom, he yeilded to the solicitations of Ethelfrid, promising either to deliver him up, or to take order for the shortning his life.
6. These Treaties between the two Kings were not caried so secretly, but Edwin had notice of them: and by the change of King Redwalds countenance and gestures began to suspect his own danger. Which suspi|cion was changed into assurance by an ad|vice given him by a freind of Redwalds reso|lution. Which freind advised him to secure himself by flight, offring himself his com|panion and guide therin. But Edwins answer was, That having had so many years expe|rience of Redwalds fidelity and generosity, he would not be the first to shw a suspicion of so base a crime in a King: and that if he

must perish, he would chuse to doe it ra|ther by the hand of a freind then of a de|clared Enemy. With this resolution he dis|missed his freind. This discourse betwen them for the greater privacy passed in a soli|tary place, and in the evening when it be|gan to be dark.
7. Edwin being thus left alone in obscu|rity, had the greater freedom to entertain his melancholick thoughts, which were bu|sied rather how to dye nobly, then how to secure his life, which he conceived impos|sible. Being taken up with such medita|tions he on a sudden heard the voyce of one at a little distance, who ask'd him, Why he staid there alone in the dark, when all others were asleep? Edwin nothing imagi|ning who this unknown person was, de|sired him to be gone. Yet he departed not: but continuing his speech he said, My Son, you have indeed great cause to be greived, and to stand in fear of Redwald, who is resolved on your uine. But what reward would you give to one who would restore you without all danger to this Kings fidelity? Edwin answerd, that it was beyond his power to make an equall re|compence. But, said the other, what retribu|tion would you make to him, who should not only doe this, but make you stronger then your enemy, and possessour of his crown, yea and en|crease your patrimony with the accession of other kingdomes beside? Hereto Edwin sayd, I can only promise a gratefull mind: for such obliga|tions exceed all possible retribution. When he had said this, the Angell (for that it was an Angell, the successe demonstrated) added these words, But what will you doe for him who will not only make you happy and glorious in this world, but after this life procure for you im|mortall glory? Will you not at least afford him your attention and submission when he shall pro|pose to you counsells in themselves holy and good for you? This being readily promised by Edwin: Then the Angel layd his hand upon his head, and sayd to him, When you shall hereafter see a mans hand thus layd on your head, and all the things which I have foretold you accomplish'd, then be sure to remember this promise you have made. And having said this, he vanished, leaving Edwin in an uncer|tainty between hope and feare.
8 Now whilst these discourses passed be|tween Edwin and the unknown Messenger from heaven (which S. Beda, Huntingdon, Florilegus, and severall Protestant Writers doubt not to call a Divine Oracle) the Queen, Wife of Redwald, undertook the patronage of Edwin, representing to her husband his noble qualities, the basenes and infamy which would lye on him, being a King, if for fear he should betray his freind, c. In a word she so wrought with him that he re|nounced the promise made to Ethelfrid, em|braced Edwin confirming his ancient fide|lity, and in revenge of the infamy which the Tyrant would have perswaded him to, he sent first a defiance to Ethelfrid, saith Florile|gus, provoking him to a combat.Florile ad A. D. 616. Whereupon ar|mies were raised on both sides, which mett in the Region of the Iutes on the Eastern side of the Ri|ver Idle.
9. Huntingdon gives this Narration of the combat:Hunting. . 2 They fought, saith he, in the Province of the Coritani (Nottinghamshire) in the bounds of the Mercians, on the East of the River Idle, which lost its colour by the abundance of blood shed there. King Edlfrid wondring and disdaining that any one should dare to oppose him, with his choicest and most tryed soldiers, with wonderfull boldnes, but withall discorderly, rushd among his Enemies, whose army was ran|ged to the best advantage, and terrible to be|hold: for they were not only more numerous, but with shining helmets, great groves of spears and innumerable banners, they march'd or|derly in three great bodies. Notwithstanding the King of the Northumbers hastily rushing, as to an assured prey, among the thickest squa|drns, slew Rayner the son of Redwald, sen|ding him and his part of the army before him to Hell But Redwald nothing affrighted, but rather incensed with this losse, kept his ground invincibly with his two other Bodies: Which the Northumbrians being not able to peirce through, Edilfrid beyond his power stri|ving to enter, was separated a good distance from his own soldiers, and in a short time wa slain, his body lying upon a heap of enemies slaughterd by him. Assoon as this King was dead his whole army fled.
10. This deserved end had the ambition of Edilfrid, nourish'd with all manner of crimes, after he had raign'd four and twenty years: In whose place succeeded Edwin now rightfull King of the Northum|bers, who was present at this combat and seems to have given name to a town not far distant called Edwinstow: though others derive that appellation from ano|ther root. As for the Sons of Ethelfrid Oswald and Ebba, born to him by Acca the sister of Edwin, they fled privily into Scot|land, by which some understand the ori|ginall countrey of the Scottish nation, Ire|land: Of whose return we shall treat in due place. And thus much of the Divine Oracle was this year fullfilld: the rest also will be duly accomplish'd in the proper season.



A. D 618.
IX. CHA.IX. CHAP.

i.2. c Eadbald King of Kent repents his Apostacy.

A. D. 618.1. WE will now contemplate the happy change which the right hand of our Lord made in the heart of Eadbald King of Kent upon the sight of the wounds which the stripes inflicted on the Body of the Arch|bishop S. Laurentius by S. Peter caused. It is thus described by S. Bede:Bed. l. 2. c. 6. When the King heard that for his eternall good the Bishop had suffred from the Apostle such wounds and torments, he was sore affrighted: And renouncing his former accursed Idolatry, also repudiating his incestuous Wife, he received the Faith of Christ, and was baptised. After which he was carefull to favour, and with his utmost power to promote the affairs of the Church.
2. S. Beda had reason to mention his fa|vour and liberality to the Church, for there is to this day extant a Charter of his dated this year, Reye in . tr. 1. f. . in which after a commemoration of the occasion of his Conversion by seing the stripes inflicted on S. Laurence, he declares that for the remedy of the soules of his fa|ther, his own and others of his kinred he granted for the use of the Monastery of Saint Peter and S. Paul a portion of land of thirty ploughs in Kent call'd Northborne and with|all confirmed all the Gifts, Priviledges and liberties formerly granted by his Father to the same Church, c.
3. Moreover to testify his care of the advancing the Christian Faith in his king|dom,Bed. l. 2. c. 6. he sent (saith Saint Beda) into France, from whence he recalled Mellitus and Iustus, or|daining that they should return to their Chur|ches, and freely instruct and govern the flocks committed to them. Accordingly they came back about a year after their departure: And Iu|stus indeed went to his Church at Rochester, for|merly committed to him: But the inhabitants of London would not receive their Bishop Melli|tus, for they rather chose to obey their Idolatrous Preists.


X. CHAP.A. D. 619.
X. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Laurence his voyage to procure Vnity with the Irish and Scottish Bishops: the good Successe of it.
5 6 His death: Saint Mellitus, his Suc|cessour.

1. AFter this S. Laurence survived no long time,A. D. 619. for he dyed in the beginning of the following year. But the short remain|der of his life he spent very proffitably for Gods Churches. For not contenting himself with providing for the spirituall good of his own See, he extended his zeale and care beyond the limits of the Island. Insomuch as some Authours write that to procure an Vnion and charitable correspondance be|tween the Churches of the Saxons, Brittains Scotts and Irish, he undertook a painfull voyage into Ireland, to perswade them to a conformity with the Vniversall Church in ce|lebrating the Paschall solemnity.
2. But perhaps their meaning was, that by his appointment a Conference or Synod was assembled in which certain Irish and Scottish Bishops met to compose differences about that point.Mgdeb. Cen|tur. 7. f 518. Which Synod according to the Centuriators of Magdeburg was cele|brated in the Isle of Man, in which S. Lau|rence earnestly contended for an uniformity with the Catholick Church in that Observation, and wrote letters to the same effect to the Irish and Scottish Bishops who were absent.
3. Neither were his endeavours vain: for as the Authour of his Life in Capgrave re|lates,Ap. Capgrav. in S. Laurent. By S. Laurence his preaching and exhorta|tions in Ireland (Scotia) his fame was largely spread, insomuch as S. Tenan an Arch-bishop of Ireland came to him: A man of so great San|ctity, that he is reported to have raised to life three dead persons. Which Holy Bishop having heard S. Laurence disputing touching the Paschall observation and other Apostolick Institutions, yeilded the Victory to Truth, and endeavoured to eform the practise of his own Nation.
4. And no wonder it is that Truth defen|ded by such a man should prevayle, since he by Gods assistance confirmed it with Di|vine Miracles:Among which the restoring of a dead man to life at his return from the same Synod is recorded by the said Authour,Ibid. The man of God Laurence being returned (saith he) found the son of a man who had kindly en|tertained him, dead, and the parents in great sorrow, Who with a loud voyce cryed to him, O holy man, restore our son to us, that we may more firmly beleive in Iesus Christ whom thou hast preached to us. Hereupon the Holy Bishop having first offred up his prayers to God, said to the Child, Arise: who presently rose up: and withall testified, that being dead his soule was

violently drawn by horrible spirits to the flames of Hell, but upon the prayer of the holy man Laurence it was by Angels shining with bright|nes brought back to the body.
Hereupon the child together with his Father, mother, whole family, and kinred were baptised, and the Holy Bishop passing through the whole region dispersed saving doctrine every where, which he confirmed with Miracles.
5. These are the last Gests recorded of S. Laurence:A. D. 619. who in the beginning of the fol|lowing year of Grace six hundred and nine|teen deposed his mortality and was buried in his own Church neer his Predecessour S. Augustin: with an Epitaph inscribed, which commemorated his forementioned scour|ging by S. Peter. Not the English only but Roman Church likewise celebrates his memo|ry on the second of February, for thus we read in the Martyrologe, At Canterbury in En|gland is this day celebrated the commemoration of S. Laurence,Martyrol. Rom. 2. Febr who after S. Augustin govern'd that Church, and converted also the King to the Faith.Baron. ibid. Vpon which passage Baronius thus writes, In the Catalogue of the Writers of Brit|tany is signified, that the Life of S. Laurence was compiled by Gtzelin a Monk of S. Bertins in Flanders: which probably is the same still extant in Capgrave.
6. It hapned commodiously that S. Melli|tus Bishop of London was returned into Brit|tany before the death of S. Laurence. For since the Kings of the East-Saxons would not ad|mit him, neither could Eadbald, whose power was not so great as his Fathers, con|strain them to it, now upon the vacancy of the See, also at the the request of Eadbald, and no man opposing, he succeeded S. Laurence therein, whilst S. Iustus governed the See of Rochester. These two Bishops, as we read in the Antiquities of Brittany,Antiq. Brit. in Mellito. with an equall care and solicitude exercised their Episcopall function, and received exhortatory letters from Pope Boni|face, who after Deusdedit governed the Roman Church. Those to Mellitus are not now ex|tant: But the Letters directed to S. Iustus shal be mentioned in due place.
7. King Eadbald the year foregoing this had begun the building a Chappel to the ho|nour of the Blessed Mother of God in the Mo|nastery of S. Peter:Bed l. 2. c. 6. Ap. Capgrav. in Mellito. which being now finish'd was consecrated by S. Mellitus. S. Beda makes mention of it: And how gratefull it was to the Blessed Virgin Mary, was oftimes made manifest by praises sung to God in it by the glorified Saints and many Miracles, saith the Authour of S. Mellitus his life.


XI. CHAP.A. D. 622.
XI. CHAP.

1.2. c King Edwins Conquests.

1. IN the mean time Edwin King of the Northumbers according to a Divine Ora|cle being exalted from a state of Exile to that Kingdom,A. D. 620. encreased his dominions. For in the year six hundred and twenty he fought against Cadwan the Brittish King, who had compelled King Ethelfrid to retire more Northward, quitting certain Provin|ces of the Brigantes (Yorkshire) lying towards Wales: Which Provinces Edwin now again recovered,Caden  Briga. having overcome him in battell. The Region thus recovered was anciently called Elme, saith Camden: and it is seated near Leeds a principall town in Yorkshire, in the Saxon tongue called Loyds, which became a Royal Town after the burning of (Cambodunum) Almonbury, or Albanbury, in this Kings days, where S. Pau|linus built a Church to the honour of our Proto-Martyr S. Alban.
2. The year following the same King Edwin fought prosperously against the Scotts and Picts,A. D. 622. lead by their King Eugenius, and re|covering from them the Provinces of Gal|loway and Laudon, added them to his own Dominions. That Region was in the times of the Romans call'd Valentia,  belong'd to the Brittains. Some Wrter say that the Scottish King Eugenius was at this time dead, and that these Provinces were won from Ferquhard his Son, and this with lesser difficulty, by reason of civill dissentions between the said Ferquhard and his Nobles. He is sayd to have been educated and instructed by Conan the Holy Bishop of Sodor in the Isle of Man: H. Bt. l. 9. and that afterward by means of frequent conversation with Brittish Preists: he fell into the Heresy of Pela|gius, with which never any Scottish King before had been tainted. Thus Hector Botius: Al|though no other Historian does in this age impute that Errour to the Brittains.
3. King Edwins conquests were the next year yet further extended:A. D. 622. Bed. l. 2. c. 9. For according to Saint Beda's relation, he subdued the Is+lands called Mevaniae, or Meneviae, to the En|glish Empire. One of which Islands lying more toward the South (namely Anglesey) is both more happy in producing plenty of corn and other fruits, and in quantity larger, as con|taining according to the English estimation the measure of nine hundred and sixty fami|lies: Whereas the other (to wit, the Isle of Man) contains little more then three-hun|dred.
4. Many proofs may be produced to de|monstrate that these Islands anciently be|longed to the Iurisdiction of the Brittains:Ib. ib. c. 5.

for S. Beda expressly calls them Brittish Isles:A. D. 624. but had been a long time injuriously pos|sessed by the Scotts, taking advantage from the weaknes of the Brittains at their first in|vasion by the Saxons, Hence it was that the Bishop of Sodore in the Isle of Man, or lesser Menavia, was subject to the Iurisdiction of the Arch-bishop of York.


XII. CHA.XII. CHAP.

1.2. Death of the Apostats, East Saxon Kings.
3.4 Also of S. Mellitus Arch bishop of Canterbury: to whom S. Iustus succeeds.
5.6 Epistles of P. Boniface confirming the Priviledges of the See of Canterbury.

1. THE year of Grace six hundred twenty three is by Florilegu marked with the death of Sexred and Siward Kings of the East-Saxons:A. D. 623. Westm. hc. who were slain by Kinegils King of the West-Saxons and his Son Quicelm: And this, saith he, came to psse by the iust judgment of God, because after the death of their Father King Sebert, they return'd to the worship of Idols, having expelled S. Mellitus Bishop of London out of their Dominions. Their whole army was ut|terly destroyd, that not one escaped home to carry the news.
2. There succeeded in the Kingdom of the East-Saxons, Sigebert sirnamed The little, son of Siward, saith William of Malmsbury: from whence may be collected that the third Brother, Sigebert the Son of Sebert was dead before: For to this Sigebert the Little, of whom small mention is made, there suc|ceeded another Sigebert Nephew to King Se|bert by his Brother Sigebald. As for Sigebert who begun his raign this year, he had a Bro|ther truly deserving the sirname of Great, ce|lebrated in all our Martyrologes for a Saint: Of whom more hereafter.
3. The year following S. Mellitus the late|ly made Arch-bishop of Canterbury dyed,A. D. 624. having seen the miserable end of those in|gratefull Kings of the East Saxons who had banished him from his See of London: and was buried saith S. Beda in the Church of S. Peter. His Memory is celebrated on the four and twenieth of April, both in the Roman and Englih Martyrologe;Mrtyol. Angl. 2. April. as likewise that of S. Beda, Vsuardus and Ado.
4. His Successour in the said See was Saint Iustus Bishop of Rochester, who only of all the Romans remained in the Island adorned with a Miter. Which moved King Eadbald to acquaint Pope Boniface with the penury of persons sufficient for so high a function. Saint Iustus likewise informed the same Pope of the vertues and zeale of the King, and how great hopes appeared of a great accesse to the Church, if more labourers were sent to cultivate our Lords Vineyard.
5. These particulars appear in the answer sent by Pope Boniface to Iustus recited by Saint Beda:Bed. l. 2. c. Wherein he expresses his great ioy to heare the good effects of his la|bours and zeale, which King Eadbald had declared to him: and exhorts him to per|severe to communicate the Gospell both to Kent and other Provinces. He likewise in|forms him that he had sent him a Pall, to be made use of only in celebrating the Divine Mysteries: giving him moreover a power to ordain Bishops in all places com|modious, c.
6. Another Epistle from the same Pope to Saint Iustus,Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2. f. 208. or rather a wrong Copy of the same is transcribed by William of Malms|bury, wherein the Pope confirms the Pri|viledges conferred by Saint Gregory on the See of Canterbury, constituted the Metropo|litan and Primatiall See of the whole Na|tion, immediatly under the protection of the See Apostolick. Yet this Copy was by Saint Lanfranc sent to Pope Alexander to justify the Priviledges of the See of Can|terbury,Id. ib. as the same Authour declares.
Yea even Bishop Parker transcribes it entirely into his Antiquities, and on this Letter grounds the dignity and supereminence of his See:Antq. Brit. For other arguments he has none, but such as are derived from Popes, to whom notwithstanding he can allow no other titles but proud, superstitious, im|pious Prelats, and such as had no lawfull Iuris|diction over Brittany. Thus manifestly men|tita est iniquitas sibi: Such self-contradi|ctions necessarily attending injustice and disorderly passion.
7. Vpon the receit of these Letters and the Pall, Saint Iustus consecrated Romanus Bishop of Rochester, who for some time assisted him in propagating the Christian Faith. But shortly after being obliged upon occasion of some emergent businesses, not for the obtaining Consecration (as the Cen|uriators fancy) to goe to Rome, he was drownd at Sea by the way, and the See of Rochester became once more vacant.



XIII. C.XIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Redwald K. of the East angles dyes: And Edwin elected his Successour: but gives it to Redwalds Son.
3.4. c. Edwin Monark of the English: demands the Sister of the King of Kent to wife and on certain conditions obtains her.

A. D. 624.1. THE same year Redwald the party-Chri|stian and party-heathen King of the of the East-angles dyed, and though he left behind him a son Erpenwald who was bred up to the expectation of the Crown, yet were the affections and esteem of that people to Edwin King of the Northumbers so great, that neglecting their late Kings Son, they unanimously chose Edwin for their King, having had long experience of his vertues during his exile in that Court, and also incited with the fame of his Con|quests.
2. Notwithstanding Edwin gave to Erpenwald the Title and Ensigns of Kingly authority, contenting himself with an authority paramount over that Kingdom, as he enioyd the same over all the rest, excepting only the Kingdom of Kent: So that among his other Titles he now inserted that of Monark of the English Nation. For after King Ethelberts death that Title descended not upon Eadbald his Son, but on Redwald King of the East-Angles. For, saith Saint Beda,Bed. l 2. c. 5. the first who enioyd this Empire was Elli, King of tho South saxons; the second Celin or Ceaulin King of the West-Saxons; the third, Edilbert King of Kent; the fourth Redualt King of the East-Angles, who also during the life of Edilbert was Prince of that Nation; And the fifth was Edwin King of the Northumbers, who with greater power then any before governd all the inhabitants of Brittany, whether Saxons or Brittains, except Kent only. He had also lately subdued to his Empire the two Brittish Islands calld Menavia, seated between Brittany and Ireland.
3. There remained nothing of the fore|mentioned Divine Oracle given to Edwin unaccomplish'd that concernd his felicity in this life: Of a poore, afflicted and per|secuted Exile, he was exalted to the Throne of the Northumbers, to that Kingdom he had added severall Regions and Islands lately sub|dued, likewise another Kingdom of the East-Angles which offred it self to him, and lastly a Supereminent Monarchicall Power over all the Brittains and Saxons, excepting Kent: Yet that was still wanting which alone could indeed make him happy,A. D. 625. the knowledge and love of the true God.
4. In order therefore to a perfect accom|plishment of the said Oracle,A. D. 625. Almighty God putt it in his thoughts to demand for a second wife (in place of Quenburga who dyed during his Exile) Ethelburga, calld also Tata, daughter of Ethelbert late King of Kent, and sister to Eadbald at this time raigning there. For which purpose he sent Embassadours into Kent: But the Royal Virgin who had the devout Quern Aldiberga for her Mother, and Saint Augustin for her Spiritual Father, who had instilld into her a Noble, and deeper sence of Christianity, refused to hearken to such proposalls made by a Pagan, Idolatrous King. The answer therefore brought back by the Em|bassadours was according to Saint Beda, That it was not lawfull for a Christian Virgin to be maried to a Pagan,Bed. l. 2. c. . for fear least the Faith and Sacraments of the Celestial King should be profaned by so near an association with a King who was ignorant in the Worship due to the true God.
5. Notwithstanding this repulse, Edwin would not desist from his pretentions, but remanding his Messengers with orders to presse more earnestly the Mariage. he assu|red King Eadbald and his Sister,Id. ib. That for himself he would never doe the least thing that might be contrary to the Christian Faith pro|fessed by the Virgin: but rather would allow full permission both to her and all those who came with her, men and women, Preists and servants o enioy after the Christian manner the perfect exercise of their Religion, both as to an open Profession of their Faith, and perfor|mance of all ites belonging therto. He added moreover, that he himself would not refuse to embrace the same Religion, in case that after a serious examination by prudent men it appeard to be more holy and beseeming the Maiesty of God, then that in which he had been brought up.
6 Such advantageous conditions as these from so potent a King could not be refused: For no doubt the pious Virgin considered that, as to her self, there would be no danger: and withall that hereby a way was opened to the gaining not only of her husbands soule, but of the grea|test part of his subiects too. This was the very case of her own countrey: for by the mariage of a Christian Lady into it, her Father had been well disposed to embrace the Christian Faith, assoon as proposed by Saint Augustin: and he was no sooner converted, but generally his whole King|dom followed his Example. Besides Prea|chers were now ready, and near at hand, not to be expected from forrain coun|treys, or strangers who had no knowledge of the Kingdoms language; and as for Religion it self, it was becom no wonder even

among the Pagans,A. D. 626. the fame of the great Miracles confirming it, was dispersed over the whole Island, and no doubt would dis|pose the way for its reception.
7. Vpon such considerations as these the Mariage was consented to. Yet before her departure, the pious Virgin obtaind from Saint Iustus Arch-bishop of Canterbury a man  indeed to be her Spirituall Father and Master, namely Saint Paulinus, who was one of those which had been sent by Saint Gregory into Brittany, to labour in the Harvest of soules. And moreover to enable him to preach the Truth with greater au|thority and vigour, Paulinus (saith Saint Beda) was ordaind Bishop (of York) by Iustus Arch-bishop, on the twelfth day before the Ca|lends of August, and in the six hundred and five and twentieth year after our Lords Incarna|tion.
8. Vnder the secure conduct of so pru|dent a Guide thereore the Royal Virgin is sent to her Husband King Edwin: To whom likewise she presented Letters from Pope Boniface, saith Saint Beda, by whom they are at large recited:Bed. l. 2. c.  .The substance wherof con|sisted in a summary Explication of the grounds of Christianity, touching the Crea|tion and fall of man, the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity and Mans redemption, c. from whence descending to exhortations to re|nouncing Idolatry, the vanity and danger wherof he declared, he proposed King Au|dubald (Eadbald) and his New Queen for his examples to follow in receiving the sign of the Crosse and Sacrament of Baptism, by which alone he might be freed from the guilt of ins and eternall misery, c. Here|to he added as a sign of benediction from Saint Peter certain presents, a shirt adornd with gold together with (Laena ancyriana) a certain Robe of the Eastern fashion.
Id. ib.9. The same Pope had likewise written a Letter to the Lady Ethelburga, In which after expressing his ioy for her own and her Bro|ther King Eadbalds conversion, he earnestly exhorted her to use all possible endeavours by perswasions to her husband, and by prayers to God to instill into him a love of Christian Faith, assuring her that he himself also would ioyn in the same prayers. He desired her likewise to inform him by letters of the successe of her pious endeavours: concluding also with small presents of a Looking-glasse sett in silver, and an Ivory comb gilded, c.
10. It is not to be doubted but the pious Queen diligently followd such charitable ex|hortations, and both by her words and exam|ple endeavoured to prepare her Husbands heart to admitt the celestial Light of Divine Truth. Neither can we suspect that Saint Paulinus would be wanting to contribute his assistance in so pious a work. But King Edwin forgetfull perhaps of the Divine Ora|cles, could not suddenly be persuaded to renounce the Superstition received from his Ancestours, and complying too much with vicious liberty, and instead therof to sub|mitt his neck to Christs yoak, easy only to hearts replenished with Charity. A stronger hand therefore was necessary to expugn all difficulties, and this, God was pleased to stretch forth o him the year fol|lowing.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1. King Edwin in danger to be murdred.
2.3. c. His promises to become a Chri|stian, upon conditions.
5. His Warr against the West-Saxon Kings: and victory.

1. THE prosperity of King Edwin raisd extreme envy, especially in the mind of Quichelm King of the West-Saxons, and an equall desire to stopp the current of it. But not daring to attempt this by a declared war, he had recourse to treachery: and sent an Assassin under the shew of a publick Mes|senger to murder him. King Edwin was then recreating himself in a countrey house at Auldby upon the River Derwent, seaven miles distant from York. It was then the day of the Christian Paschal solemnity when the King was advertised of the Messengers arrival, whom he commanded to be admitted: And while the King courteously stretched forth his hand to salute him, the Assassin with a feigned submission put his own hand under his Robe and took out a short sword, which with great violence he directed against the King, and had certainly peirced him through, had not a faithfull servant of his, calld Lilla, interposing himself, receiv'd the sword into his own body. Notwithstanding so furious and forcible was the thrust that the point of the sword passing through Lilla's body, entred a little into the Kings, who was presently secur'd from further danger by his Guards. Neither could the Messenger, whose name was Eumerus, be dispatched, before he had slain another of the Kings soldiers calld Forder.
2. This wound brought everlasting health both to the King and Kingdom of the Northum|bers. The Queen Ethelbuga was then great with child, and by the consternation caused by that dismal accident and the Kings danger was before her time the same night deliverd of a daughter. Whereupon the King partly in gratitude to his Gods for his escape, and partly for ioy of receiving issue, obliged himself by certain vowes to them (for he was naturally very devout) and causing Publick Prayers to be appointed, his intention was to sacrifise his young daughter to the vain Idol worship|ped

by him. Which impious design of his being come to the knowledg of Saint Pauli|nus, he very opportunely interposed himself, and informed the King that he owed his pre|sent safety not to the false Deities adored by him, but to the one onely true God, from whom himself by Prayer had obtaind safety both to the Father and daughter: and there|fore that it was iust that the young child should be consecrated to Christ the Authour of his health.
3. Vpon this remonstrance King Edwin was somewhat moved: but yet replied,What assurance canst then give mee that I owe mine own and my daughters life to the God worshipped by thee, and not to mine own Deities? Hereto Paulinus answerd by setting forth the impo|tency of Idols, and omnipotency of the true God: adding other considerations touching the Queens sanctity very acceptable to God, and her Prayers also for his life and prosperity.Well, said the King, who was then recoverd of his wound, I will now putt it to the tryall, whether I am to give thanks for my present safety and happy successes to thy God, or no. I am re|solved to invade this murdrous King: If Christ whom thou adorest will give mee victory, I engage my Faith here to serve and worship him alone. In the mean time, since Ethelburga earnestly desires it, I resign my child to be disposed of by thee, and initiated in the Mysteries of thine and her Religion: And moreover I promise, in case I return from this war with health and victory, that I will seriously deliberate of the great affaire, and will doe as thou advisest mee.
4. S. Paulinus infinitly glad at these promi|ses of the King departed from him, and on the solemne day of Pentecost following baptised this first-born child of Ethelburga, together with twelve others of the Kings family, saith S. Beda, who were the first fruits of that Nation: And then was accomplish'd the Oracle pronounced by S. Gre|gory, and Alleluia with great ioy sung among them. The name imposed on the child was Eanfleda. She was afterward a Queen, and illustrious for Sanctity: concerning whom more shall be related in due place.
Bed. l. 2. c. 9.5. King Edwin deferd not the war: but the same year gathering a great army, saith S. Beda, he marched against the West-Saxons: and coming to a battell he gaind the victory: after which he either killd, or had surrendred to him all those whom he was informed, had conspired his death. Florilegus adds, that Quichelm (whom he calls Quinchelin) was slain in the place of battell,Florileg. hic. which place in testimony of his victory Edwin calld Quin|chelines hame. And so returnd with triumph into his own kingdom.Malmsbur. l. 1. c. 2. But William of Malmsbury affirms that both the West-Saxon Kings, Kinegils and Quichelm, escaped, and not long after embra|ced the Christian Faith by the preaching of Be|rinus a holy Bishop: likewise that they fought prosperously against Penda King of the Mercians.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. C.

1.2. King Edwin wonderfully converted to Christianity.
3.4. c. A Generall Assembly called: in which Idolatry is renounced: and the Christian Faith received.
11. The place of this Assembly.

1. CErtain it is that King Edwin obtaind an illustrious victory,A. D. 626. as shortly ap|peard by his acknowledgment of his obliga|tion to discharge the Vow he had made to Almighty God. Notwithstanding at the first he delayd, partly upon a pretence of pu|blick affaires, and partly out of a desire to de|liberate more maturely.Bed. l. 2 c 9. For being a man (as S. Beda saith) naturally of a peircing sagacious Spirit, he would oftimes sitt alone, silent, but re|volving in his mind many doubtfull thoughts what he should resolve upon, and what Religion he should professe. He was already unsatisfied in his own superstition, but withall he had fram'd in his mind obiections against Chri|stian Religion: He thought it misbecoming a great victorious King to submit his neck to the yoak of one who had been crucified, c.
2. On a certain day as he was agitated with such uncertain thoughts, Saint Paulinus, no doubt by divine Inspiration, came suddenly to him, and laying his hand on the Kings head, severely asked him,Whether he calld to mind that Sign of his Faith and pro|mise formerly given when he was in a pri|vat condition, an exild person, and in im|minent danger of death? And he bad him take heed how he continued longer a rebell against God: since he who had raised him up so high, could as easily depresse him. The King was struck with this unexpected be|haviour of Saint Paulinus: but having re|covered the freedom of his thoughts, and perfectly remembring the forementioned Divine Oracle, he presently fell at Saint Pau|linus his feet, acknowledging his guilty doubtfullnes, and submitting himselfe to obey what soever he should command him from God, whom, by a new in|fused Light, he perceived to have been his Guide through strange and wonder|full wayes to his Divine saving Truth.
Now all his doubts and obiections vanished, and he is resolved not only himself to become a servant of Christ, but to en|deavour to make his subiects also com|panions with him in that happy servi|tude. He perceives a compleat effect of all the promises formerly made by the invisible Messenger, and he condemnes his own slownes in corresponding to the Divine Goodnes.
3. But withall considering what inward sus|picions and commotions in mens minds a sudden publick change of Religion would probably cause, he with the advice and approbation of Saint Paulinus thought fitt to proceed with as much pru|dence and caution as might be, and by calling a Generall Assembly of his Estates, to endeavour to make the in|troducing of Christian Religion an Act of the Kingdom, as well as of the King. To this expedient Saint Paulinus the rather consented, because since the Queen and her Christian families coming, he saw a ge|nerall disesteem of their Idoll-Gods among the people.
4. The great Assembly being convened, the King in the first place signified to them the great and signal blessings he had re|ceived from God, and how desirous he was to expresse his gratitude to his Bene|factour. But since severall Nations accor|ding to their fancy appropriated to them|selves many peculiar Gods, he could not perswade himself there could be any more then One Omnipotent God. That therefore which he desired to propose to their se|rious considerations was, Which God they should devote themselves to. He added, That the vertuous innocent life of his Queen and her family had begot in his mind a greater esteem of the God whom she ado|red then any other, and whether they should adhere to him only, rejecting all their impotent Idols, he desired them faithfully to advise.
5. Such a discourse of the King was hearkned to attentively by the whole company present, neither did any one among them expresse any dislike of his proposal. Yea moreover a certain person among them named Coifius, who was the Cheif Pontife of the Pagan Superstition, freely confessed the vanity and impotency of the Idols which they had served, and added that a plurality of Gods contradicted human reason: concluding that One onely God was to be worshipped: But whether the Re|ligion professed by the Queen should be ad|mitted, that he desired them further to consider of. Assoon as he had ended his speech the whole Assembly unanimously cryed out, Let the Idol-Gods be taken away, and the Religion of Christ professed. But Coifius added moreover, That he thought fitt that the Queens Cheif Preist Paulinus should be admitted to give an account of the Christian Religion professed by him: which when they heard, they might more advisedly proceed.
6. Hereupon Saint Paulinus was sent for, and required to expound to them plainly and sincerely the Nature, qualities and condition of the Religion professed by himself and the Queen.This task he chear|fully undertook, and with a discourse full of prudence and zeale, began with an invective against the Idol-Superstition in practise among them, shewing that the Gods which they worshipped were at the best but mortall and sinfull men unable to help, and many of them meer fictions of mens brains, or wicked im|pious Spirits, which sought no other thing but the eternall perdition of their Worshippers. Then he demonstrated that the Creatour of Heaven and Earth could be but one onely God, the Principle and End of all things. Yet that, notwithstanding this Vnity of Nature, there was in the Deity such a fecundity of divine per|fections, that three Subsistences or Per|sons were to be distinguished, which three notwithstanding are but one God. That among these, the Second Person the Eternall Son of God out of infinite Love to Men lost in sin and misery, had merci|fully taken our Nature on him, and by his humiity had exalted us, by delive|ring a Law full of Sanctity and Perfection, which Law he confirmed with his own death, by which he made himself a Sacri|fice of attonement for our Sins: And after death by his own power restored himself to life, and in the sight of many hun|dreds of Witnesses ascended gloriously into heaven, thereby in his own person giving an assured proof that those who beleived in him and lived according to his Law, should by the same power be raised from death, to live for ever with him in hap|pines incomprehensible. That Christians therefore having such infinit obligations to Christ their Saviour, ioyfully professe, and are not ashamed to worship him who was willingly crucified, since by a death so full of torment and shame he made them for ever free from all shame and torments.
7. What hath been hitherto recoun|ted, is conformable to Saint Beda's re|lation: But the successe of Saint Paulinus his Discourse shall be declared in his own expression.Bed. l. After this, saith he, King Edwin having first consulted with the most eminent in wisedome among them, asked them singly one by one what opinion they had of this Doctrine and new manner of Worship, of which they had never heard before. Hereto Coifi the Prime Pontife presently answered:Doe thou, O King, consider how this Doctrin newly preached before us is to be esteemd: for mine own part I declare upon assured know|ledge and experience, that the Religion which we have professed hitherto has in it neither vertue nor proffit at all. There is not any of your Subiects has been more diligent and zealous in the service of our Gods, then my self: yet there are very many who have re|ceived far greater benefits and dignities from you then I have: Now if our Gods were of any power or gratitude they would

surely be most kind to them by whom they are best served.
It remains therefore, that if in your opinion the advices lately given us, how new soever, be indeed better and of more proffit, we should without delay admitt them.
8. To this discrett perswasion of Coifi another of the Kings Nobles assenting, added, The present life of man upon earth compared with the time following it, whose end is uncertain to us, seems to mee as if, Whilst your Ma|jesty are feasting with your Nobles in the winter time in a room warmed with a good fire, whilst abroad cold winds and tempests doe rage, a silly sparrow entring into the room at a window should presently fly out at another opposite to it: During that moment of time in which she passes through the roome, she feels not the bitternes of the winter: but immediat|ly she enters into the tempestuous cold, and flyes out of your sight. It is just so with this present life: it appears for a short moment: but what follows, or what went before it, we are utterly ignorant of. Therefore if this new Doctrine can give us any certainty what shall befall us after this short life, it deserves to be embraced.
9. These and such other Discourses passed among the Kings Counsellours and Ancients of the Assembly. To which Coifi again adjoynd, that he was desirous to heare Paulinus once more discourse to this point, of the God whom he preached.Which being done by the Kings com|mand, Coifi cryed out, It is not of late only that I have understood that the Gods worshipped by us are nothing worth: because the more stu|diously I sought for Truth in their service, the lesse I found. Now therefore I openly professe that in this mans discourse the Truth appears manifestly, and such a Truth as is able to conferr on us the Gifts of life and eternall hap|pines. Therefore my counsell is, O King, that without delay our Temples and Altars, from which we never received good, may be cursed and given to the fire.
10. In conclusion, not to be tedious, the King openly and plainly professed his assent to the Doctrin preached by Saint Paulinus, and re|nouncing his former Idolatry acknowledged that he received the Faith of Christ:And having demanded of the foresaid Pontife, to whom the care of proaning the Altars, Temples and ground about them dedicated to Superstition, should be committed: His Answer was, To none but my self: For who is more fitt to be a pattern for others in destroying those things which in the time of my folly I worshipped, then my self, now that by wisedom newly inspired by God I see their vanity?
And having said this, immediatly abjuring his Superstition, he desired the King that he might be furnished with arms and a horse: which having mounted, he hastned to destroy the Idols. In which manner he rode, to de|clare publickly his deserting his former profes|sion: For it was against their Superstitious Law for a Pontife to carry arms, or to ride except upon a mare. Thus being girt with a sword, and having a lance in his hand, mounted likewise on the Kings horse he went to the Idol-Temples.A. D. 627. When the common people saw this, they thought him out of his witts: but he went on however, and when he was come to the Temple he profaned it by ca|sting into it the lance which he held in his hands, shewing great joy for the knowledge of the true God which he had newly learnt. And having done this, he commanded his companions to destroy and burn to the ground the Temple and all buildings belonging to it.
11. The place where this Assembly was held and Idols destroyd is thus described by the same Saint Beda;Bed. l. 2. c. 13. Men shew the place where the Idol-temple formerly stood: It is not far from York, toward the East beyond the River Derwen, and it is at this day called Godmundigham, where the foresaid Pontife, by Divine Inspiration, pol|luted and destroyd the Heathen Altars which himself had consecrated. The memory there|of has likewise been conserved ever since Saint Beda's time, being still called God|munham, or the mansion of the false Hea|then Gods. Yet some Authours ascribe an higher Original thereto, as far as the ancient Brittish and Roman times: For they con|ceive that the town called Delgovitia (which in the Brittish tongue signifies an Idol) was anciently seated here.
12. Hereto accords this Observation of Camden in his perambulation through these parts,Camden in Brigant. I doe not doubt, saith he, but that in the times of the Brittains here was a famous Oracle, when Superstition, spread through all Nations, had more strongly possessed the minds of the ignorant inhabitants. But when Paulinus preached Christ to the Northumbers, Coyfi who was the Pontife of their Pagan Ceremonies, having embraced Christian Religion, was the first who by casting a lance into it, profaned the Temple, a Mansion of impiety there.


XV. CHAP.XV. CHA.

1.2. c. King Edwin Baptised: and great numbers of his Subjects.

1. KING Edwin though perfectly con|verted,A. D. 627. deferred hic Baptism to the year following which probably he did to the end he might have more compa|nions of his happines.Bed. l. 2. c. 14. Saint Beda thus relates it: King Edwin with all the Nobles of his kingdom, and great multitudes of the common people received the Faith and Laver of Regeneration (or Baptism) in the eleaventh year of his Raign, which was the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred twenty seaven, and about the hundred and eightieth after the coming of the English into Brittany. He was baptised at York, on the Holy Feast of the Paschal Solemnity, the day before the Ides of April, in the Church of Saint

Peter the Apostle, which, during the time of his instructing in the Faith, he com|manded to be suddenly erected for that pur|pose.
2. This Church for the quicker dispatch was at first built of wood: and though of a good capacity, yet it was too narrow to re|ceive all that flockd to Baptism: among which are named Offrid and Edfrid, the Kings Sons born to him by his Queen Quen|burga whilst he was in exile.
3. In the same Citty of York (saith Saint Beda) he assigned the Episcopall See to his Tea|cher and Prelat Saint Paulinus.Id. ib. And presently after his Baptism, upon the proposall of Saint Paulinus, he took order for the erecting a far larger and more magnificent Church in the same place: and in the midst of the New Church was inclosed the Oratory built before. The foun|dations therefore being prepared in a large square on all sides of the former Oratory, the Churches building went on with great dili|gence.
4. How wonderfully King Edwins good example drew the rest of his Subjects in other parts to seek instruction in Christian Faith, is thus described by the same Authour: It is reported that the peoples fervour to embrace the Christian Faith,Id. ib. and their desire to be ini|tiated by Baptism was so great, that on a certain time when Saint Paulinus attending the King and Queen came to a certain countrey Palace of theirs at a Town called Adregin (or rather, Adgefrin, now Yeverin, seated in the ut|most parts of Northumberland) he was obliged to stay there thirty six dayes, spending that whole time from morning till evening in Ca|techising and baptising such as came to him, in the River Glent, which flowd not far of This village was deserted in the times of the following Kings, who made their abode in ano|ther called Melmin, (but now Melfeild.) In the same countrey of the Bernicions, not far from that place there is a Town,Camden. in Northumb. saith Camden, called Halyston (or Holy Stone) where the report is, that in the Primitive Church of the Saxons Saint Paulinus baptised three thousand persons.
5. But a more plentifull harvest did Saint Paulinus reap in the other Province, of Deiri, containing Yorkshire, c. For thus Saint Beda prosecutes his Story:Bed. l 2. c. 14. In the Pro|vince of the Deiri where for the most part Saint Paulinus made his abode with the King, he baptised greater numbers in the River Swale which passes by a village called Cataract: For as yet in the infancy of that Church Oratoryes and Fonts could not so soon be built. Notwith|standing at Campodon, where the King had a Royal Mansion, he erected a Church, which afterward the Pagans by whom King Edwin was slain, sett on fire together with the town adjoining. Instead of which the following Kings built themselves another in the Territory cal|led Leidis (or Leeds.) Notwithstanding the Altar belonging to the said Church escaped the fire,A. D. 628. because it was of Stone: and it is to this day kept in the Monastery of the most Reverend Abbot Trumwulsi, which is seated in the forest Elmete. This place Campodon is the same which now is called Almond|bury, but the true name is Albonbury,Camden in Brigant. saith Camden, from a Church built there, which was consecrated to Saint Alban by Saint Pau|linus the Apostle of the Saxons. And to this day the black colour of the Stones remaining of its ruines doe testify its burning.
6. Among the persons baptised by Saint Paulinus we must not omitt three Royal Infants which Queen Ethelburga bore to King Edwin, concerning whom Saint Beda thus writes,Bed. ib. In the time following there were baptised by him other children of King Edwin by his Queen Edilburga. Their names were, Edilhime, Edilfrida a daughter, and another son called Wlfrea: Of which the two former were taken out of this life whilst they were in their white robes of Baptism, and were buried in the Church at Yorke.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1.2.3. Christianity received in Lincoln|shire.
4.5. Saint Iustus Arch-bishop of Can|terbury dying: Saint Honorius suc|ceed, him: who is consecrated by Saint Paulinus.

1 NEITHER was the piety of King Edwin and zeale of Saint Paulinus confined to the Provinces on the North-side of Humber:A. D. 628. but their effects passed over that River the year following into the Province of the Coritani, or Lincolnshire: For thus consonantly to Saint Beda, writes Florilegus: In the year of Grace six hundred twenty eight the Arch-bishop Paulinus con|verted to the Faith of Christ the Province of Lindissa,Florileg. hc. which lyes on the South-coast of the River Humber. And the first baptised by him was Blecca governour of the Prime Citty thereof (Lindocollina) with all his family. In which Citty he likewise built a Church.Bed. l. 2. c. 16. Which Church (saith Saint Beda) was of stone, of exquisite work: the Roof whereof either by ne|gligence or hostile violence is cast down, but the walls are yet standing: and every year in that place miraculous cures are wrought, to the great benefit of those who in devotion vi|sit it.
2. The same Saint Beda also testifies that the Pious King Edwin accompanied Saint Paulinus in this devout labour, and was present when he baptised a very great multitude in the River Trent.Id. Ibid. Concer|ning the Faith of the inhabitants of this

Province belonging to the kingdom of the Mer|cians, saith he, I was told by a certain Abbot and Preist calld Deda of the Monastery of Peur|tanei, a man of great integrity, that an ancient man had assured him that he himself was one of those who had been baptised by Saint Paulinus at Mid-day, King Edwin being present: and that a great multitude were also baptised with him in the River Trent neer a Citty calld in the En|glish tongue Tiovulsingacestir. The same man was likewise wnt to describe the shape of the said Holy Bishop, that he was a man of a tall stature, but some what bowing, that he had black hayre, a lean face, a nose somewhat rising, that he was very slender, and with his aspect begetting both veneration and terrour in the beholders. He had likWise attending him a Deacon calld Iames, Who was a man very illustrious in Christ and his Church, who lived to our very times.
3. We read likewise in Camden that in the Province of Nottingham at the same time a Church was built and consecrated to the Blessed Virgin at a town calld Southwell:amden. in Coritan. the which Church, as the fame goes, Was erected by Pau|linus first Arch-bishop of York, when he baptised the inhabitants of this countrey in the River Trent. He coniectures likewise very pro|bably that this Southwel was the same Citty of the Mercians which Saint Beda calls Tio|vulfingacestir.
4. The same year dyed S. Iustus Arch|bishop of Canterbury after he had administred that See three entire years.Harpif. saee. 7. c. 7. He was a Bishop, saith Harps-feild, of such integrity that the Name of Iustus may seem to have been given him rather to honour his vertues, then as belonging to his family. Which vertues were acknowledged to be in him, and wonderfully cherished by Pope Boniface the fourth (rather fifth) who likewise by his Letters exhorted him to consummate to the end his so excellent course of piety. He ended this mortall life the fourth day before the Ides of No|vember: and was buried in the Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, near to Saint Augu|stin.
5. His Successour in the Archbishoprick was Honorius, who indeed deserved all Honour for his piety and zeale in preaching the Gospell. When he was to be ordaind, he came to Saint Paulinus,Bed. l. 2. c 18 who mett him in the Citty of Lincoln, where he was consecrated the fifth Pre|lat of that See after Saint Augustin, saith Saint Beda. Hereby it appears that Saint Pau|linus either had before this received his Pall, or at least a power of ordaining the Prime Arch-bishop in case of vacancy, without the assistance of any other Bishops. Which Pri|viledge, considering the penury of Bishops at this time,Honor. P. Ep. was by Pope Honorius shortly after conferred on each of those two Sees, in these terms, That when either of the Arch-bishops should leave this world and return to his Creator, the surviver might ordain another in his place. This appears in the Letters of the said Pope to King Edwin and Saint Paulinus, written five years after this. Notwithstanding this Or|dination of Honorius to the Arch-bishoprick seems to have been conferred on him not the same year that Saint Iustus dyed,A. D. 629. but the year following: during which time probably such Faculties were sent from Rome.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. C.

1.2. c. Of Penda the cruell King of the Mercians: His war against the West-Saxons.

1. AFter such hopefull beginnings of the Gospell in the kingdom of the Mercians,A. D. 629. the progresse therof was inter|rupted by the violence of Penda, King of those Provinces, a Prince of an ambitious, turbulent and cruel nature, and one who professedly bore an irreconcileable enmity to Christian Religion. He is by some Au|thours esteemd the first King of the Mercians: For Cridae (descended in the tenth degree from Woden, the Idol-deity of the Saxons,) about the year of Grace five hundred eighty five invading the midland Provinces of this Island, layd the first foundations of that Kingdom. To him succedeed his Son Wibba, who by fire and sword enlarged the bounds thereof. After him raigned Ceorl (whose daughter Quenburga was the first wife of King Edwin:) and he dying, Penda, a Son likewise of Wibba, inherited the Crown, and more then all his Predecessours rendred the Name and power of the Mercians formida|ble to all their Neighbours. The former Prin|ces are said to have contented themselves whith the Title of Dukes: and Penda to have assumed that of King.Malmsbur l. 1. de Reg. c. 4.
2. He was according to William of Malms|bury, fifty years old when he ascended the Throne, which was in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred twenty six: a Prince illustrious for his descent, active and vigilant in war, and who by frequent excursions into his Neighbours Pro|vinces, had nourished and much encreased his boldnes: But withal he was even fanatically zea|lous in his Pagan superstition and impiety. There|fore as soon as he was possessed of the Kingdom, being impatient of rest, and not regarding how great a crime an uniust war was, he infested the neighbouring Citties, disturbed the bounds of his confining Saxon Princes, and filld all the Provinces about him with tumult and ter|rour.Flrileg. hc. Eth. lvverd. in bron. Huntingd. 
3. In the third year of his raign, in which hapned the Conversion of Blecca Gover|nour of Lincoln, he broke into open war against Kinegils and Quicelm Kings of the West-Saxons: and beleaguerd the Citty of Cirencester belonging to them. To raise which siege they gathred a great

army, and came to battell: Which was fought a whole day together with extreme fury, each army having abjured flight: so that only want of light sever'd them. The next morning, both sides being much weakned, by the intercession of persons of more mo|deration, they entred into conditions of peace, and retired.
4. Cirencester, where this battel was fought, is the same ancient Citty which Ptolomy calls Corinium, Antoninus, Cornovium, and the Brit|tains, Car-Cori: It is seated in the Province of the Dobuni (Glocestershire) at the River Corin,Camden in . now call'd Churn. The ruines of the an|cient walls containing a circuit of two miles, shew it to have been a large Citty. It belonged to the West-Saxons: for we read how Penda King of the Mercians besieging it with a numerous army, was discomfited by Kinegils the West-Saxon King. Yet it came afterward into the power of the Mercians, and so remained till the English Monarchy.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2. King Edwins Tufa, or Ensign of the Crosse.
4. Conwal King of the Scotts: his devout veneration of the Crosse.
5. Custom of subscribing Charters with the Crosse: now began.

A. D. 629. Bed. l. 2. c. 16.1. THVS tumults and bloodshed raged in the Province of the Pagan Saxons, Whereas after receiving of the Gospell saith S. Beda, there followd so great peace through all the parts of Brittany to which the Empire of Edwin extended, that according to the vulgar saying, If a woman alone with her new-born in|fant should travel through the whole Island from Sea to Sea, she might doe it without the least danger. And such solicitude the King shewd to procure the commodity of his Subjects, that in most places where he saw any fresh spring rising near the High-ways, he would for the refresh|ment of travellours cause brasen vessells with pro|visions, (caucos) to be sett upon posts, which no man would presume to mak use of beyond neces|sity, such was the greatnes either of their fear or love to him. The Majesty likewise and splendour in which he lived was so great, that whither so ever he went Ensigns were caried before him, and this not in war-time onely, but likewise in peace. Moreover in his progresse both through Citties and countrey that kind of Ensign which the Ro|mans called Tufa, and the English Tuf, was born on high before him.
2. This Ensign, according to Lipsius was a Ball or Globe, which Augustus used as a Mark of Monarchicall Soverainty. But Christian Em|perours and Kings were accustomed to fix a golden Crosse upon the said Ball, as we see in many of their ancient Coynes: Particu|larly in those of the Emperour Heraclius and his Son, who the same year that King Edwin was baptised recovered the Holy Crosse which Cosroes the Persian King had taken from Ie|rusalem: after which time the Veneration of Princes thereto much encreased.
3. Particularly of King Edwin we read that he bore with him a Crosse of Gold, which his Queen Ethelberga after his death caried with her into Kent. Neither can his reverence to that Sacred Ensign of our Salvation be doub|ted of,Camden in Yorkshire. since his Master and Prelat S. Pauli|nus caused many Crosses to be erected through the Kingdom. One of which Camden testifies to have been lately extant at Deus|borough (Duisburgum) a town in York-shire on the river Calder, with this Inscription, Paulinus preached and celebrated (Masse) here.
4. Neither can this veneration of the Crosse be imputed to these Roman Missioners, as if they had first introduced it into this Island, for besides many Examples already mentioned, our Historian Hollinshead will inform us that Conwall King of the Scotts in the year of Grace five hundred sixty nine,Hollingsh. in Scotland. f. 1, 6. was ca|ried with such devotion to the Holy Crosse, that whither soever he went, he made it be born be|fore him: and both when he mounted on hors|back and descended, he prostrated himself be|fore it, and reverently kissed it, as his attendants likewise did (according to the fore mention'd example of S. Alban.) That Crosse was of Silver, to which was fixed the Image of Christ crucified: and this Inscription was upon it, The glory of Christians. He commanded likewise a Woodden Crosse to be sett upon the tops of Churches, over the gates of Castles, Citties and most eminent Towers.
5. From the same respect proceeded the practise of subscribing Charters and other publick Writings with golden Crosses and other like sacred marks,Ingulf. f. which continued in use, saith Ingulus, to the dayes of S. Edward the Confessour. And Selden adds, That it was not rashly or without cause that Writings and Instruments for con|veying Lands, c. were generally signed with such sacred Marks: since Supreme Princes did usually carry round Balls with Crosses (Stauropho|ros globulos) as testimonies of their Soverainty. For so Suidas relates of the Emperour Iustinian, that he caried in his left hand a globe with a Crosse for a sign that by his Faith in the Crosse he became Lord of the Earth. The like inten|tion, no doubt, had King Edwin in carying his Tufa before him, signifying that he ascri|bed to the Vertue of the Holy Crosse, and his Faith in Christ crucified, all the Empire which he possessed.



A. D. 633
XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. A Controversy about Easter
3.4. c. An Irish Synod determining the said Controversy. Of S. Lesrean, S. Munnu, c.

A. D. 630.1. WHilst all things were so peaceable in King Edwins Dominions, com|motions were renewed among the Brittains
and Scotts touching the celebration of Easter. Their practise discordant from the whole Church S. Beda calls the errour of the Quartode|cimani:Bed. de sex. aeaib. ad A.M. 4591.
which is not to be understood strict|ly, for they alwayes observ'd it on a Sunday: But their account was such that when the fourteenth day of the Moon fell upon a Sun|day
they kept the Paschall Solemnity on that day, as the Iews and Quartodecimani did: whereas in that case according to the Decree
of the Synod of Nica,Id. ib. they ought to deferr it till the Sunday following. He adds, That Pope Hnorius by an Epistle reproved their pra|ctise, and Pope Iohn his next Successour after Se|verinus, as soon as he was elected to the Pontificat wrote to them likewise upon the same subiect, and touching the Pelagian Heresy, which was re|vived among them.
2. In like manner Ado of Vienna in his Chronicle testifies that at this time among the Scots a very great Errour arose touching the So|lemnity of Easter.Ado Vienn. Chron. aetai 6. He calls it (errorem maxi|mum) a very great Errour, both because it was esteemed a kind of Sacrilege to conform with the Iews in Christian solemnities; and likewise because all the Mysteries and Feasts of our Lord almost depended on this of Easter, so that upon a wrong solemniza|tion of it there followed a great distra|ction
among Christians in the Worship of God.
3. The occasion of mentioning this by the said Authours, was because at this time a great Synod was convok'd in Ireland about this controversy, which had been agitated formerly by S. Columba and his Disciples. For a certain Irish Abbot nam'd Lasrean earnestly defended the Roman custome, wheras S. Munnu (otherwise calld Fintan or Finten) as earnestly opposed it.Vsser. in Primord. f. 959. In which Saints life
(saith B. Vsher) we find these particulars rela|ted thouching this Synod. On a certain time there was a great Council of the people of Ireland assembled in the White feild: among whom there arose a great contention about the order of obser|ving Easter. For Lasrean Abbot of the Monastery of Leighlenne, under whom lived fifteen hundred Monks, defended the New order which came from Rome. But others defended their old practise. Now Saint Munnu came not presently to this Council therefore all the rest expected him. The said Saint was for the Old custom. Then Subne Son of Domnail,A. D. 619. and Duke of the Region Hua|maircha sayd, Why doe you expect so long this filthy Leper?But Abbot Lasrean answerd him, O Duke, doe not speak ill of Saint Munnu, for though he be absent in body, yet in Spirit he is present here, and no doubt wheresoever he is he hears what thou hast said, and our Lord will avenge upon thee the injury of his servant.
Now the same day before even Saint Munnu came to the Council: and the company went went to meet him. And when Saint Lasrean and Saint Munnu saluted one another, Duke Subne was likewise present, and asked Saint Munnu his benediction.To whom the Man of God said, Why dost thou ask the benediction of a Leper? I tell thee for certain that when thou spokest so vily of mee, our Lord himself blu|shed at the right hand of his Father: For I am a true member of Christ, who is my head: now the head is sensible of every in|jury done to any member. Wherefore before this Month be ended some of thy kinred shall kill thee, and cut off thy head: and cast it into the River Berow, which shall never appear more.
And so indeed it came to passe: for the same Month his Brothers Son killed him near the River Blathach, and his head was cast into the River, according to the Prophecy of the Man of God.
4. After these words, S. Munnu said to Ab|bot Lasrean before the people:It is time the Co|uncil were ended, that every one may return to his own home. We have a contention about the Order of the Paschal Solemnity: let us dispatch it in a word, and pronounce Sentence in the Name of our Lord. I here offer thee, O Lasrean, the choice of these three things: Let two Books, one of the old Order, and one of the New be cast into the fire, and we shall see which of them shall escape burning. Or let one of thy Monks and another of mine be shutt up together in a house, and fire sett to it; we shall then see which of them shall be delivered. Or let us goe to the grave of the Monk Iustus lately dead, and restore him to life: and he shall tell us which of the two practises is best, and let that be observed this year
5. After these proposals of S. Manna, S. Las|rean said,We will not contend with thee, being assured that so great are the merits of thy la|bours and Sanctity, that if thou shouldst com|mand that Mountain Marga to come into this White feild, or this White feild to remove to that Mountain Marga, God would not delay to doe it for thee.
Now they were in the White feild at that time, over which the Mountain Marga hangs. After this, the people consenting to these Saints, returned to their houses. Or (as it is more fully expressed in another Copy) after they all had professed their consent to the Holy man Munnu, they returned home joyfull.
6. Which consent, it is to be feared was to the Old erroneous Order:Id. Ib. although Cum|mian in his Epistle to the Abbot Segeni affirms that in the said Council the Bishops decreed that the year following the Paschal

solemnity should be celebrated together with the Vniversall Church.A. D. 632. But it appears from Bishop Vshers observation that they kept Easter differently from the Roman practise: for he addes, That year in which the Council was as|sembled seems to have been the six hundred and thirtieth according to the Christian account, which year the Irish, following the Cycle of eighty four years, kept Easter day being Sunday on the first of April, which was an entire week before the time prescribed in the Alexandrine Cycle of Nineteen years (Enneadecateride) received by the Romans: Whereas the year following, there interceded a full Month between the two ac|counts: for the Irish kept Easter on the one and twentieth of April, and the Romans on the four and twentieth of March.
A. D. 631.7 Notwithstanding the summary deciding of this Controversy in the foresaid Irish Sy|nod, called the Synod of Leny from the place where it was kept, to which the White feild belonged, and in which the Arch-bishop of Imelac presided: yet many there were unsatisfied, being desirous to explore the Order observed at Rome: For the ore named Cummian in his Epistle to the said Abbot Se|geni writes thus:Ap. Vsser. in Syllge Epist. E. bern. 11. f. 637. We sent to Rome certain per|sons of whose prudence and humility we had ex|perience, as Children to their Mother: Who by the Divine Will had a prosperous voyage thither, and three years after returned to us. And there according as they had heard, they saw all things, to be: yea they were now more as|sured having seen, then they were before upon report. There they observed the Paschall So|lemnity in the Church of Saint Peter, in the company of a Grecian, converted Iew, a Scythian and Aegyptian, all which were their companions in the same odging: Which Pas|chall Solemnity was a whole month distant from ours. The same men before the Feast protested to us, that upon their knowledge Easter was celebrated through the whole world the same day it was at Rome.
8. The same Bishop Vsher moreover te|stifies that the foresaid Abbot Lasrean with fifty others went to Rome this year a|bout the same affair,Vsser. in Id. Chronolog. hc. immediatly after the Synod of Lechen (or Leny:) where he was ordaind Bishop by the Pope, and moreo|ver constituted his Legat in Ireland: Where after nine years he dyed. So that probably he and his companions were the same men|tioned in the Letter of Cummian.


XX. CHAP.A. D. 633.
XX. CH.

1. Erpenwald King of the East-angles con|verted: and for that made a Martyr.
2.3. c Letters of Pope Honorius con|cerning the Paschall Solemnity, c.

1. ANother proof of the piety and zeale of King Edwin to propagate the Faith or Christ beyond the limits of his own kingdom,A. D. 632. was given by him in the year of Grace six hundred thirty two,Bed. l. 2. c. in which he dealt effectually with Erpenwald the Son of Red|wald King of the East-Angles to renounce vain, impure Idols, and not only himself to receive the Faith and Sacraments of Christ, but to induce his Subjects to doe the like. Neither did his zeale want a good effect, for Erpenwald, saith William of Malmsbury, embraced pue incorupt Christianity.Malmsb. de Reg l. 1. c. 5. But the propagating the same right Faith among his Subjects was hindred by his death: for not long after his profession of Christianity, saith S. Beda, he was slain by a certain Pagan named Ricbert:Bed. ib. and thence it came that that Province continued three years longer in Heathenish Errour. He is deservedly stiled a Martyr, because it was for his Religion, and his care to introduce it into his kingdom that he was slain by the procurement of that great Enemy of Christ, Penda King of the Mercians, as Huntingdon affirms.
2. This year according to Baronius,Huntingd. l. Baron. A. D 633. King Edwin sent Messengers to Rome, desiring Pope Honorius to send Palls both to S. Paulinus Arch-bishop of York, and to Honorius Arch-bishop of Canterbury To which request the Pope cndescen|ding, returned an Answer by letters the King, and with them sent the two Palls.
3 These arrived in Brittany the year follo|wing. Now in his Letters to King Edwin calld by S. Beda,A. D. 633. Bed. l. 2. c. 17. exhortatory Letters (the Copy of which is recorded by him) after ongratula|ting with him for his piety and zeal, he with a fatherly charity incites him to persist continual|ly and advance in the Faith of that saving truth which he had embraced. Adding withall, that at his request he had sent two Palls for the two Metropolitans, Honorius and Paulinus, with a Faculty enabling each of them, by his authority to subrogate another when either of them should depart this life. This priviledge he granted as well out of his affection to the King, as in consi|deration of the great distance between Rome and Brittany.
4. At the same time likewise Pope Honorius wrote letters to Honorius the new Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury,Ib. c. 18. in which, saith S Beda, he re|newd the Decree mentioned in the former letter, That when the Arch-bishop of Canterbury or York should dye, he who remaind alve, being of the same degree, should have power to ordain another in the place of him who was dead: that it might not be necessary to weary themselves with

sending to Rome through so far extended spaces of land and Sea for the ordaining an Arch-bi|shop. He further signified that he had sent him a Pall, and another to S. Paulinus for the same purpose. The Exemplar of this Letter is like|wise extant in S. Beda.
5. Moreover the same year Pope Honorius wrote to the Scotts touching their Errour about Easter:Id. c. 9. for thus writes the same Au|thour: The same Pope likewise directed Let|ters to the Nation of the Scotts having found that they erred in the observation of the Paschal solemnity: Whom he earnestly exhorted not to prefer their own reason, being inconsiderable for their paucity, and living in the utmost bounds of the world, before all other Chur|ches both ancient and Modern through the whole world, and consequently that they would not celebrate another different Ea|ster, contrary to the Paschall computations and Synodal Decrees of the Vneversal Church.
Vsser. in Pri|mor. l f 9346 The successe of which Letters is thus declared by B. Vsher, That these admonitions were not unproffitable I partly collect from Beda, who relates how the Scotts dwelling in the Sou|thern parts of Ireland by the advice given them from the Bishop of the Apostolick See were taught to observe Easter after the Canonical Rite; and partly from Cummian who lived at the same time, and in his Epistle to Segeni Abbot of the Monastery of Hye writes thus tou|ching the first admitting in Ireland the great Cycle of the Alexandrins consisting of five hun|dred thirty two years, composed of the multi|plication of nineteen (or the Cycle of the Sun) into eight and twenty (the Cycle of the Moon) The first year, saith he, in which the Cycle of five hundred thirty two years was received by our countrey-men. I my self received it not, but held my peace, neither daring to discom|mend, nor commend it But after a year was pas|sed, I consulted the Successour of our Holy Fathers Albeus Bishop, Queran of Cloen, Brendin, Nessan and Lugid, who being assembled in the feild of Lena made a Decree, that the year following Easter should be celebrated the same time with the Church Vniversal.
7. By this narration of Cummian it seems that in the Synod of Lena two years since, at least the more sound and considerable part of the Irish Ecclesiasticks determined to con|form to the generall practise of the Church: but that those inhabiting the Northern and more rude parts continued refractary. Which the Abbot Lasrean signifying to the Pope, occasioned the writing of these Letters in which the Church of Ireland in generall is not taxed, but onely some part of it, for the Popes expression related by S. Beda is this,Ap. Bed. l 2. c. 19. I am informed that certain persons of your Pro|vince in opposition to the Orthodox Faith, doe en|deavour to renew an Heresy already antiquated, c. It was so of old in Asia, for not that whole Province even of Lesser Asia, but some particular Churches in it obstinatly maintained the Errour of the Quarto decimani.


XXI. CHAP.XXI. CH.

1.2. c. King Edwin slain: and acknow|ledged a Martyr, c.
8. His Queen Ethelburga returned into Kent.

1. WHilst these contentions were agi|tated among the Scotts,A. D. 63. who desi|red to draw the Brittains into the same fa|ction; the English-Saxon Churches flourished wonderfully, Christian Faith having changed their manners, heretofore extremely bar|barous, but now exemplary to the whole world for their Modesty, Iustice and Cha|rity, especially in the Kingdom of the Nor|thumbers, In which, saith William of Malms|bury, there were no domestick theeves,Malmsbur. no trea|cherous under-miners of conjugal chastity, no fraudulent usurpers of other mens Estates: which happines is to be attributed to King Edwins care. For this large extended Empire was limited by Iustice and peace, which there mutually kissed each other. And this felicity had been accom|plished, but that an immature death unfortunatly snatchd him from his countrey. His death in|deed which hapned this year, was most de|plorable to his countrey, but most happy to himself: For the cheif blessing promised him by the forementioned Divine Oracle, remaind alone not yet accomplished, which was after many temporal Crowns, one that was eternal. The manner how he attaind it, is now to be declared.
2. We have before shewd how Cadwan Prince of Northwales for his valour and good conduct against Ethelfrid King of the Nor|thumbers was chosen King of all the Brit|tains. After his death his Son succeeded in the same power called by Writers severally, Cadwallin, Cedwalla, and by Saint Beda, Car|duella, but the Brittains call him Caswallo. Now there hapned a Controversy between him and King Edwin,Florilg l. . saith Florilegus, which could not be decided without war. Whereupon they came to a battell, in which Cadwallin was putt to flight, and lost many thousands of his Soldiers. King Edwin therefore having obtaind the Vi|ctory, marchd with his Army into the Provinces of the Brittains, burning their Citties, destroying the inhabitants, till at last he brought under his Dominion their three kingdoms of Demetia, Ve|nedotia and Menevia.
3. Cadwallin seing his power thus broken, enters into a league with the potent King of the Mercians, Penda, by which both of them conspired to the destruction of King Edwin: Cadwallin was a Christian, and Penda a violent Pagan, yet the Christian Prince was in his manners and cruelty far more bar|barous and cruel then the Pagan. Wherefore

ioyning all their forces together, they in|vaded King Edwins Territories.
4. The time and successe of this war is thus describ'd by S. Beda: King Edwin, saith he,Bed. l. 2. c. 10. had now raignd seaventeen years most glo|riously over the English and Brittains: of which he spent six years in the service and Spirituall warfare of Christ. Then did Carduella King of the Brittains rebell against him, and was assisted with the auxiliary forces of Penda the potent Prince of the Mercians, who governed that King|dom with variable fortune the space of two and twenty years. They came at length to a furious combat in a place calld Hethfeild, in which King Edwin was slain on the fourth day before the Ides of October, and the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred thirty three, in the forty eighth year of his age: and his whole army was either slain, or dispersed.
5. In the same battell was also slain King Edwins son Offrid, a little before his Father. And because this war was managed by him in defence of Gods Church and Christian Faith against its barbarous enemies, our Ance|stors, have allways esteemd Kind Edwin a Saint and Martyr: so that his name deservedly enioys a place in our Martyrologe on the fourth of December:Martyrol. Anglis 4. Decemb. Where likewise it is sayd that a Church was anciently consecra|ted to him in London, and another in Somer|setshire at a Town calld Brewe. His head, saith S. Beda,Bed. l. 2. c. 10. was brought to York, and buried in the Church of S. Peter the Apostle, begun by himself, but finished by his Successour Oswald. It was layd in the Porch of S Gregory Pope, by the preaching of whose Disciples he had received the Word of life.
6. What followd the death of this Blessed King is thus further related by the same Au|thour: At that time there was made a most greivous slaughter in the Church and Nation of the Northumbers,Id. ib. inasmuch as one of the Leaders was a Pagan, and the other, because in his na|ture barbarous, more cruel then a Pagan. For Penda with his whole Nation was devoted wholly to Idols, and ignorant of Christianity. But Car|duella (or Cedwalla) though in name and outward profession he was a Christian, notwithstanding in his mind and manners he was so very barbarous, that be spared neither sex nor age, but like a ra|ging wild beast, with cruel torments killd all he could meet with. A long time he ranged through the countrey, every where exercising his savage cruelty, determining to root out of the land the whole Saxon race. Neither had he any regard to Christian Religion newly planted among them: For such was, and to this day continues the malice of the Brittains, that they sett at nought the Chri|stianity of the English, with whom they will no more communicate, then with Pagans.
7. To this horrible slaughter may be added the most iniust murder of King Edwins se|cond son Edfrid born to him by his former Queen Quenburga, and baptised by S. Paulinus: Which Edfrid,Id. saith S. Beda, being thereto compelld by necessity, fled to Penda King of the Mercians, by whom he was afterward slain contrary to his promise confirmd by an Oath, during the raign of Oswald.
8. What became of the pious Queen Ethel|burga, the same S. Beda thus declares:Id. The affairs of the Northumbers being brought to this miserable state (saith he,) immediatly after this slaughter S. Paulinus seing there was no security but in flight, took with him the Queen Ethelbur|ga whom he had at first conducted thither, and fled with her into Kent, where he was honourably re|ceived by the Arch-bishop Honorius and King Eadbald. He came thither under the guard of Bassus a most valiant soldier of King Edwins; and with the Queen there was her daughter Heanfled and her son Vulcfrea, together with Iffi the son of Offrid, both whom the afterward sent into France, recommending them to the protection of King Dagobert, out of the fear she had of Edbold and Oswald Kings of the Northumbers. And there both those infants dying, were buried with such honour as became their Royal birth and such inno|cent lambs of Christ. The Queen likewise caried with her great store of King Edwins most precious jewells and Vessells, and among the rest a great Crosse of gold, and a golden Chalice consecrated for the ministery of the Altar: Both which have to this day been kept in the Church of Canter|bury.


XXII. CHAP.XXII. CH.

1.2. S. Paulin administers the Church of Rochester.
3. He repaires the Old Church of Glaston|bury.
4 5 His Death: and Translation.
6 7. c. Queen Ethelburga retires into a Monastery: Her happy death.

1. SAint Paulinus having been thus in duty obliged to conduct his special charge, the Queen, in safety to her own Countrey left not for all that his flock deprived of a good Pastor:Bed. l. i. c. . . For according to S. Beda's nar+ration, he recommended the care of the Church of York to Iames his Deacon (of whom we have already made mention) a holy man, and very observant of Ecclesiastical Order. He remaind in the said Church a long time, and by teaching and baptising recoverd from the Devills power very many soules. There is a village neer Cataract, where he most usually made his abode, that beares his name to this day. He was very skilfull in Church Musick, and therfore when peace was afterward restord, and the number of Christians augmented, he became the Master of Ecclesiasticall Singing, according to the custom of Rome and Canterbury: and in the end full of days and me|rits he followd the way of his fathers.
2. In the mean time S. Paulinus was not without employment in Kent. The Church of

Rochester, saith S. Beda, being vacant, because Romanus who had been Prelat therof had been drownd in passing the Sea towards Rome, whither he was sent by S. Iustus Arch-bishop to consult with Pope Honorius about Ecclesiasticall affairs. S. Paulinus therefore at the invitation of the Arch-bishop Honorius and King Badbald undertook the charge of it: till in his due time he went to heaven there to reap the fruits of his glorious labours. And at his death, he left in the said Church the Pall which he had received from the Pope.
Antiquit. Glaston. f. 44.3. We read in the Antiquities of Glaston|bury, That S. Paulinus, who had been Arch-bishop of York, but then was Bishop of Rochester, the third from S. Iustus who had been consecrated by S. Augustin, came to Glastonbury, where he abode a long time, and made the walls of the old Church to be built from the top to the bottom of timber (wheras anciently they were made of wattles,) and to be coverd with lead. And thus that Holy Oratory remaind in the same plight till the time that the Church was burnt (in the days of King Henry the first.) Such care had that holy Bishop, that without preiudicing the Sanctity of that place, an addition should be made to its beauty. We find mention of this Church thus repaird by S. Paulinus in the Charters granted to it by King Inas in the year of Grace seaven hundred and four,Ap. Malms|bur de Reg. l. 2. c. 11. and of King Canu|us above three hundred years after Inas: both which Charters are said to have been confirmd and signd in the same woodden Church.
4. Concerning S. Paulinus nothing occurrs in our Ecclesiasticall Records till his death which hapned in the year of Grace six hun|dred forty four, the sixth day before the Ides of October, saith S. Beda, after he had held the Bishoprick of Rochester nineteen years and one and twenty days.Bed. l. 3. c. He was buried in the Secretary of S. Andrew the Apostle, which King Ethelbert built from the foundations in the Citty of Ro|chester.
5. The opinion of his Sanctity was great after his death, and the memory of it re|maind in that Church many ages: for thus writes the Authour of his Life:Ap. Capgrav. in vit. S. Paulin. When Gun|dulph was Bishop of Rochester, Lanfranc the Arch-bishop pluck'd quite down the Church of S. An|drew, and built a new one; at which time he took out of the ground the bones of S. Paulinus, and putt them honourably in a boxe. Now among others then present there was a certain Matron greivously afflicted with an infirmity of body, but much more burdned with a certain crime. She coming to the Sepulcher of S. Paulinus, there with great devotion offred her vow to God, That if by the merits of S. Paulinus she might be freed from her disease, she would never more committ that sin, in which she then lived: and presently she was restord to health. This Translation was on the fourth day before the Ides of Ianuary, on which day his Anniversary solemnity was observ'd in the Church of Rochester. His Me|mory is celebrated both in the English and Roman Martyrologes on the tenth of October.Martyrol. Angl. 10. Oct. Bed. l. 3 c.
In his place Honorius the Arch-bishop of Canter|bury ordaind Ithamar,A. D. 634. descended from a family which was native of Kent, but in learning and piety equal to his Predecessours.
6. As for the Widdow-Queen Ethelburga, after she had dispos'd of her Children, the love to whom was the only worldly affe|ction remaining in her heart, she determind to shutt it entirely to temporall things, and to employ in a Religious solitude all her thoughts and desires upon heaven and God alone. Which intention of hers being known to her Brother King Eadbald, he piously assited her vow, and assign'd her a place re+mov'd from the noise of the Court, where she might with much commodity execute her Religious design, and moreover bestowd on her a village calld Liming, where she built a Monastery, and for ought appears was the first Widow among the Saxons which with a Religious veyle (receiv'd from S. Paulinus) consecrated her self to serve our Lord.Antiquit. Britan. in . B. Parker most unskilfully calls her a veyld Vir|gin: thinking perhaps that none but Virgins might take a Religious Veyle: Whereas S. Hie|rome expressly says,Hern Ep. 43 that both Virgins and Widows, who in scorn of the world had vowd them|selves to God, did offer their hayr to be cutt off by the Mothers of the Monasteries, and afterward went not, in contradiction to the Apostles ordinan|ce, with their heads uncoverd, but bound and veyld.
7. Which Sacred veyl was not such an one as woemen ordinarily wear, of a light trans|parent stuff: but made of a course weal, and o thick that mens sights could not peirce it. True, entire and pure Virginal Chastity, saith Tertullian,Tertull de v. land. Virg. c. 14. fears nothing so much as its own self It will not suffer the eyes even of women. It flyes to the veyl on the head as to a helmet, yea as to a sheild to protect its onely good from the darts of Tetations and scandals, against suspicions and whispers. And concerning this Veyl S. Am|brose has this expression,Ambros cont.  Let men lift up the eyes of their minds and bodyes, and consider this congregation of modesty, this assembly of integri|ty, this Council of Virginity: here are no curious ribbons to adorn the head, but an ignoble veyl, yet ennbled with the exercise of chastity: here all arts to set forth beauty are abandoned.
8. This excursion may be pardond, being occasiond by this first example in our Saxon Story. But this was an example which pre|sently after was imitated by thousands: Al|most every year we shall read of Virgins hastning out of the world to live with Christ, of Monasteries erected, enclosures establish'd, and God most purely and devoutly served: All which continued almost a thousand years in the esteem and gratulation of all Christians, till an Apostate Friar solicited a Professed Virgin for his lust to break her vow of cha|stity, and by that example the habitations of Piety became exposed to the rapines and lusts of a Sacrilegious generation.
9. This Religious Widow after that by Po|verty, chastity and subiection of her Will

she had ascended to the Perfection of Di|vine Love,A. D. 633. ended at last her Mortality. Her Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the tenth of September, where she is stiled a Mother of Many Virgins and Widows,Martyrol. Angl. 10. Septemb. because many such by her example undertook the Sacred Institut of a Religious Profession.


XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests and Martyrdom of S. Livinus.

1. ABout this time hapned the Martyrdom of S. Livinus, who though not born in Brittany, may yet challenge a place in this History.Fast. B. lg. The Summary of his Life is thus described by Aubert Miraeus: Livinus was born of a noble race in Scotland (he means, Ireland.) His Teachers were first a worthy Preist called Benignus, afterward the Great S. Augu|stin first Bishop of England, by whom also he was baptised The same Holy Bishop exalted him like|wise to the Order of Preisthood: in the dis|charge of which Office he behaved himself so worthily that not long after the Scotts (or Irish) chose him for their Arch-bishop But he after a while, leaving his Vicar in Scotland a man of eminent Sanctity, called Silvanus, who was his Arch-deacon, being moved with the zeale of propagating the Gospell in other Countreys, took, with him three of his Disciples, Folian, Helias and Kilian, sailed into Flanders, and entring into a Monastery at Gant lately built by the Holy Bishop S. Amand, he was there kindly enter|tained by the Abbot Floribert, and his Brethren. Three years before that S. Bavo had been there buried at whose monument great miracles were wrought: And for this reason S. Livinus stayd there thirty days, celebrating Masse continually upon his Sepulcher.
2. After this departing from thence to exe|cute the Office of preaching, he by his instru|ctions, example and Miracles converted a world of Infidels to the Faith of Christ. But certain im|pious persons, who hated our Lord and all piety, perceiving such great multitudes brought by the Holy Bishop to a Religious life, and a contempt of their former Vices and Errours, persecuted him wonderfully. Neither did they desist from their malice, till having seised upon him, they cut out his tongue, which they cast to be devou|red by doggs: Which notwithstanding was mira|culously restored to him. Yet not mollified with this, they at last, having wounded him grei|vously in severall places, murdred him at Escha a village in Flanders, in the year of Grace six hundred thirty three, or as some reckon, the year following.
3. This S. Livinus is to be distinguished from another (almost) of the same name, called Levinus, or Lebvinus, a companion of S. Willebrord and S. Suibert: who likewise finished his Life by Martyrdom neer Gant, and is stiled the Apostle of Daventre. But he was a Saxon, as we shall declare toward the end of this Century. Whereas S. Livinus of whom we now treat, was an Irishman.Marty. Gal.  Anglic. 12. Decemb.
His Memory is celebrated in the English and Gallican Martyrologes, on the twelfth of De|cember.





THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. Osric and Eanfrid succeed King Edwin: Their Apostacy from Christia|nity.
6. Oswald succeeds his Brother Eanfrid.
7.8. Letters of Pope Honorius.

1. _RETVRNING to the King|dom of the Northumbers,A. D. 634. we shal see nothing but spectacles of misery, a Nation desolated, a Church torn in peices, and nothing but hor|rour and confusion. Yet in a short time all these tempests will be asswaged, and so great a peace and order will return both to the Kingdom and Church by another pious King, that even the losse of King Edwin will be fully recompenced. But first let us view the present calamities, thus sett down by S. Beda.
2. After that King Edwin was slain in bat|tell (saith he) Osric the Son of his Vncle Elfric, who by the preaching of S. Paulinus had been im|bued with the Sacraments of our Faih,Bed. l. 32. c. 2. took upon him the Kingdom of the Deiri. As for the King|dom of the Bernicians (for anciently the Nation of the Northumbers was divided into these two Provinces) that was possessed by Eanfrid the Son of Edilfrid, born in the same Province. Now we have already declared that during the whole course of King Edwins raign the Sons of his Pre|decessour Edilfrid attended by great numbers of the Nobility, retired themselves among the Scots and Picts, where they lived in banishment. And they were instructed in Christian Religion professed by the Scots, and purified by the Grace of Baptisme.
3. Assoon therefore as their Enemy King Edwin was dead, they were permitted to return into their countrey, and there the elder of them, Osric became King of the Province of the Deiri, and the Second Eanfrid, of the Bernicians. But both of them were no sooner invested with the marks of a temporall Kingdom, but they renounced the Sacraments and badges of the Heavenly king|dom, with which they had been initiated, and to their eternall ruine polluted themselves with the filth of their former Idolatry.
4. But divine iudgment quickly overtook them both: for they were slain in a short time by the impious hand of Cedwalla King of the Brit|tains, whom Almighty God made the instru|ment of his iust severity. For the elder of them Osric having rashly besieged the said King in a certain town the summer following, the King made an unexpected furious sally, and in a mo|ment destroyd both him and his whole army. After which Cedwalla possessed the whole king|dom of the Northumbers, not as a victorious King, but a furious Tyrant, for he tore it in peices with the tragicall slaughters committed by him. At

length after about a year was passed the other Prince Eanfrid accompanied only with twelve soldiers unadvisedly coming to him to demand conditions of peace,A. D. 634. was in like manner slain by him.
5. This was an unhappy year, and the me|mory of it remains still in execration with all good men, as well for the Apostacy of these two Saxon Kings, who had abjured the Sacraments of their Faith, as for the barbarous Tyranny of the Brittish King. And therefore by a generall con|sent in the computation of the times and succes|sion of our Kings, the memory of these two perfi|dious Princes was abolished, and this year assigned to the raign of the pious King Oswald who suc|ceeded them.
6. This Oswald brother to Eanfrid, was the son of Ethelfrid, and Nephew to the Holy King Edwin by his sister Acca: so that his Title to the Kingdom of the Northumbers was sufficiently valid. He after his Fathers death, retired also among the Scots, where under|standing the vanity of Idols, he embraced the Christian Faith. Seaventeen years he con|tinued in banishment: But now hearing the desolation of his countrey, the ruine of Christianity and death of his Brother, armed with zeal and charity he took the courage, though attended with very unconsiderable forces, to hasten to the rescew of his king|dom, and the Church of God in it, almost be|come in visible. With what successe this at|tempt was undertrken, S. Beda will inform us the year following.
7. It seems by the Letter of Pope Honorius to Honorius Arch-bishop of Canterbury dated this year,Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 1 f. 208. and recorded only by William of Malmsbury, that the miseries of the Nor|thumbrian Church and Kingdom were come to his knowledge: for therin he comforts and encourages the same Arch-bishop not to faint in the midst of so many and grei|vous calamities, but to fix his trust in the promises of God to his Church, and those who sustain the care of it. In the same letter he likewise confirms the authority and Pri|macy of the Church of Canterbury over all the Churches of Brittany, c. This Epistle found in the Archives of Canterbury was by S. Lanfranc directed afterwards to Pope Ale|xander the Second, as a proof of the ancient Priviledges of his See.
Caius de An+tiquit. Can+tbrig. l. 1. f. 58. 8. There is another Letter of the same Pope produced by Caius the Defender of the Antiquity of Cambridge, in which the said Pope exempts that Vniversity from the Iurisdi|ction of all Arch-bishops, Bishops, Arch-Dea|cons, c. and their Visitations or Censures, gi|ving the sole authority over Students to the Chancellour and Rectors of the same, with power to excommunicate, c. In the gran|ting of which Priviledges he professes to fol|low the examples of his Predecessours, Pope Eleutherius, Fabian, Simplicius, Felix and Boni|facius
But what grounds there are to suspect fraud in the compiling this Grant,B. Tvvyn de Antiq, Oxn. may be read in Brian Twyne the Advocat for Oxford,A. D. 635. and since him in the learned Bishop Vsher, to whom I refer the Reader.Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. 131.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. King Oswalds miraculous Victory over the Brittains.
5.6. c. The Crosse Venerated by all Chri|stians: This approved by Miracles.

1. IN the year six hundred thirty five, Oswald King of the Northumbers figh|ting against the Tyrants,A. D. 65. happily triumphed. And because our gravest Authours S. Beda, William of Malmsbury and others affirm that encountring them, Faith was his strongest armour, we will endeavour more diligently and largely to recount the order and man|ner of the Combat, by which he restored the Crown to himself, security and Faith to his Subjects, and the Churches to God.
2. S. Beda's summary Narration of it is this: Assoon as Ceadwalla had slain the two Kings Os|rich and Eanfrid,Bed.  2. Oswald attended with an army weak for their numbers, but fortified with Di|vine Faith, came upon him, and in the combat that execrable King of the Brittains was slain, to|gether with his immense army, which he thought no power could resist. This combat hapned in a place (in Northumberland) called in the English tongue Devils-burn, or the Devils-brook. It is at this day,Camden. in Northumb. saith Camden, called Dilston, but in ancient Records, Divelston, the Seat and Man|sion of the Noble family of Ratcliff. Yet Bomton calls the place Denysbourn,Bromt.  78 or River of Denys, and adds that from this combat it took the appellation of Slaughter of the Cewallians.
3. Oswald preparing himself for the fight, co~sidered, no doubt by Gods inspiration, that victory was not to be expected but fro~ heaven therefore to shew his trust in Gods assista~ce,Bed. ib. he made the Crosse his Standard-royal, by which our Lord had triumphed over Hell, and Con|stantin over the world.Bed. l. 3 c. 2. This Crosse being pre|pared and erected, Oswald himself held it upright between his hands till it was fastned in the earth.Which being done, he called his Army together, and thus spoke to them, (saith Saint Beda) Let us bend our knees, and with one heart and voyce beseech the Omnipotent, true and living God mercifully to defend us from this proud and feirce Enemy: For he knows that this war undertaken by us for the safety of our countrey is just.
4. Having said this, his army with a new infused courage sett upon the Brittains, and without any considerable resista~ce put them to flight. In this combat nothing is more commended by our Authours then King Oswalds Faith: Oswald, saith William of Malms|bury, more armed with Faith then weapons,Malmsburg. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3 at the first onsett drove out of his camp Cedwalla puffed up with the memory of his former exploits, and destroyed him with all his forces.
5. But whence had Oswald received this

Faith? If our Modern Protestants were to answer, they would cry, No doubt from Rome: For thus Augustin mett King Ethelbert, carying the Crosse in a solemne Procession, and teaching the Saxons to venerate it. And indeed if any Roman Teachers had in|structed King Oswald, they would have had reason to impute the Original of his Faith to Rome. But it was among the Scots that he learnt Christian Doctrine, and they were at this time very averse from Rites practised at Rome. Which evidently shews, that ho|nour and veneration paid to the Crosse, was the common practise of Christians, who were therefore even in the Primitive age of the Church scornfully stild by Heathens, Cru|cicolae, or Worshippers of a Crosse. It was therefore doubtles from the example of the Emperour Constantin that King Oswald learnt, that Victory against Tyranny, iniustice and infidelity would assuredly attend the saving Standard of the Crosse.
6 Yea moreover not the Crosse only, but the very place in which King Oswald had erected the Crosse was by posterity had in ve|neration.Bed. ib. For S. Beda above eight hundred years agoe thus writes, To this day is shewn, and with great veneration esteemd the place where Oswald ready to fight, erected the sign of the Holy Crosse, and with bended knees be|sought almighty God to afford to his faithfull ser|vants his celestial ayd in their so great necessity. The said place is calld in the English tongue Heofen-Feild, or the feild of heaven. Which Name certainly was given it by a presage of followin events: For it signified that there a heavenly victory to be begun, and heavenly miracles to be in future times wrought. Now it is seated neer that great Wall anciently built by the Romans from Sea to sea acrosse Brittany, to hinder the incursions of the barbarous Nations beyond it. The same place is at this day calld Haledon, saith Camden.
Camd. in . Bed. ib.7 S. Beda consequently adds, That it was a custom continued a good while before his time for the Monks of Hagulstad, who lived near that place, to got thither every year on the day be|fore that of his death, and there to say Vigils for the health of his soule, and the morning after to offer the Sacrifise of the holy oblation with Lauds for him. Which good custom encreasing they of late built and consecrated a Church there, so rendring the place more sacred and venerable. And this they did with iust reason: For through the whole countrey of the Bernicians, as far as we can learn, there was not any visible sign of the Christian Faith, nor any Church or Altar be|fore this good King the Captain of that new Chri|stian army had raised up this Standard of the Holy Crosse, when he was ready to fight against a most barbarous Enemy. Whence it appears that though severall Churches had been erected by S. Paulinus and King Edwin in the southern part of his Kingdom, or Province of the Deiri, yet they had not space enough to propagate the Cristian Profession among the Northern Bernicians.
8. Let us now see how God was pleased to shew his approbation of King Oswalds Faith, the erection of that Crosse, and the venera|tion shewd to it. For thus S. Beda proceeds in the Narration of the Gests of his own time,Id. ib. It will not be impertinent, saith he, to relate one, among the many Miracles which our Lord was pleased to worke at this Crosse. A certain Monk of the Church of Hagulstad nam'd Bothelm, who is yet alive, walking unwarily by night upon the ice not many years since, fell suddenly and broke his arm: by which he was so incommodated, that besides the paine, he could not lift his hand to his mouth. One morning having heard that one of his Brethren was to goe that day to the place of the Holy Crosse, he desir'd him to bring him a smal portion of that Sacred wood: For he sayd, he was confidently perswaded through Gods help to be cured by it. The Brother performed what he desird, and coming back at even when the Monks were in the Refectory, he gave him a little of the mosse which coverd the outside of the wood: which he putt into his bosome. When he went to bed, forgetting to lay it by, it remaind in his bosome all night. But waking about midnight, he felt some thing which was cold lying against his side, and searching for it with his hand, he perceived that both his hand and arm were be|come perfectly whole.


III. CHAP.III. CH.

1.2. c. K Oswald demands Preachers from the Scotts Corman is sent: but returns discouraged.
5.6. c. The Holy Bishop Aidan succeeds: Sent from the Monastery of Hy His ver|tues: and great austerities.
14.15. He places his See, and Monastery in the Isle of Lindes farn.
16 The Monastery of Hagulstad.
17.18. King Oswald finishes the Church at York: His Piety and Humility.

1. KIng Oswald,A. D. 635. as a reward of his Faith and piety, having obtaind a glorious victory, and by that a secure possession of the whole kingdom of the Northumbers, as well the Province of the Deiri, as Bernicians, made it his first care to expresse his gratitude to God, to whose goodnes alone he imputed his victory, by restoring his true Faith and Worship, the greatest ornament of a Kingdom But not finding at home any Ecclesiastical per|sons capable o instructing  guiding others in the way of Heaven, he seeks them abroad.
2. This good design of King Oswald is thus express'd by S. Beda,Bed. l. 3. c. 3. Oswald, saith he, as soon as he was possessed of his Kingdom, had a vehe|ment desire that his whole Nation should be im|bued with the Grace of the Christians Faith, great experience of the good whereof he had received in conquering his barbarous enemies. Therefore he sent

to the ceif among the Scotts, by whom himself and his, followers had received the Sacrament of Baptism earnestly desiring them to send him a Prelat, by whose teaching and ministery his subiects might be instructed in the true Faith, and enioy the Sacraments of it.
3. The Scotts to whom he sent, were not such as S. Beda calls Scots of the Southern, but Northern countrey, that is, not such as inha|bited Ireland, the ancient Native countrey of Scots, but the Northern parts of Brittany, and were mingled with the Picts:Id. l. 3. . 1. For among them it was that both himself and his Brethren had remained many years during their bani|shment, by the testimony of the same Authour.
4. Those to whom King Oswald sent, complying with his desire sent him out of their countrey a Preacher, calld by some Writers Corman. But his coming took not that effect which was desired and expected: Whether it was that he was a man of a rude disposition, so that he could not comply with the humour of the Saxon Nation, or being not well acquainted with their tongue he found too great tediousnes and difficulty in conversing with them, or that he was impatient of labour; what ever the cause was, finding little proffit in his endeavours, he shortly returnd whence he came, and in a publick Meeting of those who had sent him gave this account of his deserting so suddenly his employment, saith Saint Beda, by telling them that no good could be wrought in that Nation to which he had been sent,Id. l. 3. c. . by rea|son they were men of a rough, barbarous and in|corrigible nature.
5. Notwithstanding this mans endeavour to excuse himself by disparaging the Saxons, yet did not that Assembly of Scottish Clergy desist from their intention to endeavour the satisfaction of King Oswald:Id. ib. Whereupon (saith S. Beda) there was a great debate in the Council about the course they were to take for that purpose for they had an earnest desire to contribute to the salvation of that Nation, seeking it at their hands, though they were somewhat troubled that the Preacher sent by them had not been received.
6. It fell out happily that in this Assem|bly there was present among others one calld Aidan, a man of an humble, charitable and meek spirit, who earnestly interceded for the ignorant rude Saxons: advising withall that such Missioners should be chosen as could comply with the rudenes of the Na|tion, instilling by little and little the Myste|ries of Christianity into their minds, c. Aidans discourse pleased the whole Assem|bly: and himselfe was iudged most proper to succeed in this Apostolick employment. Him therefore they sent: and he was re|ceived by King Oswald with all kindnes  ioy.
7. He was by Profession a Monk, educated in the famous Monastery of Hye,Bd. l 3. c. 5 which had a Su|periority over all other Monasteries of the Picts a long time, and also enioyd supreme irisdiction in all Ecclesiasticall affairs, saith the same S. Beda: Adding, that the said Island of Hye or Iona, of right pertaind to Brittany, from which it was divi|ded by a very narrow sea, but by the free gift of the Picts inhabiting the adioyning continent, it had many years before been bestowed upon the Irish Monks, by whose preaching they had received the Faith of Christ.
8. From hence it was that the holy Preacher Aidan came into the Kingdom of the Nor|thumbers,Id. ib. c. 3. having first been consecrated Bishop at the time that Segenius a Preist was Abbot of the said Monastery. Now Aidan (saith S. Beda) was a man of eminent meeknes,ibid. piety and moderation; having withall a zeale of God, though not perfectly according to knowledge: For following the foremen|tiond erroneous custom of his own Nation, he ob|serv'd the Paschal Solemnity from the fourteenth Moone to the twentieth. Which Errour though (ac|cording to the iudgme~t of Baronius) it was no light one,Baron. yet did not exclude that Nation from the Churches Communion. It had indeed been oft con|demn'd by Ecclesiastical Councils: but since it re|garded only external Rites, and not Dogmes of Ca|tholick Faith, it was a while tolerated, till the Truth could be more perfectly discover'd to that people. Neither indeed could the Scots be iustly reckond among the Quartodecimani, condemned by the Council of Nica: for as they did not cele|brate Easter after the Roman custom, so neither did they after the Iewish.
9. S. Beda therfore thus excuses this holy man:Bed. l. 3. c. 17 I can neither commend nor approve Aidan for that he did not celebrate Easter in the due time: which he did either out of ignorance of the Cano|nical account, or if he knew it, would not conform thereto because he was unwilling to contradict the practise of his own nation. Yet in this I doe much approve him, that in observing Easter after his own fashion, he neither in his heart beleived, nor openly venerated or taught any thing different from us, for he kept it only in memory of the Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of the Mediator of God  men, Iesus Christ. Moreover the day celebrated by him was not, as some doe erroneously think, the same fourteenth Moone which the Iews observed on what day of the week soever it fell: for he always kept it on a Sunday falling between the fourteenth Moon and the twentieth, to show his beleif of our Lords Resurrection which hapned on the first day of the Week; and likewise to shew his hope of our Re|surrection, which he beleived, as the Church also doth, shall befall likewise on the first day of the week, or Sunday.
10. This is the only defect imputed by S. Beda to Aidan the Scottish Monk and Bishop. In all other regards he acknowledges him Ortho|dox, agreeing in the common Faith of the Catholick Church. Yea moreover he was esteemd by him not only free from errour or vice, but a great example of vertue and ho|lines. And particularly, saith he, among other good precepts of vertuous living,Id. Ib. he left to Clergy|men a most wholesome example of abstinence and continence. (Now it is well known that by ab|stinence S. Beda understands an austere life, consisting in a contempt of delicacy in food:

and by continence, an abstaining not only from all unlawfull sensual delectations, but those also which to others would be lawfull in a Matrimoniall State.Id. ib.) He addes. That the thing which most commended his Doctrine to all, was that as he taught, so both himself, and all that belonged to him practised in their lives. For he neither loved, nor cared for any contentments of this present world.
11. It is very probable that from his Example proceeded the custom in Brittany, not only of abstaining from flesh; but also fasting on Fridays, which is not practised in Catholick countreys abroad: Though he then added Wednesdays also to that austerity: For thus S. Beda writes,Id. ibid. At that time Religious men and woemen, informed by Aidan's examples, through the whole year prolonged their fast till three of the clock after noon on Wednesdays and Fridays, except only in the Paschall time.
12. Moreover Aidan, being himself a Monk, came out of the School of S. Columba in the Monastery of Hye,Id. ib. who left behind him Successours of his own Institut, men eminent for their great continence, Divine Love and Regular Ob|servances Their only defect was that in the cele|bration of the Paschal Solemnity they followed du|bious accounts and Cycles. And no wonder, since being seated as it were out of the world, none took care to send them the Synodal Decrees touching the Paschal Observance. So that they were infor|med therein no further then as they could learn from the Propheticall, Evangelicall and Aposto|lick Writings, according to which they diligently observed the Duties of Pety and Chastity.
13. These Monks therefore being according to the Institut of S. Columba, so continued many years: and to distinguish them from the Monks in Kent, who coming from Rome followed the Rule of S. Benedict, our Writers began to call the Benedictins, Black-Monks, from the colour of the Habits which they then generally wote: Whereas these Colum|bian Monks either wore white garments, or of the naturall colour of the sheep. Notwith|standing we read that S. Wilfrid in a Synod publickly professed that himself was the first who commanded the Rule of the most Holy Pa|triark S Benedict to be observed by Monks in the Northumbrian Kingdom.Malmsur. de Pontif. l. 3. f. 26. But whether his command extended to Monasteries founded there before, or only such as himself had built, I leave to the disquisition of others.
14. This Holy Bishop Aidan received the See of his Bishoprick in the Isle of Lindesfarn, seated among the Bernicians in the most Nor|thern coast of the Kingdom of the Northum|bers Which is a little Island, saith William of Malmsbury, and is now by those of that countrey called the Holy-Island.Id. ib. p. 275. This Isle S. Aidan who was a lover of Silence made chocice of for his See, despising the pompe and populousnes of York. But besides the advantage of solitude and silence, another Motive inducing S. Aidan to chuse that Island seated in the German Ocean, might probably be, because the Bernicians, a people hitherto more rude and ignorant stood in greater need of his care: And besides it was easy for him, from thence by ship to visit the other Province of the Deiri.
15. S. Aidan moreover having accepted this See, did according to the example of S. Augustin, erect there a Monastery. This is after this manner related in an ancient Ma|nuscript of the Monastery of Evesham, cited by the R. F. Clement Reyner in the Appendix to his Apostolat: The Holy King Oswald and S. Aidan Bishop and Monk,Ap. Reyne in Appendic ad Apostolat. f. 42 did first settle an Epi|scopal See and Order of Monks in the Church of Lindesfarn, according to the relation of S. Beda, about the year of our Lords Incarnation six hun|dred thirty five, and the thirty ninth after the coming of S. Augustin. Which See and Order con|tinued there together the space of two hundred forty and one years: For then the Church of Lin|desfarn was totally destroyed by the most barba|rous Infidel Danes, and the said See and Order translated from thence to Conk Chester.
16. Besides this,Bd l. 3. c. 7. severall other Churches were built in many places among the Bernicians, saith S. Beda, and the people flocked with ioy to heare the Word of God. King Oswald likewise bestowd possessions and lands to maintain the Monasteries, in which English Children were instructed by Scottish Teachers both in lower and higher studies and also in the Observance of Regular Discipline: For those who came to preach were Monks. At the same time likewise the famous Monastery of Hagulstad is said to have been founded, in the place where formerly was seated Axel|lodunum, now called Hexham, near the Picts wall where also in following times was an Episcopall See.
17. The like care and Munificence the Holy King Oswald shewd in his other Province of the Deiri: where he not only finished the Noble Church of S. Peter in York, begun by King Edwin: but likewise erected severall Schooles for the education of youth in learning and piety: For which purpose he co~manded more Monks to be sent out of Scotland,Bed. l. 3. c. 3. who, saith S. Beda, came in great numbers year after year into Brittany, and with great devotion preached the Word of Faith in the Provinces subject to King Oswald, and those among them who were Preists, administred likewise Baptism to such as had been instructed.
18. An admirable example of piety,Id. ib. zeale  Christian Humility, the same Authour relates of this blessed King: Who, saith he, assoon as S. Aidan was come, humbly and chearfully heark|ned to his admonitions, and took great care and diligence to found and delate the Church of Christ through his whole Kingdom: Where it often hapned that a most beautifull spectacle was represented, for whilst the Bishop, who was not perfectly skilled in the English tongue, was preaching, the King him|self would be the Interpreter of the Heavenly Word to his Officers and servants: for he during his long exile had fully learnt the Scottish language.
19. Now how Almighty God even with outward blessings recompenced this good

Kings piety, and how according to the en|crease of Faith his Empire also was encrea|sed, Huntingdon thus declares:Huntingd. l. 3. f. 331. King Oswald, saith he, being formed by the institution of Saint Aidan, as he made progresse in the Graces of his mind, so did he likewise in the extent of his Rule, beyond all his Predecessours. For all the Nations of Brittany, Brittains, English, Picts and Scots became subiect to his Dominion. And yet though he was so high exalted, he was humble and mer|cifully kind to the poore and strangers.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.3. c. S. Birinus converts the West-Sa|xons: His Miracles.
6.7. c. K. Kinegils converted, and bap|tised: Dorchester appointed the Epis|copall See: And Canons under a Rule placed in it.
10 11 c A great Controversy about S. Birinus his Relicks.

1. THE same year was happy likewise to the West-Saxons;A. D. 635. Bed. l. which happines how it arrived, S. Beda thus declares: At the same time, saith he, the Nation of the West-Saxons, an|ciently called Gevissae, in the raign of Kinegils, received the Christian Faith by the preaching of Birinus a Bishop, who with the advice of Pope Honorius, came into Brittany: having promised in the presence of the same Pope, that he would di|sperse the seed of the Gospel in the inmost parts of Brittany, where never any Teacher had gone be|fore. Vpon which promise, by command of the same Pope, he was consecrated Bishop by Asterius Bishop of Genua.Ethelvverd. in Chron. His coming into Brittany to preach the Gospell to the West-Saxons hapned, (saith Ethelwerd) six years after the same King Kinegils his fight against Penda King of the Mer|cians at Cirencester; which fight we recoun|ted in the year of Grace six hundred twenty nine.
2. This Apostolick Mission of S. Birinus our Lord approved by a Divine Miracle. Which because it powerfully manifests the Faith preached by him to have been Orthodox, and ancient grave Authours have attested it, in|somuch as even Iohn Fox after he had related it,Fox Acts and Mon. addes, Of this there are so many Witnesses who constantly avow it, that it is to mee a great wonder, I will not doubt to give the Narra|tion of it from Baronius, who cites for it William of Malmsbury, Huntingdom, Florentius, Mathew of Westminster, c.
Baron. hc.3. I have thought expedient, saith he, to de|scribe here out of the Acts of S. Birinus a won|derfull Miracle beseeming an Apostolick man, which is omitted by S. Beda. It was thus. The Holy man being arrived to the shore of the Brittish Sea, and ready to take ship celebrated the Divine Mysteries, offring to God the Sacrifice of the Sa|ving Host, as a Viaticum for himself and follow|ers. After which, the season being proper, he was hastily urged to enter the ship: and the wind ser|ving the~ they sayled speedily, when on the sudden Birinus called to mind that he had lost a thing infinitely precious to him, which by the urging hast of the Sea-men having his mind other ways busied, he had left behind him at land. For Pope Honorius had bestowed on him a Pall, or Corporal, upon which he consecrated the Body of our Lord, and afterward used to wrap in it a particle of the said Sacred Body, which he hung about his neck, and allways caried with him: but when he celebra|ted Masse, he was wont to lay it by him upon the Altar. Armed therefore with Faith, he by Di|vine inspiratio~ went down fro~ the ship into the Sea and walkd securely upon it to the shore. Where fin|ding what he had left behind, he took it and in like manner returned to the ship: Which he found standing still immoveable, whereas a little be|fore he had left it sailing extreme swiftly. When he was entred into the ship, not one drop of water appeared on his cloathes: Which the Marriners seeing, kneeld before him and worshipped him as a God: and many of them by his preaching were con|verted to the Faith of Christ.
4. This custom of carying with them the Consecrated Body of our Lord was practised from the beginning of the Church, many proofs whereof are in Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose writing of his Brother Satyrus, S. Basile,Id. ibid. c. Which pious custom. saith Baronius, as the fervour of Religion introduced, so Religion as holy hath in latter times forbidden it. Former|ly a firm Faith incited to the doing that which Reverence afterward disswaded. In both cases Gods faithfull people deserve commendation: as we read both the confidence and the modesty of the Apostles praised in the Gospel, both when, they were sorrow|full to want our Lords presence for a moment, and likewise when S. Peter desired his absence, saying, Lord, goe from mee for I am a sinfull man.
5. S. Birinus being thus arrived in Brittany, with an intention to visit the inmost rudest parts of the Island, according to his promise to Pope Honorius, he found at his landing so full a harvest, that, as William of Malmsbury says, he thought it a folly to goe any further, or to seek out sick men whom he should cure, when as in the place where he already was, there were not any sound. Thus it hapned to S. Birinus, as it had formerly to S. Augustin, who being sent to the Deiri in the North, stayd at the very en|trance into the Island in the South. He has notwithstanding found a more favourable esteem among Protestant Writers then S. Au|gustin did, thought both taught the same Doctrin: For B. Godwin calls him a man of great zeal and devotion:Godvvin. in Catal. Camden in Dobu. and Camden says he was illu|strious for his Sanctity even to a miracle, c.
6. At his first coming, S. Birinus addressed himself to King Kinegils: to whom he with a modest boldnes expounded the Summ of the Christian Faith, which he was come so far to preach for his salvation. The Doctrines of Christianity were not now become strange even among the Pagans

in Brittany: But withall it fell out very happily that at the same time the most ver|tuous and Victorious King of the Northumbers Oswald (as S. Beda stiles him) was then pre|sent at the West-Saxon Court, being come thi|ther to demand King Kinegils his daughter for his wife. This pious King gave his royal testimony to the Truth of the Doctrine prea|ched by S. Birinus, which was suitable to that received in the whole kingdom of the Nor|thumbers: And this he did so effectually, that King Kinegils submitted his iudgment to the King and Bishop, desiring to be con|ducted to the gate which opens into Heaven. Hereupon he was sufficiently catechised, and after that admitted to Baptism: in which by a pious commerce King Oswald became Spirituall Father to him whose daughter he presently after maried.
7. The King being thus converted, the whole Province generally followd his exam|ple: for, according to S. Birinus his Acts, the people hastned in great troops to heare the H. Bishop preach, Brin. and with their hearts humbly embraced the Doctrine taught by him. And no wonder: for besides the sanctity and inno|cence of the Preacher, God was present with him to confirm his Doctrin by Miracles. One particularly is recounted in the said Acts after this manner:Id. There was in the Province a certain ancient Woman who a long time had been deprived both of her sight and hearing: To her it was suggested by revelation that she should re|pair to the Holy Bishop for her cure. She delayd not therefore, but took with her a Guide to conduct her. The Bishop therefore seing the womans piety, immediatly made the sign of the Crosse upon her eyes and ears, whereupon both her sight and hea|ring were restored to her.
 l. 3 c 7.8. The Christian Faith being thus spread in that Kingdom, both the Kings, saith S. Beda, assigned to the Holy Bishop the Citty called Dorinca, to be his Episcopall See: Where severall Churches were erected and consecrated, and great multitudes gained to Christ: after which he went to our Lord. This Citty Dorinca is the same which is now called Dorchester, not the principal town of Dorsetshire, but another of that name sea|ted near Oxford: Which at this time belon|ged to the West-Saxons, but afterward passed to the Mercians.
9. This Holy Bishop not being by profes|sion a Monk, instituted in his Church at Dor|chester a Community of Canons,Ap. Bed. l. 1. c. 27. who lived in a kind of Regular Observance, and accor|ding to S. Gregories directions, imitated the Institut of the Primitive Church during the A|postles times, wherein not any of them esteemed that which he possessed to be his own, but they had all things common. In the said Church this Holy Bishop and seaven and twenty of his Suc|cessours continued the space of four hundred fifty seaven years.
10. Fifteen years S. Birinus laboured with great fruit in cultivating this our Lords vine|yard: and at last in the year of Grace six hun|dred and fifty received his reward, on the third of December,Marty. Angl. 3. Decemb. on which day he is com|memorated in our Martyrologe. He was buried, saith S. Beda, in the same Citty (o Dorchester:) and several years after his sacred Body was tran|slated into the Citty of Winchester by Hedde Bi|shop of the same Citty,Bed. l. 3. c. 7. and reposed in the Church of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul.
11. This passage of S. Beda was cause of many troubles in ages following, insomuch as the See Apostolick was oft appeald unto to decide the Controversy raised between the two Churches, which contended earnestly whether of them were possessours of his Re|licks. The summ of which controversy though hapning in a far remote age, yet pertinent to the present subject, I will here deliver, that I may shew the esteem which the Monuments of our Holy Ancestours de|serve at our hands.
12. S Birinus, as hath been said, instituted in his Church of Dorchester a Colledge of Ca|nons Regulars,Act S Birini ap. Capgrav. which lived in a Community under a certain Rule: Which Colledge in pro|cesse of time was seised upon by other Ca|nons, called Seculars, who dividing the reve|news among themselves, each of them lived and enioyd separatly his portion. But in the Raign of King Steven, by the procurement of Alexander Bishop of the Diocese the Regulars were restored. These men bearing a great respect and devotion to thei Prime Patron, and Founder, whose Body they were perswa|ded still remained among them, by Letters demanded leave of the Pope to place his Re|licks more decently and to adorn his Monu|ment. Hereupon the Pope (Honoius the third) wrote to Steven Langton then Arch-bishop of Canterbury and Cardinal to examine all things well, and accordingly proceed in satisfying the said Canons: The Arch-bishop committed the affair to the diligence and prudence of the Arch-Deacon.
13. Then broke out the pious contention between the Monks of Winchester and Canons of Dorchester. Those of Winchester placed the summ of their cause in the testimony of Saint Beda. But they of Dorchester produced severall witnesses, and among the rest a certain Ca|non who deposed up on Oath that a former Canon called William in his hearing oft prote|sted that by Vision in sleep a certain man ap|pearing to him had commanded him to search such a sepulcher in the Church of Dor|chester before the Altar of the Holy Crosse, and that there he should find the Body of S. Biri|nus. Whereupon search having been made by the Abbots permission, and in his pre|sence together with the Canons, they found a Bishops Body entire, with two stoles and other Episcopall ornaments, of a red colourd silk: together with a Crosse of metall upon his breast, and a Chalice a little below it.
14. Moreover in further confirmation they added proofs of severall miracles: as of a certain young man deaf and dumb cured

there: who affirm'd that he was commanded in a vision to repair to that. And being cured at the Sepulcher of S. Birinus, he spoke in the English tongue. Whereupon one of the Canons said in a ieasting manner, He who taught thee to speak was no Courtier, otherwise he would have taught thee a better language. And three days after he spoke perfectly both in French and English. Other Miracles also were alledged, as of a blind man receiving sight; a leper cleansed; and two dead per|sons restored to life, c.
15. As to the testimony alledged from S. Beda, the Abbot answerd, That Historians doe not relate all things from their own sight, but oft by hear-say: Therefore S. Beda might have been misinform'd: and for a proof that he was so, the Abbot acknow|ledged that the Body of a certain Bishop cal|led Bertinus, the tenth from S. Birinus, had been translated to Winchester: Which body had been buried in a corner of the Church near the dore: a place unfitt for the Prime Patron of the See. He added, that after the Invention of Saint Birinus his Body a certain Anchoret a holy man named Mathew, li|ving at Haliwell near Oxford, heard a certain voyce saying to him, Birinus under the pave|ment, Bertinus behind the dore. He conclu|ded, that since many Miracles were wrought at Dorchester; and not any at Winchester, this was a certain proof that the Sacred Body had not been translated.
16. Notwithstanding all which allega|tions, yet would not the Arch-deacon pre|sume to pronounce sentence in favour of the Canons: but sent a particular relation of all the Acts to the Pope: Who in a Second Letter expressed so much deference to the single authority of S. Beda, that he would not determine the Controversy: but gave order for another Search to be made in the Church of Winchester, and an enquiry whe|ther any like Miracles had been wrought there by the same Saints Intercession deman|ded by devout persons, c.
But what pro|ceedings were further made in the matter, and whether the Controversy were decided, does not appear in any of our Authours. Probably permission was given to both Churches to shew honour to the Saint: since it was likely, and very ordinary in such Translations, to divide the Relicks.


V. CHAP.A. D. 636.
V. CHAP.

1.2. c. Sigebert after his exile, King of the East-Angles.
5.6. c. He sends for Felix to convert his Kingdom: who is made Bishop of the East-Angles: His Piety, c.
10. Quichelm King of the West Saxons ba|ptized: and dyes.

1. THE year of our Lord six hundred thirty six, as it was mournfull to the Eastern Church, for then did the Saracens pos|sesse themselves of the Holy Citty Hierusa|lem.A. D. 636. So was it ioyfull  happy to the King|dom of the East-Angles in Brittany, who were then again converted to the Christian Faith, and held it more constantly then they had done in the days of King Redwald or his Son Erpenwald: For now Sigebert de|servedly sirnamed Pious, raigned there, to whom that Kingdom was beholding for lear|ning, and the Province for the Christian Faith: Who after a Monasticall profession was assumed to the Royall Purple, and that purple adorned with Martyrdom.
2. This Sigebert was not, as Pits suppo|ses, a Son of King Redwald, but only a half Brother to Erpenwald by the Mother, as William of Malmsbury testifies: And being very gra|cious among the Subjects for his vertues in the Raign of Redwald, was commanded (as heretofore Edwin had been) to depart the Court, least his eminent probity and en|dowments should prove preiudiciall to Er|penwald heyr to the Crown.
3. Sigebert being thus through envy ex|pelled the Court, left the Prrvince and Island also, and sayld into France, where civility, learning and Religion flourished. He had not yet given up his name to Christ: but he was naturally of so good a disposition, that any thing that was good would easily make an impression in his mind. To qualify the an|guish and tediousnes of his banishment, he gave himself to the study of human lear|ning, and by inquisition into Naturall cau|ses, he was lead to the knowledge of the First supreme Cause.
4. His most frequent conversation was with learned men: among which the most eminent were Desiderius Bishop of Cahors, as appears, saith Pits by mutuall Letters be|tween them still extant in the Monastery of Saint Gall among the Swizzers: and Felix a Burgundian Preist, who afterward became the Apostle of his Countrey the East-Angles. By discourse with these learned and pious men he quickly perceived the vanity of Idols and Pagan Rites, how unproffitable and noxious to mens soules were the Gods worshipd by

Heathens and how impossible it was that there should be more then one Eternall Omni|potent God, Governour of the world. This foun|dation layd in his mind, easily prepared it to admitt the Light of the Gospell, which once kindled, was never after extinguish'd. He received Baptism from the said Felix, stiled in his Life a Bishop: who therby gave him a Title to a far better Kingdom.
5. In the mean time King Erpenwald dyed, having been slain by one of his Pagan Noble+men, at the Instigation of Penda the cruel King of the Mercians, as hath been sayd. After whose death Sigebert succeeded in the kingdom. Who assoon as he was King made it his prime care to introduce among his subiects the Christian Faith and civility of the French: For which purpose he calld out of France his Spiritual Father Felix the Bur|gundian: Who coming into Brittany, first addressed himself to Honorius Arch-bishop of Canterbury,Antiquit. Brit. in  by whom he was sent to preach the Gospel to the East-Angles. Bo Parker says that Honorius first consecrated him Bishop, and then directed him in that Mission: But the Authour of his life affirms that he was a Bishop before his coming: So that the rea|son why at his first coming he addressed himself to the Arch-bishop was, because not having received his Mission immediatly from the See Apostolick, he could not accor|ding to the Laws of the Church exercise iurisdiction within the Arch-bishops Province without his permission. Now if any one shall obiect the coming of Aidan out of the Monastery of Hy without expecting orders either from within or without the Island, Saint Beda will solve the difficulty by declaring, that the said Isle of Hye, or Iona, did always enioy for its governour an Abbot,Bed. l. 3. c. 15. who was a Preist, to whose Iurisdiction that whole Province, and even Bishops them|selves were subiect: the like example being no where else to be found: But the reason of it was, because the first Apostolick Teacher of that Na|tion was not a Bishop, but only a Preist and Monk.
6. Felix now Bishop of the East-Angles went to Sigebert, by whom he was received with great honour, and had assignd him for the See of his Bishoprick, saith Saint Beda, the Citty calld Dummoc situated in the Province of the Iceni, or Suffolk. It is now calld Dunwich (saith Camden:Camd. in Suffolk.) the greatest part wherof is swallowd by the Sea, and almost reduced to a solitude: the Episcopall See many ages since having been transferd. At first it alone exercised the whole Iurisdiction over the Kingdom of the East-Angles: But Bisus the fourth Bishop from Saint Felix, growing old and sickly, and uncapable to manage so large a Province, divided it into two Dioceses, consti|tuting the other Episcopal See at North-Elmholm, now a small town.
Bed. ib. 7. The desire which Saint Felix had to serve our Lord in that Employment wanted not good successe, saith Saint Beda: for his labours produced manifold fruits in that Nation. For according to the happy omen of his name, he re|duced the whole Province from its former in|felicity and iniquity to the true Faith, to the works of Christian Iustice, and the rewards of eternall Felicity. And as King Oswald assisted Saint Aidan by interpreting his speeches into a more intelligible language: So did King Sigebert to Saint Felix being a stranger in the countrey.Huntingd. l. 3 For Huntingdon writes, that Sigebert the Successour and Brother of Erpwald was a most Christian King, and toge|ther with Felix the Bihop brought others to Christianity.
8. The same King, whom S. Beda calls a most learned and most Christian Prince, as by his example and command he lead his sub|iects to the true Faith and works of Iustice: So to establish the same Faith more firmly, he built Churches, adorned Altars, reveren|ced the Clergy and those who professed a more severe Christian austerity of life. Besides the Church belonging to the Episcopal See, he erected another at a town calld Babingley, where Felix first entred that Province, and a third a place calld Sharnburn: Thus writes Camden.Bed. l. 3. c. 8.
9. Moreover remembring the inconstancy of his subiects, who had more then once de|serted the Christian Profession, the pious King Sigebert, saith Saint Beda, desirous to imitate the good orders which he had seen practised in France, instituted a Schoole for the instructing of children: Wherein he was assisted by his Bi|shop Felix, who appointed Teachers and Masters according to the manner of Kent. And though Saint Beda mentions a School in the singular number only, which some interpret to be understood of the Vniversity of Cambridge: Notwithstanding our other ancient Histo|rians affirm,Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2. Id. de Reg. c. 5 orilg. hic. Huntingd. l. 3. lo stovv. Huntingd. tib. 3. Florent. Wigorn. hic. that S. Felix instituted Schooles in severall opportune places, and by little and little reformd the barbarousnes of the Nation by introducing the civility of the Latin tongue. Which was a benefit much to be celebrated, to bring a people formerly rude and fanatick to tast the sweetnes of human literature. This is the testimony of William of Malmsbury, in which Florilegus and Huntingdon doe ioyn. And our modern Writers doe more particularly affirm that at this time a Schoole for the instructing young children was erected at Flixton, a Town which took its name from Saint Fe|lix.
10. This same year Quichelm the Son of Kinegils, and partner with him in the Kingdom of the West-Saxons, followd the example of his Father in embracing the Christian Faith, and receiving the Sacra|ment of Baptism: but went before him to receive the crown of his Faith and inno|cence, for he dyed the same year, saith Huntingdon, and Florentius of Worcester: who adds, that he was baptised by Saint Birinus in the Citty Dorice, by which he seems to

understand Dorchester the Episcopall See of S. Birinus.A. D. 637.
11. King Oswald likewise the same year maried Kineburga daughter to Kinegils: by whom the year following he had a Son cal|led Ethelwald.


VI. CH. VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of S. Fursey.
5.6. c. His wonderfull Visions.
11.12. He builds a Monastery in Es|sex: which he recommends to his Bro|ther.
13. He goes into France: where he dyes: His Memory celebrated at Peronne.

A. D. 637.1. IN the year of Grace six hundred thir|ty seaven Saint Felix Bishop of Dun|wich received great comfort and assistance in his Apostolick labours by the arrival of a stranger out of Ireland. This was Saint Fursey, who having spent many years in preaching the Gospel in his own countrey,Vsser. in Ind. Chron. came this year into Brittany, saith Bishop Vsher.
Bed. l. 3. c. 19.2. Saint Beda relates the same more ex|pressly, saying: Whilst Sigebert as yet held the raines of the Government in his hand, there came out of Ireland a holy man, named Fur|sey, illustrious both for his teaching and pie|ty: who was desirous to spend the remainder of his life in a strange countrey, wheresoe|ver he could find opportunity, the more per|fectly to serve our Lord. This devout man coming into the Province of the East-Angles, was honourably received by the said King: and there he executed his usuall employment of preaching, by which ioynd with his ver|tuous example he converted many Infidels to the Faith, and likewise strengthned in the same Faith and Love of Christ many who before beleived.
3. Supposing it may be for the Readers edification, I will not neglect to set down here at large some of those wonderfull visions which in an Excesse of mind our Lord revealed to him concerning the state of soules after death:Id. ibid. Which visions, saith Saint Beda, he himself would sometimes de|clare, but only to such as out of a desire of com|punction asked him.
Id. ibid. 4. This holy man, saith the same Au|thour, was descended from a most Noble fa|mily among the (Irish) Scots: but was much more Noble for the vertues of his mind, then his blood. From his very child-hood he care|fully gave himself to reading holy Books, and practising Religious austerities: and, which most became Gods Saints, whatsoever good things he learnt by reading, he was solicitous to ex|presse in his practise.
5. To be breif, in processe of time he built himself a Monastery to the end he might more freely and without interruption attend to heavenly meditations. Where on a certain time falling into an infirmity he was rapt from his body, and in that Extasy, which continued from Evening to Cockcrowing, he was fa|voured with the sight of troops of Angels, and the hearing the Hymns of Praises which they sung to our Lord. And among other par|ticulars he was wont to relate how he heard them distinctly to chant these verses of the Psalm, The Saints shal goe from vertue to vertue: And again, The God of Gods shall be seen in Sion.
6. Three days after being again in an Ex|tasy he saw yet more glorious apparitions of Angels, and heard Divine Lauds sung by them more solemnly: Moreover there were discovered to him very earnest contentions of Wicked Spirits, who by many accusations of a certain Sinner lately dead endeavoured to stop his passage to heaven, but by reason the Holy Angels protected him, they could not effect their desire.
7. Now if any one desires to be more accuratly informed in all these particulars, touching the malicious subtilty with which the Devils layd to the Mans charge all his actions, idle words, and even his very thoughts, as if they had them written in a Book; as likewise severall others, some ioyfull, others sad which he learnt from the Angels and glorified Saints which he saw among them, let him read the Book of this Saints life, and I doubt not he will receive thereby much spiritual edification. Amongst all which I will select one passage to putt in this History, from which many may receive proffit.
8. On a certain time being elevated in Spirit, he was commanded by the Angels which condu|cted him, to look down upon the Earth: where|upon bowing his eyes down ward, he saw as it were a darke valley under him in a very low bottom. He saw likewise in the aire four fires, not much distant from one another. And asking the Angels, what fires those were, he was told that those were the fires which now inflamed the world and would in the end consume it. The first was the fire of Lying, when we doe not perform what we promised in Baptism, to renounce Sathan and all his works. The second was the fire of Covetousnes, when we preferre worldly riches before the love of heaven. The third was the fire of Dissension, when we are not affraid to offend our neighbours, even for things of no moment. The fourth was the fire of Iniquity, when we make no conscience to robb or cousen those who are weaker then our selves. Now these four fires encreasing by little, at last ioynd together, and became an im|mense flame. And when they approached near them, Fursey was afraid, and sayd to the Angel, Sir, behold the flames come close to us.But the Angel answered, Fear not, for since thou didst not kindle this fire, it will not burn thee. For though this flame seems to thee great and ter|rible, yet it tryes every one according to his Merits,

so that the concupiscence which is in any one shall burn in this fire. For accordingly as every one being in the body, is inflamed by unlaw|full pleasure, so being loosd from his body shall he burn by condign torment.
Then he saw one of the three Angels which in both these visions had been his conductours, goe before the other, and divide the flame: and the other two flying on each side of him, which defended him from the danger of the fire. He saw likewise many Devils flying through the fire, and kindling war against the just. These malign Spirits pur|sued him likewise with accusations, but the good Angels defended him: And after this he saw greater numbers of blessed Spirits, among which some were of his own Nation, Preists, who had well discharged their Office, as he had heard by report: By these he was informed of many things, very proffitable both to him|self, and all who are willing to attend to them. When they had finished their speeches, and were returned to Heaven with the rest of the Angels, there remaind only with Saint Fursey the three Angels mentioned before, who were to restore him to his bo|dy. And when he came close to the fore|said great fire, one of the Angels divided it as before. But when the Man of God was come to a dore which stood open among the flames, the Vnclean Spirits snatching up one of those whom they were tormenting in the flames, and casting him against him tou|ched him, and burnt his shoulder and one of his cheekes. He knew the man, and remembred how when he was ready to dye he had received of him a garment:But the Angel laying hold of him cast him back into the fire. But the Devil answered, Doe not cast him back, since you have once received him: For as you have taken the goods belon|ging to a Sinner, so you must be partakers of his punishment. But the Angel replied, He took not that out of covetousnes, but for sa|ving the mans soule.After this the bur|ning ceased, and the Angel turning himself to Saint Fursey said, The fire that thou hast kindled has now burnt thee: For if thou hadst not received money from this man who is dead in his sins, thou hadst not tasted of his tor|ments.
Many other discourses he made, gi|ving him wholesom instructions how he should deale with such as repented at their death.
9. Saint Fursey being afterward restored to his body, caried visibly in his shoulder and cheek all his life time the marks of the burning which he had suffred in his soule, c. There remains alive to this day an an|cient Monk of our Monastery, who is wont to tell us that a man of great integrity and veracity assured him, that he saw Saint Fursey himself in the Province of the East-Angles, and from his own mouth heard him relate his Visions: Adding, that it was in the time of a very sharp frosty winter, and yet the Holy man wearing only a single sleight garment whilst he related these things, yet partly by the extreme fear, and sometimes great pleasure and sweetnes which the me|mory of past occurrents produced in him, he was all on a sweat, as if it had been in the heat of summer.
10. This is the Narration af Saint Beda touching the visions of Saint Fursey, which for the authority of the relatour; was not to be omitted:Magdeb. en+tur 7. f. 510. Though I am not igno|rant that our Protestant Centuriators of Mag|deburg confidently pronounce all such Sto|ries ridiculous, and Saint Beda for rela|ting them, a man full of Superstitions, c.
11. As touching the other Gests of this Holy man,Bed l. 3. c. 19. the same Saint Beda writes that King Sgebert bestowed on him a place for a Monastery, which he built with speed, and having replenished it with Monks, instituted in it Regular Disciplines. The said Mona|stery was erected in a certain Castle called Cnobberbury, or Citty of Cnober, seated in a very pleasant place near the Sea and en|compassed with woods. Which the succeeding King of that Province Anna, and his No|bles adorned with magnificent Gifts and buil|dings It is at this day called Burgh-castell in Suffolk,Camnn in Suffolk. where the Rivers Garien and Waveney mingle waters.
12. After this having well setled his Mo|nastery,Bed. l. 3. c. 19. he was desirous to abandon all secular cares, even of the Monastery it self: and there|fore committed the charge of it to his Brother Foilan, and to Gobban and Dicul Preists: so being freed from all solicitudes he intended to spend the remainder of his life in an Ana|choreticall conversation He had another Brother named Vitan, who from a Cenobiticall life was becom an Hermite. To him therefore he went alone, and with him lived a year in labours, continence and Prayer. But troubles arising in the Province by the invasion of the Pagan King of the Mercians (of which we shall speak in the proper place) and foreseeing the danger imminent over his Monastery, he sailed into France, where he was respectfully received by the French King Clodovus and Helconwaldus a Patrician, and built a Mona|stery in the place called Latiniac: And not long after being surprised with sicknes he piously ended his life.
13. His Memory is celebrated in the Gallican Martyrologe on the sixteenth of Ianuary:Martyrolog. Gallic. 16. Ianuar. Where he is sayed to have been Son to a Prince in Ireland named Philtan: and that desirous to serve God with freedom, he passed first into Brittany, and after into France, where he built the Monastery of La|tiniac: and in his way to a place where he intended to build another Monastery, he fell sick of the infirmity whereof he dyed. In his sicknes he was visited by the King, by Erche|nald the Maire of his Palace and other Cour|tiers, to whom he gave excellent exhortations touching Eternall life: and after some day of sicknes which he bore with admirable patience, full of merits, in the midst of his prayers he went

to enioy the same life of which he had discoursed.A. D. 638. His Sacred Body was buried in the Monastery of Peronne: and four years after was found entirely free from the least corruption by the Holy Bishops S. Eligius of Noyon, and S. Aubert Bishop of Arras: who with very great honour layd it where it now remains in wonderfull veneration, and fully rewards the inhabitants devotion by the con|tinual protection which they receive from it.
14. What speciall Monasticall Institut he professed,Vsser in Primord. f. 919. does not appear. B. Vsher men|tions four severall Rules in practise among the Irish, written in the language of that countrey, but so ancient that it cannot be understood in this age, all which like small Rivulets flowed from S. Patrick as the fountain. The first was the Rule of the Monks of S. Columba: the second, of Comgal Abbot of Banchr: the third of Carthag the famous Abbot of Bathen, and first Bishop of Lismore: and the fourth of S. Albeus, Arch-bishop of Imelac (or Emely.) It is probable that one of these Rules S. Fursey brought with him out of Ireland: but whe|ther in Brittany or France he assumed the Rule of S. Benedict, cannot certainly be defined.


VII. CH. VII. CHAP.

1.2. King Sigebert becomes a Monk.
3. The Southern Scotts in Ireland are corre|cted in the Observation of Easter: But the Northern become more obstinate.

A. D. 638.1. THE year of Grace six hundred thirty eight afforded an example of Horoi|call humility and contempt of the world, which had hitherto never been practis'd in Gods Church, but was afterward frequently imitated: which was that a King not forced thereto by any calamity, freely abandon'd his throne to inclose himself in a Monastery, there to be subiect to the will of a poor stranger, depriv'd of all things that might please sence, mortified with continuall abstinence, fre|quent fasts, watching, cilices and scarce ever interrupted devotion: All which he chear|fully underwent that he might more securely provide for another kingdom after this life.
2. This was Sigebert King of the East-An|gles, who,Bed. l. 3. c. 19. saith S. Beda, became so zealous a lover of a heavenly kingdom, that at last abandonning all affairs of his temporall Kingdom, which he commended to his Kinsman Egric, who before held a part of it, he entred a Monastery which he before had built, and receiving the Tonsure, made it his only care afterward to contend for an eternall kingdome. The Monastery wherin he enclo|sed himself was the same which S. Fursey at the Kings charges had taken the care of building: and no doubt it was by the same Saints encouragement that he undertook a design so strange and unexpected. Within four years we shall see him forced to leave his solitude to change his Monastical Cowl for the glorious robes of a Martyr.A. D.
3. This year the Southern Scots inhabiting Ireland, who, corrected by Pope Honorius, now kept the Canonical day of Easter, wrote Letters to the same Pope, accusing their Northern Coun|treymen of obstinacy in their erroneous practise, and moreover of reviving the poysonnous Doctrin of Pelagius. To these Letters an answer came the year following from Iobn the fourth of that name,A. D. 639. elected Pope: For in the mean time both Honorius and his Successour Severinus dyed. In which answer, recorded by S. Beda, we read that the said Northern Scots, according to the perverse humour of disobedient Spirits began now to renew the formall Heresy of the Quartodeci|mani, celebrating Easter with the Iews on the four|teenth day of the Moon.Bed. b. This Heresy, says S. Beda, now newly rose up among them, and did not infect the whole Nation, but some particular persons among thus. And the like may be affirmd of the Pelagian Heresy: However, certain it is that the Saxon Churches were free from these.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1. Ercombert King of Kent.
2.3. c. His Sister S. Eanswitha a Holy Abbesse: Her Gests.
8.9.10. K. Ercombert by a Law commands the Observation of Lent.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hun|dred and forty,A. D. 640. Bed. l. 3. c 8. saith S. Beda, Eadbald King of Kent pass'd out of this life, and left the govern|ment of the Kingdom to his Son Earcombert: which be managed most worthily the space of four and twenty years, and some months.
2. King Eadbald had maried Emma daughter of Theodobert King of Austrasia, by whom he had two sons, Ermenred and Ercombert, and one daughter calld Eanswitha. His eldest son Ermenred dyed before his Father, leaving be|hind him a most holy offspring, two sons, Ethelred and Ethelbert, both crownd with Martyrdom: and two daughters, Domnena or Ermenberga, and Ermengita.
3. But among all these the most eminent for sanctity was S. Eanswitha daughter of King Eadbald, whose Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe,Ap. Capgrav. in Enswi. and who dyed this same year with her Father. From her infancy she renoun|ced secular pomps, being desirous to serve God in solitude. But her Father had an intention to marry her to one of the Princes of the Nor|thumbers: to which mariage she with as much constancy, as might becom a tender Virgin, oppos'd her self, and by her discreet reasons obtaind of her Father that she might ever be a Virgin, consecrated to her heavenly Spouse. Whose heavenly conversation that she might

more freely enioy,A. D. 641. her Father gave her a town in Kent calld Folkston, adioyning to the Sea: Where she built a Monastery, very acceptable to God as did appear by a wonderfull acci|dent, which may be read in her Life in Cap|grave.
4. Her Example moved great numbers of devout Virgins in Kent to imitate her, and to be companions with her in her spirituall Em|ployment. One principall Act of her Devo|tion was dayly to give thanks to God for the Late immortall blessing by him conferred on the English in her Grandfathers dayes,Harps. sac. 7 c. 10. in discovering to them the heavenly light of his Gospell.
5. These Sacred Virgins found only one incommodity in this their happy retire|ment,Ap. Capgrav.  sap. which was a penury of sweet water: For the Monastery being seated on the top of the high rocks, the water necessary for their dayly uses was with great labour to be brought from a spring a good way distant. The Holy Virgin was sensible of this incon|venience: and after she had by prayer soli|cited our Lord, she went to the fountain more then a mile remote from the Monastery, and striking the Water with a Staffe, com|manded it to follow her. The deaf Element heard and obeyd the Sacred Virgins voyce, and against the inclination of Nature fol|lowed her steps, till overcoming all the dif|ficulties of the passage, it mounted up to the Monastery, where it abundantly served all their uses. One particular more encreas'd the admiration of the event: For this little rivolet in the way being to passe through a poole, flowed notwithstanding pure and free from all mixture.
6. After severall years innocently and chastly spent in the Office of Abbesse, she was at last seysed with a languishing infirmity, during which the flame of her love to her Eternall Spouse encreased, and at last on the last of August she was called to his embra|ces: though in our Martyrologe her Memory is celebrated the twelfth of September.Marty. Angl. 12. Sept. Her Body was deposed in the sayd Monastery, where it was held in great veneration, till the Sea breaking in forced them to remove it to the Church of the adjoyning Town Folk|ston consecrated to S. Peter, but which now is called by the name of S. Eanswitha.
7. The Monastery is in ancient Writings called the Monastery of Black Nunnes, no doubt from the colour of the habits worn by S. Eanswitha and her companions. Which argues that she received her Veyle, either from the Arch-bishop Honorius, or some of the Roman Monks of the Order of Saint Be|nedict.
8. As for her Brother Ercombert now King of Kent, he began his raign more prosperously then his Father Eadbald had done:A. D. 641. Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 1. being illustrious for his devotion to God, and piety to his countrey. For whereas his Grandfather and Father had pro|fessed Christian Religion without forbidding Ido|latry and destroying Idols; he esteemed it misbe|coming his Kingly devotion to suffer those Marks of impiety to remain, which his Predecessours had only condemned in their private judgment. Therefore all the Chappells of the Heathen Gods he cast down to the ground, that not any footstep of former superstition might remain to posterity. This he did by the suggestions of his most vertuous and pious Queen Saint Sexburga, daughter to Anna King of the East-Angles.
9. Moreover, saith S. Beda, he by Royal au|thority commanded the Fast of forty days in Lent to be strictly observed:Bed. l. 3. c. 8 Which Law least it should be exposed to contempt, he ordained condign pu|nishments against all transgressours. And thus he taught his Nation, too much addicted to gluttony, to accustome themselves to so|briety and temperance. But from hence Sir Henry Spelman unduly collects, that the Fast of Lent was not hitherto observed by the English.Spelm. tom. 1. Concil. f. 143. On the Contrary, the observation of Lent is as ancient as Christianity it self. We cele|brate the Fast of forty days, saith S. Hierom, ac|cording to the Tradition of the Apostles,Heron. Epist. 51. once a year, in a season congruous to us. And S. Basile speaking of his own age long before this, saith, Now this holy Fast is more perfectly ob|served,Basil Homil. de Land. Iein.
since the commendation of it is taught through the whole world: For there is neither Is|land nor continent, neither Citty nor Nation, how remote soever, to which the ordinance of ob|serving Lent is not arrived. That therefore which before was established by an Eccle|siasticall Law, King Ercombert by his Royal au|thority commanded to be observed by his Subjects, and those who would pretermitt it out of their feeble love to vertue, he terri|fied with a denunciation of temporall pu|nishments.
10. But how sacred and unviolable the Observation of the Quadragesimal Fast was not only in Kent, but through the whole Saxon-Heptarchy in the following age, is manifest from the ancient English-Saxon Laws, which the same Sir Henry Spelman has published in the Saxon character: among which this is the thirty seaventh Chapter viz,Ap. Spelm. tom. 1. f. 612.
The time of Lent ought to be kept with very strict observance, so that during that whole time, except on Sundays which are exempted from ab|stinence, fasting must not be dissolved. For those dayes are the Tenth of our whole year, which therefore we must passe with great devotion and Sanctity. In them therefore no occasion must be taken to dissolve our fast, which in other times may be permitted for charities sake: But this is by no means allowd in the time of Lent. At other times fasting is left in each mans will and choice: But not to fast in Lent, is to transgresse the Precept of God. Fasting at other times obtains a reward of abstinence: But in this whosoever does not fast, except sick persons and children, procures to himself a deserved punishment: for our Lord hath by Moyses, by Elias, and by his own example consecrated those days to a Sacred Fast.



A. D. 642.
IX. CHAP. IX. CHAP.

1.2. King Sigebert and King Egric slain by King Penda.
3. Anna King of the East Angles: His holy Offspring

A. D. 642.1. THE year of Grace six hundred forty two was mournfull to Brittany, being staind with the Blood of two most pious Kings Sigebert and Oswald. Four years before this Sigebert having surrendred the Kingdom to his Cousen Egric, was retired into a Monaste|ry. Now Egric during his short raign, had oft been vexed with the incursions of Penda King of the Mercia~s: but this year he invaded his countrey with a powerfull army, which he was not able to resist. In this danger, by common advice it was decreed to call King Sigebert out of his solitude: For which pur|pose Messengers were sent to solicite him to prefer the common care of the Kingdom be|fore his privat Devotions: He earnestly opposed a good while this proposal, but at last, saith Saint Beda,Bed. l. 3. c. 18. even against his will they drew him from his Monastery to the Army: for they hoped that the presence of so Noble and Valiant a Prince would encourage the fainting soldiers, ready for fear to disband. Notwithstanding Sigebert mind|full of his present profession, though he was en|compassed with a Royal army, would not act the part of a soldier, nor carry in his hand any other thing besides a rodd.
2 Thus unarmed, and with an intention to act the part of a General, onely with his counsell and prayers, he proceeded to the Battell: Which was violently begun by Penda: in which Sigebert being prepared to receive, not give wounds, took no care to defend his own life: So that he became an easy Vi|ctime to the Enemies cruelty. King Egric likewise was slain with him, and for a peri|shing Crown, received one that was immor|tall. How precious the death of Sigebert was, fighting for Religion and his countrey, posterity shewd by giving him the title of a Martyr: for with that dignity he is comme|morated in our Martyrologe on the seaven and twentieth of September:Marty. Ang 2. Septemb. but in the Gal|lican, on the seaventh of August.
3. The innocent blood of Sigebert and Egric watering this Eastern feild, made it fruit|fully budd with flowers of many royal ver|tues in his Successour,Id. Ib. which was Anna the Son of Eni, of the Royal family, a Prince of admira|ble Vertue, and Father of a most glorious Offspring, saith S. Beda. Now Eni was Son of Titullus, and brother of Redwald: so that Anna's suc|cession being legal, was unquestioned by all, Never any Saxon King was blessed with such a progeny: His son Erconwald, after|ward Bishop of London was for his Sanctity il|lustrious to the whole Church. His daughters were Queen Etheldreda, twice a wife, yet always a most chast Virgin: Sexburga also a Queen: Ethelburga a most holy Virgin, and Abbesse of Barking: Edilburga a Virgin like|wise, and Abbesse of Brigue: And lastly Withburga a chast Virgin: All which are in|scribed in our Martyrologe with the Title of Saints, concerning each of which we shall hereafter treat in due place. With so many glorious Stars did this one good King Anna adorn the palace of our Heavenly King.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. King Oswalds Mercy and Piety.
5.6. His desire to dye for his people.
7.8. His battell against Penda: and death.

1. KING Oswald yet remained alive, ex|pecting the like end of his race. But before we conduct him to his death,A. D. 64. it will be expedient, after the old Roman fashion to adorn and crown the Sacrifice before its immolation, by declaring some of those many vertues which he shewd both in li|ving and dying. We sayd some thing before of his Piety to God, and munificence in his service. These sublime vertues were accompanied with others regarding Gods poorest servants, whose wants and incommodities he would not only supply, when they were in his view, but he would often be inquisi|tive to find out objects of his mercy and li|berality. He never sent away from him any poore man empty-handed,Ap. Capgrav. in vit. Sanct. Oswald. but performed exactly that precept of our Lord, Give to every one who asks thee. Yea his liberality was so boundlesse, that he almost empoverished himself by supplying the indigence of the poore.
2. One Noble Example of this vertue is recorded by S. Beda,Bed. l. and generally all our Historians: which was this. On a certain Feast of our Lords Resurrection the Holy Bishop Aidan and King Oswald dined together: when one of the Kings servants coming in, told him that at the gate there stood a great mul|titude of beggars in great necessity. King Oswald glad of an occasion to exercise his Charity, stretched forth his hand and took up a silver dish full of meat, which he com|manded the servant to distribute among those poore, not the meat only, but the dish, which for that purpose was to be broken in peices. S. Aidan was much affe|cted with so commendable an expression of piety in the King, and taking that hand which had given the Plate, said, Let this hand never be consumed which has so liberally distri|buted the Gifts of God. This propheticall be|nediction God heard, and approved with a great Miracle: For after the Kings death, when all the rest of his body was dissolved

into dust that hand remaind entire both in the flesh and sinews for many ages, as shall be proved by many witnesses.
Bed. l. 3. c. 6.3. How acceptable these vertues were to Almighty God, he shewd by heaping on him even great temporal prosperity. For, sayes Saint Beda, King Oswald together with the Nation governd by him was blessed not only with a sure hope of a heavenly Kingdom, unknown to his Ancestours: but moreover, by Gods spe|ciall assistance who made both heaven and earth, he encreased his Dominion by the accesse of more Provinces, then any of his Progenitours had enioyd: For he not only united the Kingdoms of the Deiri and Bernicians, but had a supereminent power over the four Nations and Provinces of Brittany, which were divided into four tongues, of the Brittains, Picts, Scotts and English
Id. ib. c. 12.4. Yet did not the cares of so largean Empire withdraw his mind from a frequent conversation with God: On the contrary, the same Authour writes that whilst he managed the government of so many Provinces, his cheif solicitude and labours were how to obtain a cele|stiall Kingdom. The generall same gives that his frequent practise was to persist in his prayers from Morning Lawds to brad day: and that by reason of his almost continuall custom of Praying and praising God, wheresoever he was sitting he would hold his hands on his knees, with his face looking up to heaven: and lastly that he ended his life in the midst of his Prayers. For being compassed on all sides with enemies and weapons, when he saw himself upon the point to be slain he prayed for the soules of his soldiers.And hence arose the Now common Proverb, God have mercy on their soules, sayd King Oswald when he was falling dead to the Earth.
This expression of piety we English Catholicks to this day owe to this good King: for though the generall practise or the whole Church in all ages was to implore the Divine mercy for those who dyed in her Communion, yet this speciall form of expres|sing our Charity by saying, God have mercy n their soules, came from this most pious King, who in his last danger, as it were for|getting himself, became an intercessour for others.
5. Another eminent Example of the like Charity to others with neglect of himself, the same King formerly gave in the time of a wasting Pestilence.Ap. Capgrav|in vis. Sa.  Oswaldi. For being peirced to the soule with compassion, seing such a world of funeralls, he earnestly prayd to God, as King David had done, that he would spare his people, and turn the scourge against himself and his family. Which prayer Al|mighty God heard: for presently after the plague seised upon him, with such violence that he was brought to the utmost extremity. Lying thus a victime for the whole Nation, and inwardly ioyfull in hope that with his single death he should purchase a world of lives to others, he saw three persons of a sta|ture more then human, who approached to his bed, and conversing together spoke many words full of comfort to him:A. D. 634. At last one of them sayd to him; O King, thy Prayers and resignation are acceptable to God: Thou art one of ours, for shortly thou shalt receive an im|mortall crown for thy Faith, Charity and Piety. But that time is not yet come: For God at the present gives thee both thine own, and thy subiects live. Now thou art willing to dye for them: Shortly thou shalt dye far more happily a Martyr for God. Having said this, they disappeared leaving the King full of wonder: Who presently recoverd his health, and after that; not any of his subiects dyed of the same infection.
6. The Authour of his life adds, That the King was wont to relate to his Bishops,Ibid. that not only with his intellectual, but corporall eyes also he often saw Angelical Spirits in great splen|dour. By which visitations Divine love was much more kindled in his heart and a stu|dious care to encrease in all vertues. And because corporal purity doth frequently attend that of the mind, by the consent of his Queen Kineburga (daughter of Kinegils King of the West-Saxons) he abstaind from matrimonial conversation, knowing well how gratefull to heavenly spirits is an aver|sion from carnall sensuality.
7. Thus happily did King Oswald proceed in his course to heaven, when that scourge of all good men Penda King of the Mercians, envying the progresse of Christianity, and the glory of Oswald, became an instrument of exalting him to a heavenly Crown. For whilst King Oswalds thoughts were busied in advancing Chists Kingdom, the said Tyrant made an impression into a Province belonging to him: to repell which, King Oswald with an army mett him in a place by S. Beda calld Macerfelth.Bed. l. 3. c. 9.
8. It is not yet decided, in what Province that place of combat between these two Kings is seated. The inhabitants of Lancashire earnestly contend that King Oswald was slain neer a well known village of theirs calld Winwick, where they find a place to this day nam'd Macerfelth, and alledge like|wise an ancient Inscription in the Church of Winwick importing the same. And their con|iecture may seem to receive strength from this consideration, that the said Province cer|tainly belonged to the Dominion of King Oswald, who was assalted by Penda.
9. Notwithstanding Camden and others of our learned Writers doe rather design the place of the Combat in the Western part of Shropshire,Camden. in. Cornavi. s. neer the Kiver Morda, where there is a town from Oswald calld Oswestre,ap. Capgrav. invt. acti Osvvaldi and by the Brittains, Oswalds-Crosse: And this agrees with what wee read in Saint Oswalds life, that the place of the Combat was near the con|fines of Armorick Wales, seaven miles distant from Shrews bury, not full half a mile from King Offa's ditch dividing Wales from England, and Sixteen mile

from the Monastery of Wenlock.A. D. 642. In the feild where the battell was fought a Church called the White Church was founded to the honour of Saint Oswald, near which arises a fresh spring which the Inhabitants call Saint Oswalds foun|tain.
10. Now although Shropshire anciently belonged to the Kingdom of the Mercians, yet at this time it seems among other Pro|vinces to have been a portion of King Oswalds conquests. For the same Authour relates, how Penda a little before this had been overcome and put to flight by King Oswald, so that it seems that part of the Mercian kingdom was become an ac|cession to that of the Northumbers.
11. The two armies therefore ioyning here, that of King Oswald could not su|stain the fury of Penda, but after a short combat was forced either to seek safety by flight, or like devout Soldiers fighting for God and his Church, by patient expo|sing themselves to purchase immortality. King Oswald seing his Army dispersed, per|ceived that now the hower promised him by the Angels was come. Therefore he was not very solicitous to avoyd his Ene|mies weapons, but in the expression of William of Malmsbury,Malmsburg de Rg. l. 1. c. 3. having seen all his guards cutt in peices, though he had as it were a grove of iron weapons planted on his breast, yet neither the greivousnes of his wounds, nor the approach of death could hinder, or interrupt his devout Prayers to God for the salvation of his faithfull subjects. Thus was this Blessed King slain, saith Saint Beda, in a place called in the English tongue Macer|felth, in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred forty two, and the thirty eighth of his age, on the fifth day of August.
12. The barbarous Tyrant Penda was not satisfied with the death of his Enemy, but most cruelly raged against his dead body, which he cutt in peices, and cau|sed his head and armes, divided from the trunk, to be hung up on three stakes, as a Trophey and monument of his Cruelty, and to be a terrour to others.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1. 2. c. King Oswi buries the Relicks of his Brother S. Oswald.
5.6.7. The Incorruption of his hand: te|stified in severall ages.
8. 9. c. His other Relicks where dispo|sed: The great Veneration given to him: Churches built in his honour.

1. THE inhuman Tyrant Penda thought by his barbarous usage of the Holy King Oswalds liveles body to render him a spectacle of misery: but Almighty God shewd himself more powerfull to glorify him, then the Tyrant had been to dishonour him. For his Members had been for a whole years space exposed to the injuries of rain and tempests, yet notwithstanding they preserved their former lineaments, lively freshnesse and comlines. The head and left arm continued all that time hanging on the stakes, and the right arm was faln into water: for no man durst take them away or shew any regard to them, for fear of the Tyrant.
2. At last Oswy the Brother and Successour of King Oswald by a Divine Oracle was admo|nished to perform due respect to his Bro|thers torn Body, by bestowing an honourable buryall on it. Therefore fearles of the Ty|rants rage or power,Bed. l. 3. c. 6. he gathered an Army, and marching into that Province he came to the place: Where taking out of the Water the right Arm, he inclosed it in a Silver Boxe, and reverently deposed it in the Church of S. Peter in a Citty then called Bebba from a Queen of that Name, now Bamburg. The lest arm likewise he layd there in a place sepa|rate from the other, as also the Body. And the whole Body,Malmsbur de Reg. l. 3. c. 6 sayth William of Malmsbury, ac|cording to the course of Nature, was turnd into dust: But the arms and hands, by divine power doe remain incorrupt, as an Historian of great veracity affirms.
3. How long those Sacred Relicks remaind there, was to the said Authour in certain. A report there is that a certain Monk of Peter|borough perceiving great negligence in kee|ping that Treasure, stole away the right arm and Silver boxe, and deposed them in his own Monastery.Ingulph ad A D. 128 f. 891. Ingulphus a grave Writer con|firms this Suspicion, for relating the cruel depopulations made by the Infidell Danes in that countrey, he declares how the Abbot and Convent there were forced to fly, who carried with him the Sacred Relicks of the Holy Virgins Kineburga, and Kineswitha: and the Priour, says he, accompanied with some of his Brethren, taking the arm of S. Oswald King, fled with it to the Isle of Ely.
4. The benediction of S. Aidan (saying, Let this hand never be corrupted) was fullfilld,Bed. l. 3. c. 6. saith Beda, for when it was severed from the rest of the Body after the battell, it remains to this day in|corrupt. Now what this learned and devout Historians relates of his own time, which was almost a hundred years after the death of S. Oswald: the succeeding Writers in following ages testify also with regard to their times:Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3. For William of Malmsbury, who wrote four hundred years after S. Beda, hath this Ex|pression, I beleive that the Truth of that Divine Oracle, He dispersed, he gave to the poor, his iustice remains for ever, was fullfilld in King Oswald. For that royal right hand, which had bestowd so many Alm, together with the arm, skin and sinws remains to this day fresh and in|corrupt: but the rest of the Body, beside the bones, did not escape the common condition of mortality, but was dissolved into dust. This may seem strange to the Reader: but none has the impudence to dare to deny the Truth of this.
5. In the next age after lived Roger Hove|den, who was no Monk (this is added, because Protestant Writers impute such stories to the fi|ction of Monks) who writes thus,Hoden part. 1. f. 403. In the Citty Bebba, seated on the top of a Mountain, is a beauti|full Church, in which there is a precious boxe con|taining the right hand of the holy King Oswald, which remains uncorrupted.Floril. ad A. D. 644. After him lived Mathew of Westminster who gives this testi|mony, In the fight where King Oswald was slain, his right hand and arm was cutt of, which to this day remains free from corruption. In the fol|lowing age Iohn Capgrave thus writes,Capgrav. in S. Osvvalds. When King Osald was slain, his Arme was cutt from his body which hitherto remains incorrupt.
6. Polydor Virgil, a secular Preist, in the next age recites the Propheticall speech of S. Aidan to King Oswald,Pabr. virg. l. 4. May this hand never perish: This, saith he, we may beleive proceede from Divine Inspiration: For the same hand always remaind entire, though the body was con|sumed: which is still preserved in a decent boxe, and with great veneration deposed in the Church of S. Peter in the Royal Citty. Lastly Nicholas Harpsfeild a secular Preist likewise,Harpsf. sa 7 c. 26. who wrote not long after, says yet more ex|pressly, S. Aidan who then sate at Table, ad|miring this munificence of the King, prayd that a hand so liberal might never wither. Which Prayer to this our times did never want effect, c. That munificent hand indeed did never wither: For what S. Beda and our following Historians affirmd to be true, each one in respect of his own age, our present age likewise hath confirmed. There are at this day alive Witnesses of great worth and veracity beyond all exception who have testi|fied to mee that themselves saw the same hand.
7. Now let the Reader iudge whether such a chain of Tradition deserves not rather our assent, then the impudent charge of lying layd on all our Ancestours by the Centuria|tors of Magdeburg, who without any ground or suspicion from Antiquity impute forgery, Superstition, or what other crime they please to Writers, whose learning and piety has been approved and co~mended by the whole Church.
8. As for the other Relicks of this holy King, his Sacred Head was deposed in the Monastery of Lindesfarn, which himself had lately founded for his Bishop S. Aidan. It was afterward removed from thence, and more decently buried with the Body of S. Cuthbert. And when the See of Lindesfarn was translated to Durham about the year of Grace one thousand and twenty, together with the Body of S. Cuthbert, the same Head was removed by Edmand Bishop of that See: for William of Malmsbury a hundred years after testifies, that the Head of S. Oswald, together with his arms was found there.
9. His other bones, together with the trunk of his body,Bed. l. 3. c. 11 saith S. Beda, were by the industry and devotion of Offrida wise to King Ethelred son of Oswi at this time King of the Northumbers, re|moved to the Monastery of Bardeney in Lincoln|shire: Who likewise recounts how when the Monks refused to receive these Sacred relicks out of an ancient hatred to his person, as a stranger and Enemy to the Mercians, by a Pillar of Light which all the night before stood over the Charriot in which these Holy Relicks were exposed to the aire, they ear|nestly begged that their Church might be ho|nourd with them. And many other wonder|full Miracles recounted by him, by William of Malmsbury and others, which God was plea|sed to work in severall ages by the interces|sion of this holy King: all these may be read in those Authours, for I have no inclination to transcribe them.d. Bed. ib.  l.  c. . Onely I will add, that upon the incursion of the Danes, these Relicks were from the Monastery of Bardeney translated to Glocester. Yea so illustrious was the Memory of his Sanctity, that severall other forrain Churches, in Ireland, Flander, c. were ambi|tious to be partakers of them.
10. Yea not only the bones of this Blessed King were held in veneration, and operative in miracles: But according to the testimony of S. Beda, in the place where fighting for his countrey and Religion he was slain by Pagans,Bed. l. 3. c. 9. fre|quent cures were wrought both on men and cattell. Whence it came to passe that many took of the dust it self where his body fell, and putting it into wa|ter, thereby restord health to the sick. Which custom was so much frequented, that by the continuall deminution of earth a trench was made the heighth of a man in depth, c.
11. So great was the veneration born among us to this Holy King, that severall Churches and Monasteries were built and dedicated to him: As in Cumberland neer the River Itun there is Kirk-Oswald: another in Northumberland at Si|lecester neer the Picts wall: a third in Lincoln|shire at Bardeney: a fourth at Glocester when his Relicks were translated thither: And in York|shire the Monastery of Nosthil was consecrated to him,Camden in Yorkh. saith Camden: Now that which en|creased the reverence to this holy King was, because,Malmsb. de Reg. l. c. 3. saith William of Malmsbury he gave

the first-fruits of Sanctity to his Nation:A. D. 643. for be|fore him I known not any of the English illustrious for miracles. To conclude, his Memory is ce|lebrated both in the Roman and English Mar|tyrologes on the fifth of August.Martyrl. Rom. 5. Aug. Some part of his Relicks are sayd to have been transla|ted beyond sea into Flanders and reposed in the Monastery of Bergs S. Winok,Miraus in Fast Bely. the Memory of which Translation is celebrated there on the twelfth day before the Calends of Iune.


XII. CH.XII. CHAP.

1.2. Oswi and Oswin Kings of the Northum|bers.
3.4. c. K. Kenewalch succeeds Kinegils, His Apostacy: and Repentance.
9. The Monastery of Malmsbury.

1. AFter S. Oswald was translated to a hea|venly kingdom,A. D. 613. saith Saint Beda, his Brother Oswi, a young wan of about thirty years, succeeded him in his throne, which with great labour he possessed eight and twenty years. He was onely naturall brother to King Oswald, for he was born to Ethelfrid by a Concu|bine. At the beginning he was onely King of the Bernicians:Id. ib. For saith the same Authour, he made his consort in the Kingdom Oswin, descended from the royal family, being the son of Osric, of whom we treated before, a man of excel|lent piety and Religion, who governd the Pro|vince of the Deiri seaven years, enioying great affluence of all things and beloved by all.
2. These two Princes for some years raign'd in great concord, being united both in blood and Religion. But afterward by giving are to flatterers and sycophants, enmity arose between them, which proceeded so far, that war was declared, the successe wherof we shall declare in due season.
3. The same year that King Oswald dyed in the North, Kinigils also ended his life in the West. He had lately embraced the Faith by the preaching of S. Birinus. An argument of his Piety was his demolishing the Pagan Temple at Winchester,Godvvin. in Catal Epict. Winton. which had been polluted with the su|perstitions of Idols, and in the place erecting a Church: which notwithstanding, being intercepted by death, he could not finish, the care wherof he left to his son.Harpsf. saec. 7. c. 18. To this Church he added a Monastery, saith Harpsfeild, the revenews wherof were so great, as ancient Monuments record, that the whole region at seaven miles distance about, was assigned by Kinegils to its use. The Church was dedicated to the honour of S. Peter.
4. After a long and quiet raign for the space of one and thirty years, he ended his life, and left his Successour Kenwalch (calld by others Kenwald) his Son: For Quechelm his eldest, dyed before him. Besides Kenwalch, he left an|other son alive,A. D. 644 named Kentwin. William of Malmsbury adds a third calld Egelwin a Holy man,Malmsb, de Pontif. l. 2. f. 255. and patron of the Monastery of Adeling: for treating of that Monastery, he saith: The Monks of that place are few in number, and poore: who notwithstanding doe at least reap comfort, if not ioy from their poverty, by reason it affords them solitude and quietnes. They de highly exalt the praises of their Patron S. Egelwin, of whose san|ctity they have experience by many benefits. The constant fame is, that he was Brother to Kenwalch King of the West-Saxons, and by his vertue yet more ennobled his blood: for though he was conti|nually chaind by a long infirmity, yet that did not abate his diligence and fervour in the service of God. At last he dyed happily, and by his inter|cession is present to all who invoke his help.
5. Kenwalch succeeded his Father Kinegils in his kingdom, but not in his piety: For, saith S. Beda,Bed. lib. 5. c 7 he refused to embrace (or, renounced) he Faith and Sacraments of the heavenly Kingdom and not long after deservedly lost the power of his temporal Kingdom. This Character also William of Malmsbury gives of him:Malmsbur de  l. 1. c 2. In the beginning of his raign he might be compard with the worst Princes, but in the middle, and conclusion with the best. Some write that by occasion of a prosperous combat fought against the Brit|tains he grew insolent, and trode underfoot all Laws both humane and Divine But most probably his unhappines arose from his unlawfull repudiating his Queen Sexburga, Si|ster to Penda King o the Mercians.
6. This afront, encreased by his marrying another wife, Penda deeply resenting, saith S. Beda, made war against him in the third year of his raign, and deprived him of his Kingdom: so that he was forced to seek refuge with Anna King of the East-angles: with whom he lived in banish|ment three years, and there came to the acknow|ledgment of the true Faith. For King Anna was a pious Prince, and happy in a holy Offspring Kinewalch his conversion came by the admo|nitions of this holy King, and his Apostolick Bishop S. Felix, by whom he was baptised.
7. By this trienniall Disciplin the Pride of Kinewalch being depressed, and his lawfull Queen Sexburga restored to his bed, he regain'd his Kingdom and afforded to his Subiects a pleasing spectacle of his change. The reco|vering his kingdom seems to have been effe|cted rather by force then covenants:Huntingd. l. 2. for Hun|tingdon relats how he bestowd on his Kinsman Aedred, who had assisted him three thousand villa|ges neer Aescendun. This Aedred is by William of Malmsbury calld Cuthred,Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2. who was his Brother Quichelms son, on whom he munificently bestowd almost the third part of his Kingdom.
8. Kenewalch thus restored to his Kingdom, and his reason also, to secure his crown for the future addicted himself to piety: He shewd great reverence to the holy Bishop Bi|rinus: and the Church, begun by his Father, he so diligently finished,Id. ibid. that the same Writer gives him the whole praise: For, says he, he was so religious, that he was the first of the

Saxons who built a Church to God at Winchester: which was so fair that though when it was made an Episcopall See it was more beautified by Work|manship, yet the same structure remained.
9. At this time was founded the famous Monastery of Malmsbury by Maidulf an Irish|man, with the assistance of King Kenelwalk. It is seated in Wiltshire, where in former time Dunwallo Mulmutius King of the Brittains had built a Town which he called Car-bla|don: which having been burnt in the Saxon warrs, out of its ruines was raised a Castle, called by the Saxons in their tongue Ingle|burn; till Maidulf an Irish-Scott,Camden. in Wilon. saith Cam|den, a man eminent in learning and piety, in|vited with the pleasant solitude of a wood growing under it, lead there an Eremiticall Life: After|ward he opened there a School for learning, and consecrating himself together with his Schollars to a Monasticall Profession, he built there a Mo|nastery. Hence from this Maidulf, instead of In|gleburn, it was called Maidulfs-bury, and after|ward more contractedly Malmsbury: Some Histo|rians call it Meldunum.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1. Ithamar a Saxon, Bishop of Rochester.
2. Birth of S. Swibert.
3. S. Foillan Brother of S. Fursey.
4.5. Death of S. Birinus: whose Successour was S. Agilbert.
6. Death of Saint Felix Apostle of the East-Angles.

A. D. 641. SAint Paulinus formerly Arch-bishop of York, and afterward Bishop of Rochester, happily and holily dying in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred forty four, Ho|norius Arch-bishop of Canterbury saith Saint Beda,Bed. l. 3. c. ordaind in his place Ithamar a Native of Kent, but in learning and piety equal to his Pre|decessours. This was the first of a Saxon race who was exalted to an Episcopal degree in our Island. Who after he had the space of seaventeen years with great sanctity gover|ned the See of Rochester, received the reward of his labours.
2. The year six hundred forty seaven was illustrious for the birth of S. Suibert,A. D. 647. after|ward the Holy Apostle of Westphalia. Concer|ning whose original Haraeus from Marcelli|nus a Preist, and S. Ludger Bishop of Munster who largely compild his Life, thus more compendiously writes: In the foresaid year in England was born the Blessed child Suibert:Haraeus ad 1. Mart. His Fathers name was Sigebert Count of Nortingran in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, and his Mo|ther was the pious Countesse Bertha. His birth was prevented by a Divine vision, for a star of wonderfull brightnes appeard to his Mother in sleep, from which two gloriously shining beames proceeded, the one pointing towards Germany, the other towards France:A. D. 650. and the star it self, after she had a good while contemplated it, seemd to fall from heaven into her bed. When the child was arrived at the age of fifteen years, he preferd a Religious life before a Secular, and was graciously received into the Monastery of Bardeney. Where having spent nine years in great austerity, com|punction, prayer, sacred Lection and other Mena|sticall Disciplines, he attaind the dignity of Sa|cerdotall Order. Of him more hereafter.
3. In the year six hundred forty nine Foillan the Brother of S. Fursey,A. D. 649. and who had been left by him Superiour in his Monastery of nober|bury in the Kingdom of the East-Angles, seaven years after his departure following his exam|ple went to Rome, and from Pope Martin obtaind an Episcopal benediction to convert Infidels. Which having received, he went into France, where by the gift of the holy Virgin Gertrude, he founded the Monastery of Fosse, on the River Berven.
4. The year following S. Birinus the Apostle of the West-Saxons dying,A. D. 650. as hath been declared, there came very opportunely an Apostolicall man out of Ireland into those parts to succeed him. Concerning whom S. Beda thus writes:Bed. l. 3. c. 7. After that Kenwalk was re|stored to his kingdom, there came into that Pro|vince out of Ireland a certain Bishop named Agilbert, by Nation a Frenchman, but who had abode a good space in Ireland for the opportunity of studying Scriptures. This Holy Bishop came to the King, and voluntarily took on him the em|ployment of preaching. The King therefore obser|ving his abilities and industry, desired him to accept the Episcopal See then vacant, and to becom the Bishop of his Nation, whereto he condescended, and governed that Church many years.
5. In the Gallican Martyrologe this S. Agil|bert is said to have been born in the territory of Paris of a Royal Stock:Martyrol. Gallican. 11. Octob. his Fathers name was Bel|frid, and his Mothers, Aga. But wheras it is there added, that the See of his Bishoprick was Winchester, the Authour Andrew Sauay was mistaken: for though in Agilberts time the Bishoprick of the West-Saxons was divided into two Sees, one remaining at Dorchester, and the other placed at Winchester, S. Agilbert con|tinued at Dorchester.
6. The same year S. Felix the Apostle of the East-Angles also dyed:Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2 f 237. Of whom William of Malmsbury thus writes: S. Felix after gover|ning his Bishoprick seaventeen years, dyed and was buried in the Church of his See at Dunwich. Thence he was translated to Seham, a town seated near a Lake heretofore dangerous to such as would passe by boat into Ely: but now a Caussey being made, men passe thither commodiously on foot. There still remain marks of a Church burnt by the Danes, and in it were burnt the inhabitants like|wise. But the holy Bishops Body a long time after was sought for, and with much adoe found, and translated to the Monastery of Ramsey. His Memory is celebrated both in the English,Martyrol. Rom. 8. Mart Gallican and Roman Martyrologes on the eighth of March. And his Successour

in the Bishoprick was Thomas his Deacon of the Province of the Girvians,A. D. 651. saith Saint Beda: who was consecrated by Honorius Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. c. War between King Oswi and King Oswin.
4.5 King Oswin to spare his Subjects blood, dispersd his army: Is murdred.
6 His great Humility
7.8 c. The Translation of his Relicks, c.

A. D. 651. Malmbar de Reg. l. 1. c. 3.1. THE two Kings of the Northumbers, Oswi King of the Bernician, and Oswin King of the Deiri, hitherto lived in good correspondence, having passed nine years in their raign: But in the year of Grace six hun|dred fifty one, by the practises of wicked Sycophants, this amity was disturbed, and the mind of Oswi incensed against his kins|man Oswin. Oswi a long time reverencing the Sanctity of Oswin, by a principle of Christianity had kept himself free from am|bition and discord, but at last by suggestions of impious Parasites, a quarrel was raised about the confines of each kingdom, which not being decided by Messages and treaties, a declared war broke forth this year.
2. Oswi the feircer of the two, and greedy of prey, had gathered a very potent army: But Oswin with inconsiderable forces came rather to deprecate a combat, then to em|ploy force, more carefull to prevent the shedding of Civill Christian blood, then to provide for his own safety. Therefore, saith Saint Beda,Bed. l. 3 c. 14. perceiving that he was unable to stand in fight against the numerous army of his Enemy, he judged it best not to proceed at that time in the war, but to reserve himself for a bet|ter season. He therefore sent his army home, telling them, that he would not expose them to slaughter by an Enemy much stron|ger then himself: that the controversy should be decided with his single personal danger: and in case he miscarried, he ad|vised them for their own safety to submitt to Oswi. Thus he dismissed his soldiers, in a place called Wilfares-Dun (or the Hill of Wilfar) situated ten miles westward from a Town called Cataract.
3 Thus being left attended by one onely soldier, named Tonder, e retired to a Town called Gilmy or Gelingam near Richmond in Yorkshire, which he had lately bestowed on a Count called Hudwald, whom he much fa|voured. There he supposed he might lye hid securely, and that Oswi contenting himself with usurping his kingdom, would not pursue his life: or however, that Hudwald so obliged by him, would afford him a safe Sanctuary.
4. But experience shewd that he every way deceived himself: For Oswi knowing that he could not securely enioy the King|dom as long as a Prince so beloved and reve|renced by his subjects, was alive, sent the Steward of his house Ethelwin to search out and kill the King. Ethelwin too too diligent makes enquiry through the whole Province for Oswin, urging all men by Promises, rewards and terrible threatnings to discover him. Hunwald either allured with gain, or affrighted with danger treacherously betraid his King and Benefactour. Assoon as Oswin saw himself discovered, and the place en|compassed with soldiers, he desired Ethelwin to content himself with his death alone, and to spare his companion Tunder, since his life only was sought by Oswi. But the cruel executioner presently slew them both for indeed the faithfull soldier refused to survive his King. This murder was commit|ted on the thirteenth day before the Caends of September.
5. The death of this pious King was greatly bewayld by all:Westmonast.  for from his child hood, saith Mathew of Westminster, he was a devout Professour of Christian Religion: He was tall in stature, valiant, civill, prudent, liberall: he was as his table sober, in his bed modest, affable to all, and between the poor and rich he caried him|self so, that the poor regarded him as their equall, and the rich as their Master. Whence it came to passe, that for the civility of his Royal mind all sought accesse to him and tenderly lov'd him, even out of forrain Provinces. The like chara|cter S. Beda gives of him.
6. But among all his vertues the same Authour most commends his Humility, a worthy example whereof he thus relates: He had bestowd on the Holy Bishop Aidan a horse,Bed. l. 3 c. 14. on which, though ordinarily he went afoot, sometimes he passed the rivers, or upon necessity rode a iourney. Awhile after as the Bishop was travelling, a poor man mett him and begged an almes: The Bishop presently lighting down, commanded the horse to be given him, with all his sumptuous furniture: for he was very merci|full to the poor; and a Father to such as were in misery.This being related to the King, he said to the Bishop as they were ready to sitt down to table, My Lord Bishop, what meant you to give so generous a horse to a beggar, which I gave you for your own use? We had horses of lesse valew, or some other gifts which would have suffised him. The Bishop presently answerd him, Why says your Maesty so? Is a colt in more esteem with you, then the Son of God? Ater these speeches had passed between them, they entred into the dining room: and the Bishop sate in his place: but the King being newly come from hunting, stood with his servants warming himself at the fire.
And there calling to mind the Bishops words to him, he putt off his sword, and in hast went and cast himself at the Bishops feet, beseeching him to

pardon him, for, said he,I will never speak or cen|sure you for what you give to Gods children of my goods, be it never so much.
The Bishop seing this, was deeply struck with it, and rising, took the King up, assuring him that he was very well sa|tisfied, upon condition he would be chearfull and sitt down to meat. Now whilst the King at the Bishops request expressed much ioy, the Bishop on the other side began to be very sad, insomuch as he could not contain himself from weeping. Which being observed by his Preist, he asked him in his own countrey-language, which neither the King nor his servants understood, why he wept?The Bishops answer was, I am assured that this good King will not live long: for till this hower I never saw an humble King: whence I conclude that he will shortly be snatched out of this life.
And indeed it was not long after, that the Kings death made good the Holy Bishops Prophecy.
Bed. ibid. ap. apgrav.  S. Osvvins. 7. The place where he was slain, was in the English tongue called Ingethling, where his body was ignobly buried. It was after|ward called Gilling, not far distant from Rich|mond: and there saith Saint Beda, and the Authour of his life. Queen Eanfled wife of King Oswi and Kings Oswins kinswoman, having obtaind permission from her husband built a Mo|nastery for the expiation of his death, in which dayly Prayers were to be offred to God for the re|demption of both the Kings soules, of him who had been slain, and him by whose command he was slain. Of which Monastery she appointed Abbot a certain devout man named Trumhere, by nation an Englishman, but instructed and ordaind by the Scotts, who was also kinsman to the King. This holy man was afterward made Bishop of the Southern Mercians under their King Wulsere, where he converted great multitudes to Christ
8. This Monastery and Church by the fu|rious incursion of the Danes was so totally destroydHeved. ad A. D. 1065. that the memory of King Oswin was abolished. But about the year of Christ one thousand sixty five, by a vision in sleep a certain Monk of the Church of Tinmouth was admonished to inform the Bishop where the Holy Kings body lay: which being taken up, afforded a most sweet odour, and was there with great veneration deposed in the Church of Tinmouth. A second Translation followed in the year of Grace eleaven hun|dred and ten:Math. Paris. . A. D. 1110 when his Sacred Relicks were removed to a New Church in the same town, dedicated to our Blessed Lady.
Martyr. Aug. 20. Aug Wal|singh. in Rich. 2. A. D. 1384.9. After which time mens devotion to this Holy King and Martyr much encreased, the twentieth day of August being assigned for his Festivall.And Thomas Walsingham Historiographer to King Richard the second relates how by a strange prodigy, the ne|glect of that Feast was punished: For, saith he, two Marriners at New-castle on the Tyne, on that day being busy at work in hewing a peice of Timber for their ship, at every stroke with their axe, great quantity of blood issued. And when one of them per|sisted notwithstanding in his work, and turned the timber,Id. in Hy|podugm. Nestr. A. D. 1384. still the blood on all sides flowd abundantly out of it. This Mi|racle, says he, was seen by very many, and ve|rified in an assembly of Ecclesiasticks appoin|ted o examine it: and the peice of Timber all staind with blood, was caried into the Church of Tinmouth where the Saints Body reposed.


XV. CHAP.XV. CHAP.

1.2. c. Death of Saint Aidan Bishop of Lindesfarn: His vertues, c.

1. THE deplorable death of this Holy King Oswin was attended with that also of S. Aidan Bishop of Lindesfarn,Bd. l. 3. c 14 for thus writes S. Beda: On the twelfth day after the murder of the King dyed likewise the Holy Bishop who tenderly loved him, to wit, the day before the Calends of September.
2. The place where this Holy Bishop dyed is described by the same Authour to be a countrey village belonging to the King,Id ibd c. 17. where there was a Church, and a lodging prepared for the Bishop, to which he fre|quently retired to enjoy a better commodi|ty for preaching. For he had nothing in his own possession but a few small feilds about the said Church. His lodging was a Tent pit|ched against the Western wall of the Church: here leaning his head against the side of the Tent, he gave up the ghost, in the seaven|teenth year after he had been Bishop. His Body was caried to the Isle of Lindesfarn, and buried in the Church-yard of the Monastery. But afterwards when a Church more magni|ficent was there built, it was translated thi|ther, and deposed at the right hand of the Altar, with veneration due to so holy a Prelat.
3. How great the merit of this Blessed Bishop was (saith the same S. Beda) God was pleased to shew by severall Miracles.Id. ib. c. 15. It will suffise to relate onely two of them in this place. A certain Preist named Vtta, a man highly esteemed even by Princes for his gravity and integrity, was sent into Kent to conduct from thence Eanfleda the daughter of King Edwin to be wife to King Osin This Preist went thither by land, but intended to return by Sea with the Virgin. Before h iourney he went to the Holy Bishop Aidan desi|ring his prayers for a safe iourney to himself and company.The Bishop gave him his benediction, and withall delivered to him some Oyle which had been sanctified, saying, I know that when you shall be at Sea, a contrary wind and tempest will come on you: but remember that when you are in danger, you cast this Oyle into the Sea, aend th tempest will pesently cease, and your return will be prosperous. All which particulars succeeded in

order exactly as the Holy Bishop had foretold.
Thus the Man of God both foretold the Tempest by the Spirit of Prophecy, and by the power of the same spirit, though corporally absent, he calmed the Tempest when it was risen. The account of this Miracle I received, not from a relatour of doubt|full credit, but a Preist of our Church of great in|tegrity, called Cynimund, who protested that it was told him by Vtta himself, the Preist to whom and by whom it befell.Ibid.
4. The Second Miracle was, that when King Penda entred with an Army into those parts, and was determined to sett on fire the Royal Citty (which took its name from Queen Ebba) for which purpose he encompassed it with heaps of wood and other combustible matter, to which fire was applied; S. Aidan being then retired into his Isle of Farne, about two miles distant from that Citty, and seeing the fire  smoke ascending up-wards, he lifted up his eyes full of tears to hea|ven, and said, Behold, o Lord, how great mischeif Penda does to thy people: Assoon as he had said those words, the wind immediatly turned the flames upon those who had kindled them: So that the enemies forbore to im|pugn the Citty, which they saw was defen|ded from heaven.
5. Now though S Aidan and his White Monks did erroneously swerve from the ge|nerall practise of the Church in the Obser|vation of Easter,Baron. ad A. D. 634. yet saith Baronius, far be it from us to reckon among the Quartodeciman He|reticks such a man, who by an Apostolick Spirit and power converted that Nation to the Faith. How their practise differed from that of those Hereticks we have already declared out of S. Beda. His Memory is celebrated in the Roman Martyrologe on the one and thir|tieth of August: where this elogium is given of him: In England on the said day is the com|memoration of S. Aidan Bishop of Lindesfarn,Martyrolog. Rom. 31. August.
whose soule S. Cuthbert, then a keeper of sheep, seing caried up to heaven, he left his sheep, and became a Monk.


XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

1.2. c. Saint Cuthbert a child sees Saint Aidans soule caried into hea|ven: whereupon he quitts the world: and retires into the Monastery of Mailros.

1. THAT which the Roman Martyrologe wraps up in a few words touching the occasion of S. Cuthberts undertaking a Monasticall Profession, S. Beda more at large sets down in his Book of the Life of that Saint, which for the reverence due both to him and S. Aidan, we will he transcribe: And shall hereafter have equent occasion to write more of his Sanctity, the rudiments whereof now began.
2. When the Divine Grace which governs the lives of Gods servants was pleased that the de|vout young man Cuthbert,Bed. in vit. S Cuthberti cap. 4. by undergoing a more austere Profession should obtain a higher reward of Glory, he was then employed in the guard of sheep committed to his care in the remote moun|tains. One night it hapned that whilst he was watching in prayer, his companions then being asleep: he saw on a sudden a light from heaven so bright that it dispelled all the darknes: and therein he saw great multitudes of Angels des|cending to the earth, and presently after return to heaven carying with them a soule of a mar|vellous brightnes. This sight caused great com|punction in the devout youth, and an earnest de|sire to undertake a spiritual Life, that thereby he might be partaker of eternall felicity among Gods Saints. And presently giving thanks and praises to God for this favour: he also wakened his companions, inciting them with brotherly exhortations to ioyn with him in praising God:Alas, poor wretches, said he, we are wholly given up to sleep and idlenes, and are unworthy to see the light of Christs Serva~ts, who are always watch|full in his Praises. Behold, I, whilst I was even now praying, saw the great wonders of God: the Gate of Heaven was opened, and the soule of some holy person was conducted by Angels into the glory of heavenly Mansions, where it will for ever blessedly behold our Lord, whilst we remain ne|gligent in this darknes below. Surely this was either a Holy Bishop, or some other perfect Chri|stian, whom I saw with such resplendent bright|nes and such Quires of Angels caried up to hea|ven. These words of S. Cuthbert did not a little inflame the hearts of the other Shephards to praise God.
3. The next day he was informed that S. Aidan Bishop of the Church of Lindesfarn, a man of ad|mirable piety, dyed that very houre in which he had seen his soule mounting to heaven. Whereu|pon he presently resigned up the sheep which he had fed, to their owner, and resolved without delay to goe to a Monastery.
4. S. Cuthbert now meditating seriously on his entrance into a new and more stricks life, the Di|vine Grace was present to him, confirming his mind in that good purpose, and moreover by ma|nifest signs shewed, that to those who seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousnes, all things necessary for bodily subsistence shall be admini|stred. For on a certain day as he was iourneying alone, about the third hower he turned aside into a certain village, which he saw a good distance from him, and entred into the house of a certain Matron, being desirous to repose there awhile, and to gett food not for himself, but his horse. The woman received him kindly, and earnestly de|sired that she might make some thing ready for his refection. But the devout young man refused, telling her, that he could not eat because it was a day of Fast. For it was indeed Friday, on which most faithfull Christians, out of reverence to our Lords Passion doe prolong their fasting till three

of the clock after noon. She notwithstanding being devoutly addicted to hospitality, persisted in her desire, and told him that all the rest of his iourney he would find neither village, nor any habitation of men:Therefore said she, I desire you before you goe to receive some suste|nance, for fear you should faint, if you fast all day.
Notwithstanding out of a love to the Re|ligious custom of fasting he would not be over|come with the womans importunity, but fasting as he was, he returned to his iourney, and so continued till evening.
5. Here we see that from the beginning of the English-Saxon Church the fast of Fri|day was observed, so as that it was not per|mitted to dissolve the fast before evening They likewise anciently kept the fast of Wednesday: but custom afterward modera|ting the piety of our Ancestours, tempered that rigour, affixing the observance only to Friday. Thus we read in an ancient English National Council at Enham this among other Decrees,Spelm. tom 1. concil f. 51. lb f. 546. Every Friday, except it be a Festival, a Fast must be observed. The same is found among the Ecclesiasticall Laws of King Ina and King Canutus: Both which are recorded by Sir H. Spelman. But let us prosecute S. Cuthberts iourney.
Bed. vbi sup.6. When Saint Cuthbert saw that by reason of the evenings approach he could not finish his iourney that day, neither was there any lodg|ing near, as he was riding, he saw certain cot|tages which in the Sommer time the Heards|en had hastily raised up for their present use, but then the winter approaching, were left empty. Thither he went with an intention to stay all night, and tying his horse to the wall he gathered up a bundle of hay which the wind had blown from the house-covering, and gave it him to eat: and himself passed his time in Prayer. But on a sudden as he was repeating Psalms, he saw the horse lift up his head, and with his teeth biting some thing which was on the house roof, and presently after he drew down a linnen cloth wrapped up. Being desirous therefore to know what that was, as soon as he had finished his Prayers, he took up the linnen, and found wrapped up in it half a loaf of Bread warm from the Oven, and so much flesh as would suffise for one refection:For which he ioyfully praised God saying, Blessed be God who vouch|safed to provide a supper both for mee and my companion. Half of the Bread therefore he gave to the horse, and the other half he eat himself.
7. From that day he was ever after more willing and diligent to observe Fasts, percei|ving that in that solitude the same mercifull Lord had provided sustenance for him, who in old times had by the ministery of Crows a long time nourished the Prophet Elias in the wildernes with the like food: for his eyes are upon such as fear him and hope in his mercy, to deliver their soules from death, and nourish them in time of famine. This passage was related to mee by a certain Religious Preist of our Monastery at the mouth of the River Wire, named Inguald, who is yet alive, a very old man and one who can better see heavenly objects with the eyes of his mind, then outward things with his bodily eyes: and he protested that he heard this from S. Cuthberts own mouth being then Bishop.
8. Saint Cuthbert being thus wonder|fully refreshed,Bed. ibid. went in the strength of that meat whither he intended. Now there were at that time both in the Church of Lindesfarn men who lived in Regular obser|vance, and likewise Monks at Mailros on the Rver Tweed:
Both which Communities had been instituted by the Holy Bishop Aidan. At Miros, Eata was Abbot, and under him Bosilus was Priour of the Monks:Id. ibid.
Thither Saint Cuthbert went. Boisilus, saith Saint Beda, kindly received the devout young man, and when he had declared to him the Motive of his iourney, he detaind him there, approving much his resolution to prefer a Mo|nasticall life before a secular. And a few days after at the return of Eata of happy memory, then Preist and Abbot of the Monastery, and afterward Bishop also of Lindesfarn, he declared to him the good intention of Cuthbert, and obtaind permission for him after Tonsure re|ceived, to be admitted among the Brethren. Thus entring the Monastery, he was carefull to equall, or excell the rest of the Monks in Reli|gious observances of reading, working, watching and Prayer.
9. The Institut under which Saint Cuth|bert began his Religious Profession was cer|tainly the same which Saint Aidan had formed, and which he had learnt in the Monastery of Hye. For as yet Saint Wilfrid had not published in those parts the Holy Rule of Saint Benedict: neither was the Roman manner of celebrating Easter in|troduced among them: Which contro|versy divided the Black Monks from those whom Saint Columba and the Monastery of Hye sent into Brittany. Now that Saint Cuthbert did not weare then a Black Habit is evident from the testimony of Saint Beda, who saith, Saint Cuthbert used vestments of the common fashion and colour, so as he shewed no singularity either in the nearnes of them, or a wilfull neglect of cleanlines. And hence it is that to this day in the said Monastery, the Monks follow|ing his Example are content with habits of the naturall colour of the wooll afforded by the Sheep. But whether afterward the Rule and Institut of S. Benedict was introduced among them, we shall examine in due place. We will now leave S. Cuthbert in the solitude of his Mo|nastery, perfectionating his mind with those vertues and Graces which rendred him a glorious Light to that Age: whose Actions will plentifully furnish our following History.



XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. Finan Bishop of Lindesfarn, after S. Aidan.
3.4. Conversion of the Mercians.
5.6. c. And of the East-Saxons by S. Cedde.
9. Saint Honorius Arch-bishop of Can|terbury dyes: to whom Deus-dedit suc|ceeds.

A D. 652. Bed. l. 3. c. 25.1. IN the year of Grace six hundred fifty two Finan succeeded to the Holy Bishop Aidan in the Church of Lindesfarn: He was ordaind and sent by the Scotts (from the Mo|nastery of Hye) saith S. Beda. He built in the Isle of Lindesfarn a Church for the Episcopal See: which according to the Scottish fashion he made, not of Stone, but hewn Timber, and co|vered it with reeds. This Church was afterward dedicated by the most Reverend Arch-bishop Theodor to the honour of Saint Peter the A|postle. But Eadbert, who in following time was Bishop of that place, took away the thatch, and made it be covered all over, both roof and walls, with plates of lead.
2. As for King Oswi, though by the death of Oswin he became possessed of the whole Kingdom of the Northumbers, yet either out of remorse of conscience, or a pious regard to the memory of Oswin, he permitted his Son Edilwald to raign over the Province of the Deiri.
A. D. 653.3. The year following is worthily cele|brated for the accession of two Provinces in Brittany to the Faith of Christ, the Midland-Angli, and the East-Saxons. Concerning the former Saint Beda thus writes,Bed. l. . c. 24. At this time the Midle-Angli under their Prince Peoda Son of King Penda, embraced the Faith and Sacraments of Truth. This Prince being a young man of excellent disposition, and well de|serving the Title of King, was by his Father sett over that part of the Kingdom. He went to Oswi King of the Northumbers, to desire his daughter Alfleda in mariage, but could not obtain his request, except himself and Subjects would re|ceive the Faith of Christ and Baptism. Whereu|pon he having given eare to the preaching of Truth, the promise of a heavenly Kingdom, the hope of a glorious resurrection and future immor|tality, professed his reslution to be a Christian, though the Virgin should be denyed him. He was hereto perswaded most effectually by a Son of King Oswi, named Alchfrid, his kinsman and freind, who had also maried his Sister, a daughter of King Penda, called Kineburga. He therefore together with all his freinds and atten|dants and their servants was baptised by the Bi|shop Finan, in a village belonging to the King called The Village at the Wall (Ad murum.) And having received four Preists, men who for their learning and piety of life were esteemd fitt to teach and baptise his Nation, he returned home with great ioy. The names of these Preists were Cedda, and Adda, and Betti, and Diuma: of whom the last was by Nation a Scott, the rest were English. Now Adda was the Brother of Veta, a famous Preist, and Abbot of the Mo|nastery called, At the Goats-head (Ad Capreae caput.)
4. These coming into the Province with the foresaid Prince, diligently preached the Gospel, and were willingly hearkned to by the people, so that very many both of the Nobles and of infe|riour degree dayly renounced Idolatry, and were washed with Baptism, the Fountain of Faith. Neither did King Penda, though an Idolater, forbid it: yea moreover he gave free leave to the preaching of the Gospel in his own Kingdom of the Mercians, so that all who had a mind, might heare it. He likewise hated and scornd such as having been imbued with the Faith of Christ, did not bring forth fruits suitable thereto, saying, That those wretches deserved contempt, who ne|glected to obey their God in whom they beleived. These things began about two years before the death of the said King Penda.
5. The same year the Christian Faith was also restored among the East-Saxons, who had for|merly rejected it, when the Holy Bishop Melli|tus was expelled from thence.Bed. l. 3. c. 22. It was, saith Saint Beda, by the instance of King Oswi that they now received it. For Sigebert King of that Nation, who raignd there after a former Sige|bert sirnamed The little, being a great freind to King Oswi, frequently came to visit him in his Kingdom of the Northumbers: who was wont to exhort him to consider, that those could not be Gods, which were made by mens hands, c. Such exhortations being frequently and in a bro|therly manner inculcated, at last had their effect: for Sigebert by the counsell of his own freinds, who were likewise perswaded of the vanity of Ido|latry, was baptised with them by the Bishop Finan in the Royal village seated twelve miles from the Eastern Sea, near the Wall which the Romans built athwart Brittany.
6. Sigebert therefore become a Cittizen of the Kingdom of heaven, returned to the seat of his Temporal Kingdom, having requested King Oswi to give him some Teachers who might convert his Nation to the Faith of Christ, and cleanse their soules in the saving Font of Baptism. Oswi therefore sending to the Kingdom of the Midland-English, recalled the man of God Cedde: and adioyning to him another Preist, sent them to preach the word to the East-Saxons. These two going from place to place gathered a numerous Church to our Lord,
7. This holy Preist Cedde was born at Lon|don in the same Province, but had his edu|cation in the Monastery of Lindesfarn among the Scotts, by whose recommenda|tion he was first sent to preach among the Midland-English, and now to the East-Saxons

Where after he had spent about three years, he re|turnd to the Church of Lindesfarn,Id. ib. saith the same Saint Beda, to speak with Finan the Bishop. Who being informed by him how the work of the Gospel had prospered under him, consecrated him Bishop of the East-Saxons, having calld to him two other Bishops to assist in the ordination. Cedde having thus received the Episcopal Degree re|turnd into his Province, and prosecuting his em|ployment with greater authority, he erected Churches in several places, and ordaind Preists and Deacons to assist him in preaching the word, and administring Baptism: Especially in the Citty by the Saxons calld Ithancestir (a Citty in the Romans time nam'd Othona, but now swallowd by the Sea.) it was seated on the bank of the River Pente. He did the like in ano|ther Citty calld Tilaburg (now, Tilbury) neer the River Thames. In both these places, he ga|thered communities of devout servants of our Lord, whom he instructed in the Discipline of a Regular life, as far as their rude minds were ca|pable.
8. Of this Holy Bishop Cedde we shall here|after treat further: as like wise of his three Brethren, in Sanctity as well as blood, Ceadda (or Chadd) Celin and Cimbert. The seat of S. Cedds Bishoprick among the East Saxons was not Tilbury,Camden in Essex. as Camden imagins, but London the Metropolis of the Kingdom.
9. The same year wherein began the Con|version of the East Saxons, Honorius Arch|bishop of Canterbury ended his life, the last day of September, after he had administred that See the space of six and twenty years: and was buried with his Fathers in the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul.Bed. l. 3. c. 20 That See, saith S. Beda, was vacant eighteen monthes, after which time Deus-dedit descended of the Nation of the West-Saxons was elected Arch-bishop, and ordaind by Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, on the seaventh day before the Calends of Aprill: he governd that Church nine years four months and two days.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of S. Wilfrid: his Descent, educa|tion, c.
4.5. c. At twenty years of age he goes to Rome, c.
8. He lives with Dalfin Bishop of Lyons: who was murdred.

A. D. 653.1. IN this same year of Grace six hundred fifty three S. Wilfrid began to appeare in the world, being now twenty years old, and to give evident signs of those many graces which afterward eminently shone in him. We shall oft be obliged in the pursuit of this History to me~tion his Gests: In this place there|fore we will from S. Beda relate his descent, manner of life during his child hood, and till at the age of twenty years he undertook a Iourney to Rome to inform himself in cer|tain Ecclesiasticall and Religious Observances, which he could not approve in Brittany.
2. He was born in the year of our Lords Incar|nation six hundred thirty fower of a Noble En|glish family,Ap. Capgrav. . Wilfrido. Bed. l. 5. c. 20 when Eadbald raignd in Kent, and Oswald over the Northumbers. Being a child of a towardly disposition and innocent manners, he be|haved himself in all things with that modesty and circumspection that he was beloved and respe|cted by those who were more aged, as if he had been of ripe years. When he was arrived at the four|teenth year of his age, he in his affection preferd a Monastical life before a secular: Which having discovered to his Father (for his Mother was then dead) he willingly approved his vertuous and heavenly desires, advising him to pursue his good beginnings.
3. He went therefore to the Isle of Lindesfarn, where he committed himself to the direction and government of the Monks, and was carefull to learn and practise such duties of Chastity and piety as belonged to that Profession. And being of a sharp witt, he quickly learnt the Psalms and other Books, before he had yet received the Tonsure, but in the vertues of Humility and Obedience he ex|celled those who had long before received it. For which he was deservedly loved and reverenced both by his equals and seniours.
4. It seems that whilst he lived in that Mo|nastery he had not engaged himself in a Mo|nasticall Profession,Id. ib. for it follows in the same Authour, Having spent some years in the said Monastery in Gods service, he being of a peircing iudgment observed, is young as he was, that the way of vertue and piety taught by the Scots was not perfect: therefore he resolved in his mind to un|dertake a iourney to Rome, there to see what Eccle|siastical and Monasticall Rites were observed at the See Apostolick. This his intention he having disco|vered to his Brethren, they commended his purpose, perswading him effectually to accomplish it.
5. Thereupon without delay he went to Queen Eanfleda (the Wife of King Osw, and daughter of Edwin by Ethelburga Sister of Eadbald King of Kent) to whom he was well known, for by her counsel and assistance he had been recommended to the foresaid Monastery. To her therefore he made known his desire to visit the Monuments of the Holy Apostles. She was much pleased with the good pur|pose of the young man, and sent him to her Kins|man Earcombert King of Kent, desiring him to assist him honourably in his iourney to Rome. At that time the Arch-bishop there was Honorius one of the Disciples of Blessed Pope Gregory, a man pro|foundly skillfull in Ecclesiasticall affairs.
6. During the short time of his abode in Kent, where he began studiously to inform himself in the things he cheifly desird, there arrived another young man, calld Bishop, whose Sirname was Bene|dict, born of Noble English parents, who also had a desire to goe to Rome. To his company therefore the King associated Wilfrid, commanding him to take him along with him. When they were come to Lyons, Wilfrid was there detaind by Dalfn Bishop of that Citty: so that Benedict dispatched the rest of the iourney alone: For that pious

Prelat was much delighted with Wilfrids pru|dence in speech, comelines of countenance, ala|crity in behaviour, and maturity of iudgment: insomuch as he supplyed both him and his com|panions, as long as they stayd with him, with all things plentifully: and moreover offred him, if he pleased to accept it, a good part of the coun|trey to be governed by him, and his Neice a vir|gin to be his wife, so that he would account of him as his adopted son. But he rendring him most humble thanks for the extraordinary goodnes shewed to him being a stranger, told him, that he had resolved upon a quite different state of life: and that for that reason, having left his countrey, he had undertaken a iourney to Rome. The Bishop having heard this, dismissed him to his iourney, furnishing him with a guide, and all things necessary thereto: but withall earnestly de|sired him, in his return to his countrey, to visit him once more,
7. Being arrived at Rome he with wonderfull diligence applied himself to his Devotions and to the study of Ecclesiasticall matters, as he had pur|posed and had the happines to attain to the freind|ship of a very holy man called Bonifacius, who was Arch-deacon and one of the Popes Counsellors. By his direction he learnt the four Gospells by heart, likewise the true Method of the Paschall Compu|tation, and many other things pertaining to Ec|clesiasticall Discipline, which in his own countrey none could have taught him.
8. After he had spent some monthes happily in these studies, he returned back to the Bishop Dal|fin in France, with whom he remaind three years, receiving the Ecclesiasticall Tnsure of him: and was so tenderly loved by him, that he had a de|sign to make him his heyr. But this design was in|terrupted by the cruell death of the good Bishop, and Wilfrid reserved to a Bishoprick at home. For the Queen Brunichild, sending soldiers, co~man|ded the Bishop to be slain: whom Wilfrid his clark attended to the place where he was beheaded de|siring to dye with him, though the Bishop earnest|ly desired him to leave him. But the Executio|ners knowing him to be a stranger born in Britta|ny spared him, and would not kill him with his Bishop.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1. Saint Bathildis excused from the mur|der of Dalfin Bishop of Lyons.
2. Ebroin Maire of the Palace guilty of it.
3. Saint Bathildis her Piety: she founded two Monasteries: and retired into one.
4. c. She came out of Brittany of a Saxon race.

1. THVS writes S Beda. But whereas in most of the printed Copies the death of this holy Bishop is imputed to Queen Bru|nichilda, it is certain that cannot consist with Chronology: for though she was infamous for the murders of severall Princes and Bishops, as Desiderius Bishop of Vienna, c. yet about for|ty years before this time she had received her condign punishment for her cruelties. Therefore in the ancient Manuscripts and one ancient printed Copy we more correctly read in stead of Brunichildis, Baldhildi or Ba|thildis, who was indeed at this time Queen of France: But withall a Queen of such admira|ble piety and Sanctity, that it is a wonder how S. Beda, and severall of our Historians fol|lowing him,Malmsbur. de Pontif l. 3. f. 260. . in Wilrdo. Ap. Haaeum 26. Ian. could be so misinformed, as to brand her memory with a crime of so high a nature, who in the story of her life is said to have been obedient to her Husband (King Clodo|veus the second) as her Lord: to have behaved her self to the Princes as a Mother, and to Bi|shops, as a daughter.
2. To rectify this mistake therefore we are to observe from Sigebert and the French Hi|story,Sgebert in Chron. A. D. 60. that in this age the Kings of France had suffred their whole Regall Power to remain in the hands of their cheif Officer, called Mar of the Pa|lace: so that the Kings lived idlely and volup|tuously within dores, only on the first of May they came abroad in ceremony to salute and be sauted, to receive and bestow Gifts, c. only enjoying the Name of Kings. Now at this time the Mair of the Palace was Ebroinus, a man of horrible cruelty and injustice, and who was indeed Authour of this sacrilegious murther though in appearance done by the Royal au|thority, in whose name the command issued, The King of France at present was Lothaire, a child, and therefore no wonder if Bathildis the Queen his Mother, who either knew not, or could not hinder the fury of Ebroinus, was in common fame charged with the crime, though according to the Gallican Martyrologe she was at this time retired into a Monastery.
3. The said Martyrologe therefore will give us a true information of this Fact:Martyrolg. Gallic. 28. Octob. where on the twenty eighth of October in the com|memoration of this Holy Bishop we find this passage: Clodoveus being some years before dead, and his Widow S. Bathildis retired into her Mo|nastery at Cala, Ebroin Maire of the Palace a most cruel man, and extremely disaffected to Ecclesia|sticall persons, began to rage every where with sacrileges, rapines and murders of innocent per|sons. No wonder therefore if S. Ennemund Bishop sirnamed Dalfin, incurred his hatred, because out of an affection of piety and iustice he was ear|nest with the King to ease the people of their pres|sures. Therefore after that the Brother of the Holy Bishop, who was Prefect of Lyons, had been slain at Orleans upon a false accusation, as if he had an in|tention to rebell: Ebroin presently after with the like violence persecuted S. Ennemund. Who being informed that accusations were falsely charged on him before the King, perceiving the machi|nations of his cruel adversary, at first departed from Lyons: But presently after taking courage, and placing his whole trust in God he returned

thither again: where whilst he was diligent in his devotions and pious works, he was seised upon by the Emissaries of Ebroin, and to the generall extreme greif of the Citty caried away, with shew that he was to be lead to the Kings presence: but by the way near Chaillon in Burgundy, he was murdred by night, whilst he prayd God to pardon his enemies: and so for a reward of his iustice, charity and patience he received a never fading crown of Glory.
4. This Narration doth evidently absolve the good Queen Bathildis: Whose memory ought to be in a speciall manner precious to us, since she descended from a Saxon fa|mily in Brittany, which she left unwilling|ly. For as the Authour of her life in Surius and Haraeus, who lived in the same age re|counts, She was stolln out of Brittany by Pirats,Ap. Harae 26. Ianuar. and by them sold to Erchinoald a famous Prince in France, then Maire of the Kings palace. In whose service she behaved herself so decently (for she descended from Noble Saxon Ancestors) that the said Erchinoald's Lady being dead, he inten|ded to have taken her to wife. But the Holy Virgin withdrew her self from his sight, till he had maried another. This her Modesty made her so acceptable to King Clodovaeus the second of that name, son of Dagobert, that (as we read in the Appendix to Gregory Bishop of Tours) he made her,Greg. Tn. l. 11, c. 91. though a stranger, his Queen for her prudence and comlines, and had by her three Sons, Cloathair, Childeric and Theodoric.
5. After Clodovaeus his death, she awhile governed the Kingdom with her children: and then with great difficulty obtaind permis|sion of the Nobility to retire her self into a Mo|nastery built by her self in a place called Cala in the Territory of Paris,Ap. Sur. 26. Ianuar. over which she had placed Abbesse a Holy Virgin called Bertilia, sent for by her out of the Monastery of Idro. To this Mo|nastery of Cala therefore she retired, where she lived a great example of Piety and ver|tue. Now at that time there being in Brittany few Monasteries of Religious Virgins;,Bed. l. . c. 8. saith Saint Beda, many Noble men sent their daughters out of Brittany into France to be instructed there and espoused to their Heavenly Bridegroom: especially in the Monasteries of Brige, Cale (now called Chelles) and Andilege.
6. She built likewise in the Territory of Amiens at a place called Corbey,Ap. Sur. vbi sp. a Monastery for Religious Monks, which she magnificently enriched with possessions and all things necessary for their sub|sistence. Over which Monks she placed Abbot a venerable person called Theofred, whom she had for that purpose desired to be sent out of the Mona|stery of Luxueil. (Luxovium:) Which Abbot was afterward a Bishop.
7 Neither was her piety confined to France onely:Ibidem. For she honourd with many precious Gifts the Churches of the Holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul at Rome, out of the great love and devo|tion she had to them: Likewise great liberality she extended to the poor, and to persons professing a Reclused solitary life in the same Citty.
8. Thus in all conditions, both as a simple Virgin, a Queen and a Religious Nunne she sparkled with all divine Graces. Particularly during her Regency, by her zeale the Simoniacal Heresy, which then defiled the Church of God, was quite driven out of the Kingdom. And for a further proof of her innocency touching the death of S. Ennemund or Dalfin Bishop of Lyons, there is mention in her life of ano|ther Bishop called Sigebrand, who by the practise of Ebroin, against her will, without conviction or examination was slain, co~trary to Law and iustice.
9. Her piety to Holy Bishops,Ap. Sur. 7. Decemb.  particularly to S. Eligius the famous Bishop of Noyon is celebra|ted by S. Audon Bishop of Rouen who lived at the same time, and wrote his life: For he relates with what affection and devotion this Holy Queen with her children and Nobles hastned to take care for his honourable en|terment. Her desire was it should be con|veyed to her Monastery of Cala, but by no force it could be removed. Whereupon overcome with a violent greif, she uncove|red his face which she bedewed with showrs of tears. At last turning her self to her Nobles, she said, We now see it is not his will that his body should be removed from his own Citty: let us therefore permitt his own flock to enioy it. Which words she had no sooner uttered, but the Body and Coffin became easily moveable, so that two persons alone were able without difficulty to carry it. Thus having venerated the Sacred Body, she retired weary and hun|gry, for she had continued a Fast of three days with Prayers and tears, thereby to know Gods will for disposing the Body.
10. The same Holy Writer further declares the same Queens devotion to S. Eligius after his death: and how in a vision by night he commanded a certain Courtier to reprove her for wearing iewells and costly apparrell du|ring her Widdow-hood: Which she did not out of Pride but because she thought it fitting to be done whilst she took care of administring the Kingdom during her sons minority. This command thrice repeated, not having been executed by the said Courtier, he was pni|shed with a violent feaver: During which having been visited by the Queen, he declared it to her: and immediatly the feaver quitted him. Whereupon the Queen layd aside her Iewells and Ornaments, a great part of which she distributed to the Poor, and with the ri|chest of them she made a most beautifull  sumptuous Crosse, which she deposed at the head of S. Eligius (or S. Eloy) Which devotion of hers was imitated by the Nobles so zea|lously, that in a short time his Church was enriched with incredible riches  Offrings.
11. Her death was answerable to her life:Ap Harae 26. Ianuar. before which a wonderfull vision was shewd to her: for before the Altar of the Blessed Virgin a Ladder was erected up to heaven,  Angels descended to comfort her. She com|manded her Sisters to conceale this Vision: and awhile after signing her self confidently with the sign of the Crosse, and lifting up her

eyes  hands to heaven,A. D. 655. she breathed forth her pure spirit: and those who were present saw her freind the holy Bishop Genesius among troops of Angels coming to meet her, on the third day before the Calends of February. Her memory is celebrated the same day in the Gallican Martyrologe. Her Sacred Body was afterward diligently sought, and translated to a more honourable place in the time of S Lewis:Martyrolog. Gallican. 28. Mart. the Commemoration whereof is solemnised on the eight and twentieth of March.


XX. CHA.XX CHAP.

1. Anna King of the East-Angles slain by K. Penda.
2.3 c The Mercian Tyrant Penda mi|raculously slain by K. Oswi: who conse+crates his daughter to God.

A. D. 614. Westmonast. hc.1. IN the year of Grace six hundred fifty four, saith Mathew of westminster, Penda King of the Mercians, a man who breathed nothing but fury and war, and loved to tread in ways staind with blood, invaded the Religious King of the East-Angli, Anna, and in a moment de|stroyd him and his army. To him his Brother Ae|thelherus succeeded in the Kingdom. With King Anna was slain his eldest son Firmin: and both their bodies were buryed at a Town called Blithborow in Suffolk, seated on the River Blith: Which town, saith Camden, deserves to be mentioned for no other thing,Camden in Suffolk. but that there was the Sepulcher of Anna a Christian King of the East-Angli, slain in battle by Penda the Mercian King. But afterward their bodies were translated to S. Edmunds-bury, in the same Province.
A. D. 655.2. But the year following this bloody King Penda, who seems to have been raised up for the destruction of good Kings, received at last the reward of his cruelty by the hands of Oswi King of the Northumbers. The parti|cular Narration we receive from S. Beda:Bed. l. 3. c. 24. In those times, saith he, King Oswi having received intolerable vexations from Penda King of the Mercians, who formerly slew his Brother King Oswald, at last was forced to promise him incredi|bly rich gifts to obtain a peace,  for a cessation of the ruines of his Provinces. But the perfidious King Penda would accept of no conditions, being deter|mined to exterminate his whole Nation. Where|upon King Oswi had his recourse to the Divine Protection only, to deliver him from the barba|rous impiety of his enemy.Wherefore he obliged himself by vow, saying, since this Pagan King re|fuses our gifts, let us offer them to our Lord God who will graciously accept tem. He vowed there|fore that in case he gott the victory, he would con|secrate his daughter to serve our Lord in perpe|tuall Virginity, and withall bestow twelve posses|sions of farms for building and endowing Mona|steries.
After which vow he marched with a very small army to combat him.
3. Such a wonderfull inequalty there was between the two Armies,Idem. that the Pagans had a thirty fold greater army then the Christian King Oswi: for they had thirty Legions condu|cted by as many Generalls, against whom not|withstanding Oswi with his Son Alcfrid,Idem ib. d. tru|sting only in Christ their conductour, with very small forces adventured to combat. King Oswi his Son Egfrid was not present there for he was then kept as an hostage by King Penda's wife. And Edilwald son of King Oswald, who ought to have assisted him, was on the Enemies side, being one of Penda's Captains to fight aganst his Vncle and countrey. Though true it is that in the time of battell he withdrew himself into a safe place, there expecting the event.Rad. de Dicet cl 96. Yea we read in the History of the Brittains that Alc|frid also the Son of King Oswi, rebelling against his Father, was ioynd with King Penda.
4. Yet notwithstanding all these disadvan|tages,Idem ibid.
as soon as the combat began the thirty Pagan Generalls of King Penda were putt to flight and slain, and almost all their auxiliaries. Among which was also Edilhere Brother and Successour of Anna late King of the East-angles, who was the authour of the war: he together with the forces attending him was likewise slain. And because the battell was fought near the River Iuwet, which by reason of great raines, had over|flowed its banks, the waters consumed more in the flight, then swords had in the combat.
5. This wonderfull victory was gaind in the thirteenth year of King Oswi his raign, and on the seaventeenth day before the Calends of December, in the region of Loidis (now called Leeds io Yorkshire, were above thirty years before, King Edwin had overcome the Brit|tains.Westmonast. hic.) The River which in S. Beda is called Iuwet, Mathew of Westminster more properly calls Winwed, adding that thence the Proverb came, That in the River Winwed were revenged the slaughters of five Kings, Anna, Sigebirt, Egric, Oswald and Edwin. And near the place is yet extant a village, either from this or King Edwins victory called Winfeild.
6. This victory brought incredible proffit to both the Nations:Bed. ibid. for the Northumbers were secured from the hostile incursions of their Enemies, and the Nations both of the Mercians and other confi|ning Provinces became converted to the Chri|stian Faith, assoon as their perfidious Head was cutt off. For immediatly after, the most Christian King Oswi took possession of Penda's kingdom, by whose order the Holy Preist Diuma was ordaind by Finan, Bishop both of the Mercians and Midland-Angli: for by reason of the scarcity of Preists one Prelate was obliged to govern two Nations. And now also the Conversion of the East-Saxons, under their King Sigebert, of which we trea|ted before, was perfected.
7. King Oswi having thus by divine assistance gaind so miraculous a victory,Id. ibid. c. 22. forgot not his Vow. But saith the same S. Beda, according to his promise made to our Lord, and in thanks-giving for his victory he gave his daughter Elsleda,

scarce then a year old, to be consecrated in perpe|tual Virginity to our Lord: and moreover twelve possessions of lands for the maintaining Religious persons to pray dayly for the perpetual peace of his Nation: Of which each possession was ten families. The foresaid daughter of King Oswi therefore entred into the Monastery calld Heortsig, or the Island of the Hart, which was governed by the Holy Abbesse Hilda. And two years after having obtaind a possession of ten families in a place calld Streneshalch, she there built a Monastery, in which the foresaid Kings daughter first learnt, and afterwards taught Regular observance: till having spent three-score years in our Lords service the happy Virgin hastned to the embraces of her hea|venly Bridegroom.


XXI. CH.XXI. CHAP.

i.2. c. The Gests and happy death of the Holy Abbesse S. Hilda.

1. AS for S. Hilda mentiond by S. Beda, she was the daughter of Hereric Grand child of King Edwin by his son Egfrid: And when S. Paulin preached among the Northumbers, she with others embraced the Faith and received the Sacraments of Christ After which laying aside her Secular Habit,  desiring to serve our Lord more strictly, she went into the Province of the East-angles where she staid a year.Bed. l. 4. c. 23. She had a purpose like|wise, saith S. Beda, to forsake her countrey and all relations, and to goe into France, there to spend her life as a stranger in the Monastery of Cala, thereby to obtaine a perpetuall mansion in heaven. For at the same time her Sister Hereswida Mother of Al|dulph King of the East-angles, had submitted her self to Regular Disciplines, expecting a heavenly Crown. Desirous therefore to follow her example, S. Hilda had a purpose to goe into a strange Coun|trey: but before she could execute that purpose, she was recalld by Bishop Aidan into her Countrey of the Northumbers, and receiving a place of one fa|mily at the North side of the River Wire, she with a few companions lived a Monasticall life there another year. After which she was made Ab|besse in the Monastery calld Heorthu, which not long before had been built by the devout hand|maid of our Lord Heiu (or rather, Bega, accor|ding to Capgrave, vulgarly S. Bees) who is sayd to have been the first woman in the Province of the Northumbers who took the Habit and Profession of a Nunne, by the Benediction of Bishop Aidan. But she not long after she had built the Monaste|ry, retird to the Citty Calcaria, named by the En|glish Calcester (vulgarly Tadcaster,) and there instituted another Mansion.
2. S. Hilda therefore being preferd to the go|vernment of that Monastery, was carefull to esta|blish therin Regular observance in every thing, according to the instructions she had received from learned men. For both Bishop Aidan and other Re|ligious men who had known her, were wont to visit her, invited thereto by her wisedom and Love of the service of our Lord, for which they bore great affection to her, and were diligent to inform her touching Religious Observances.
3. After she had governed this Monastery some years, she undertook likewise the care of founding and ordaining another Monastery for Religious woemen, in which the like Instituts of a Regular life were established: the place where this Mona|stery was built is calld Streanshalc (now calld Whitby.) And there also she taught the perfect ob|servance of Iustice piety, chastity and other ver|tues, but principally Peace and Charity. So that according to the example of the Primitive Church, none were there either rich or poor, all things were common to all, since none challenged a propriety in any thing. For she was a woman of such eminent Prudence, that not only men of ordinary condition, but Kings and Princes also would sometimes de|mand and follow her Counsell. Such care she had o make her subiects diligent in reading Scripture: and exercising works of piety, that there were very many Ecclesiasticall persons found there very fitt to undertake the Ecclesiasticall degree and Office of the Altar. In a word out of that one Monastery we have seen to proceed no fewer then five Bi|shops, all of them men of singular Merits and San|ctity: their Names are Bosa, Eata, Ostfor, Iohn and Wilfrid.
4. This Monastery of Streneshalch she piously governd till the year of Grace six hun|dred and eighty,Id. ib. in which saith the same S. Beda, she passed to our Lord to receive in heaven a reward for many heavenly works wrought upon earth, on the fifteenth day be|fore the Calends of December, being then Sixty six years old: Which time she divided into equall portions, living the first thirty three years most nobly in a secular state, and the other thirty three far more nobly in Monasti|call conversation.
5 For her Piety and other excellent vertues, illustrious even among persons far distant from her, she was generally stiled by the Name of Mother, which she made good by being the occasion and instrument of conversion and Salvation to many: so fullfilling the dream of her Mother, Bregosuid, who living in banishme~t with her husband Hereric under Cerdice King of the Brittains where he dyed by poison, she dreamd that she had sudde~ly lost him: where|fore seeking him with great solicitude, in|stead of him she found under her garment a most precious chain of Iewells so sparkling, that the beams thereof shone through all Brittany: Which dream was truly fulfilld in this her daughter, whose life afforded exam|ples of heavenly light to many persons both near and far removed.
6. Before her death she was visited for the space of six years together with sharp and te+dious infirmities, during all which time she never ceased from praising our Lord for so pu|rifying a tryall of her patience, nor from in|structing the flock committed to her charge

to be diligent in serving and praising God as well in adversity as prosperity: In the midst of which exhortations also she ended her life.
7. Severall Testimonies our Lord gave of her celestiall happines after death. For one of her Religious Sisters in a Monastery thirteen miles distant from thence the same night being wakened with the sound of a Bell like that which called them up to Midnight prayers, saw a glorious light, and in that light Angels carying S. Hilda's soule to heaven. This vi|sion she presently ran to declare to a Holy Virgin named Frigit, who in the Abbesses place was Superiour of the Nunnes: and the next morning Messengers came to inform them of her death. The like vision was com|municated to another devout Virgin in the same Monastery where the Holy Abbesse dyed, who had then the care of such woemen as coming to conversion, were for Probation lodged beyond the bounds of the Enclosure. So that this Blessed Virgin Hilda is deservedly placed in the number of Saints in our Mar|tyrologe on the fifteenth of December.Martyrolog. Angli. 15. Decemb.
8. Neither was it a deminution to her San|ctity, that she declared her self in opposition to S. Wilfrid both in the rite of the Paschal Ob|servation, and also ioyning in a complaint to the See Apostolick against him,Bed. l. 3. c. 25. as S. Beda testi|fies, and Pope Iohn in his Epistle to King Ethel|red in the year seaven hundred and five. For it is not to be wondred, if a woman should be zealous in maintaining a ceremony re|ceived from her Ancestors. And we find in Ecclesiasticall Story that S. Athanasius Saint Chrysostom were persecuted not only by im|pious men, but also by some Bishops esteemd for their Sanctity. From such exa~ples we learn, saith William of Malmsbury, the wretched condi|tion of our humane Mortality,Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. when we read that men celebrated for their Sanctity by our Fore|fathers, as Theodore, Berthwald, Iohn, Bosa, and likewise the Abbesse Hilda, with an irrecon|cileable passion persecuted S. Wilfrid, a man most acceptable to God.
9. S. Hilda's Successour in the Government of her Monastery was the Royal and Holy Virgin Edelfleda, who had been consecrated as an Offring to our Lord by her Father Oswi King of the Northumbers, when she was then but a year old, in thankfullnes for his victo+ry obtaind against the bloody King of the Mercians, Penda.


XXII. C.XXII. CHAP.

1.2. The Gests of S. Adulf and S. Botulph, brethren.

A. D. 655.1. AT the same time with S. Hilda flou|rished S. Botulph and his Brother S. Adulph: whom erroneously some Writers affirm to have been Scotts, who are confuted by the whole contexture of their Lives. For thus we read in their Gests recorded by Ioan|nes Anglicus in Capgrave: Before Christian Re|ligion was spread over Brittany,Ap. Capgrav. in Botulpho. the Venerable Fathers Botulph and Adulf, born of a Noble fa|mily and of a German descent, and more strictly linked by charity then blood, being very young were initiated in spirituall and celestial exercises. For being born of a Saxon stock which conquered Brittany by martiall courage, they from their in|fancy were imbued in the Christian Faith. But their parents being rude and unacquainted with the Documents of perfection, sent their children, five in number, to their ancient countrey of Sa|xony, there to learn the Discipline of a holy con|versation.
2. Thus by mistake writes that Authour for as yet Christianity was not entred into Saxony:Ib dem. Therefore in stead of Saxony we are to understand Belgick France, whither by S. Beda's testimony, our Ancestors in those times usually sent their children to be in  in more sublime Christian Philosoph. The same Writer thus prosecutes hi Narratio.
3. With this intention the foresaid Fathers, pa|sing the Sea, repaired to Monasteries of Holy Re|ligious men, desiring co~munication with them, to be instructed in the Document of a spirituall life. There being imbued with Monastical Institu and disciplines of a more austere life, they recei|ved the Religious Habit: and in a short time. Gods Grace became enabled co be Teachers  Perfection.
4. The King therefore hearing the fame of S. Adulphus, exalted him to the Government of the Church of Virect in Belgium. Who in discharge of that sublime employment was very watchfu and solicitous to prevent the snares and cunning designs of the Devill, who like a ravening wl sought the destruction of his flock. He was sedulou in works of mercy, feeding the poor, cloathing the naked, correcting those which strayd, and comfor|ting the afflicted, to the end he might himself obtain the effect of our Lords Promise, Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtain mercy. He was instant in fasting, watching and prayers. He pre|vented his preaching by his practise, and in all things lead a saintlike life.
5. In the Gallican Martyrologe he is adorned with this Elogy:Martyrolog. Gall. c. 17. In. On the seaventeenth of Iune is celebrated the Memory of S. Adulph Bishop of Vrect who was Brother of S. Botulph, and out of Brittany passing with him into France, for his eminent endowments and Sanctity of life was rai|sed to that See: wherein by his admirable vertues and learning, he became a shining light to his flock: and at last with a great affluence of merits ended his life, or rather being translated by death he passed to a life immortall.
6. As for his Venerable Brother S. Botulph (by the testimony of the foresaid Authour) being well exercised in vertue and holines,Ap. Capgrav. in Botulpho. he resolved to return into England. Now there were in the same Monastery where he made his abode, two Sisters of Ethelmund a Prince among the South|angles, who had been sent thither to be in|structed in Monasticall Disciplines. They hea|ring that the Blessed man had a purpose

to return to his countrey, gave him commissions to be delivered to their Brother. Having there|fore passed the Sea, S. Botulph was honourably re|ceived by the said Prince, who having heard his Sisters petitions, and accepted them, granted to the Holy man a place for building a Monastery. Now S Botulph did not desire that for his cause any one should be driven out of his hereditary possession, but rather that some place unpossessed and uncultivated should be assigned him, that there he might build a Church, and congregate brethren to serve God, by whose pious lives and prayers his Principality might be established in this world, and an eternall kingdom prepared for him in the world to come. This request the Prince willingly granted: whereupon the Venerable Fa|ther chose a certain untilled place where none dwelt, named Ikanho. It was a Wildernes unfre|quented by men, but possessed by Devills, whose phantasticall illusions were to be expelled thence, and a Religious conversation of pious men to be introduced, that where the Devills fallacies abounded, there our Lords Divine Grace might superabound.
7. Where this place called Ikanho was seated, is now uncertain. The Centuriators of Magdeburg from Leland and Bale, place it not far from the Citty of Lincoln. And in|deed in that Province where the River Wi|tham enters the Sea there is a Town called Boston, but more truly Botulphs-town, for saith Camden it being formerly by Beda called Icanhoe, took a new name from Botulph a most holy Saxon.Camd. in .
Likewise in Huntingdon-shire there is a town called Bottle-bridge, for S. Botulphs-bridge. So that it seems in one of these two places S. Botulph built his Monastery.
8. The said Authour thus pursues his Nar|ration: When he had finished his Monastery, like a good shepheard he gathered together his flock,Ap. Capgrav. in S. Botulpho whom he diligently taught Apostolick Doctrines and Instituts of the Holy Fathers: and whatsoe|ver good Documents he had learnt abroad con|cerning Monasticall Disciplines, those he instilled into the minds and practises of his Monks. He was beloved by all for he was free from arrogance, being humble, mild and affable in all things. He was illustrious likewise for many miracles and the gift of Prophecy: For sometimes by Divine inspiration he foretold future things as expressly as if they had been passed. When he was oppressed with any infirmity, he with blessed Iob persisted in thanking God, and all his discourse was of mat|ters which might edify and advance the hearers. Such was his conversation during his life, and in such exercises he attained to a good old age.
9. He dyed most happily the same year in which S. Hilda also dyed and was buried in the Monastery which he had built. There his Sa|cred Relicks remained, till the Danes inva|ding this Island wasted all Holy places with fire and sword. Then by the care of S. Ethel|wold they were translated, part to the Mo|nastery of Ely, and part to that of Thorney. The Memory of S. Botulph was elsewhere also celebrated: for at London there is a Church dedicated to his honour. Hence we read this passage in Capgrave: In the Book of the Church of S. Botulph near Aldersgate Lon|don, there is mention how a part of the Body of S. Botulph was by King Edward of Happy memory conferred on the Church of S. Peter in Westmin|ster.Marty. Angl. 16. Maij. His memory is celebrated in our Mar|tyrologe on the sixteenth of May.





THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. The Mercians Converted: and an Episcopall See erected there.
5 Ithamar Bishop of Rochester dyes: and Damian succeeds.
6. The Holy Offspring of Merovald a Prince of the Mercians.

1. _BY the death of Penda King of the Mercians,A. D. 656. that Kingdom ogether with that of the East-Angles whose Kings he had slain, became an accession to the Domi|nions of the Victorious Oswi King of the Nor|thumbers Notwithstanding in the year of Grace six hundred fifty six he permitted Peoda the Son of Penda, on whom he had bestowd his daughter Alefleda, to raign over the Southern Mercians: and likewise Edelwald the Brother of Ethelhere to govern the East-Angles.
2. By this indulgence of King Oswi the Christian Faith became spread through seve|rall Provinces:Malmsbur. Cent. 7. f. 41. For he built many Churches and Monasteries in the Kingdom of the Mercians: among which the principall was that which was founded in an Island called the Isle of the Hart,Id. f. 34. in which as a testimony of gratitude to God for his Victory, he enclosed his daughter. So that within the space of two years the Mercians following his example were converted to the Faith and bap|tised.
3. And for a firmer establishment of Christianity among them,Godvvin. in Catal Episc. Coventr.  Lichfield. Malmsbur. de Bontif. l. 3. f. 26. he erected an Epis+copall See common to the Mercians and Mid|land Angli, in the Citty of Lichfeld, saith Bishop Godwin. Though more probable it is that as yet there was no certain place affixed for the Bishops residence: For severall years after this we read how Wuifer King of the Mercians offred Lichfeild to S. Wilfrid that he might there either build a Monastery or erect an Episcopall See, The first Bishop of the Mer|cians was Diuma a Scottish Preist, of whom we have already made mention.
4. This is testified by S Beda in this pas|sage, When Oswi the most Christian King of the Northumbers having slain King Penda,Bed. l. 3. c. 21. took pos|session of his Kingdom, Diuma one of the four fore|mentioned Preists, was ordainen Bishop both of the Midland Angli and Mercians by Fnan, Bishop of Lindisfarn. For by reason of the Scarcenes of Preists they were compelled to sett one Bishop over two Nations. Now Diuma having in a short time converted great multitudes, dyed: To whom in the year of Grace six hundred fifty eight suc|ceeded Cellach who was likewise a Scotch-man:Godvvin. ib. Who after he had a few years governed that Province, voluntarily relinquished his Bishop|rick, and returned to his Native countrey the Island of Hu, or Hy.
A. D. 6585. At this time Ithamar who had suc|ceeded S. Paulinus in the Episcopall See of Ro|chester, dyed:Harpif. saec. 6. c. 11. He was not inferiour to his Pre|decessours in Sanctity and learning, saith Harps|feild: who adds, That many years after his death by reason of frequent Miracles wrought by his intercession, his Body was translated to a more honourable place. Which translation was made on the fourth day before the Ides of Ianuary: on which day his Anniversary Solemnity is cele|brated in the Church of Rochester. In our Mar|tyrologe his Commemoration is made on the Tenth of Iune,Martyrolog. Ang. 10. Iun. which was the day of his death.Bed. l. 3 c. 20. And his Successour was Damian, des|cended of the South-Saxons, saith S. Beda.
6. This year Merevald a Prince among the Mercians built a Monastery for Religious Virgins at a Town called Lemster in the Pro|vince of Hereford. He is said to have been the Son of Penda and Brother of Peoda and of his Successour Wolfer Kings of the Mer|cians. But he is more illustrious by his Holy Offspring, his son Merefin, and his daughters Milburga, Mildreda, and Milgitha, born to him by his Wife S. Ermenburga.
. King Peoda likewise the Son of Penda first King of the Mercians,Camden in Northamp|tonshire. this same year for propa|gating Christian Religion, layd the foundation of the Mnastery of Medeshampsted, in the Re|gion of the Girvians (or Northamptonshire:A. D. 657.) But having been the next year slain by the trea|son of his Wife (Alcfleda the naturall daughter of Oswi King of the Northumbers) he could not perfect it. Thus writes Camden from Ro|bert Swapham an ancient Authour.Ingulph. And In|gulphus adds. That he left his fervour and de|votion to his Brother Wulfer his Successour in that Kingdom, and to Saxulph a man of great power there: who finished the said Monastery eight years after. The place anciently called Me|deshampsted, afterward took the name of Peterborough, illustrious in regard of this Monastery.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2.3. The Brittains overthrown by the King of the West-Saxons.

A. D. 658.1. IN the year of Grace six hundred fifty eight the Brittains received a great over|throw from Kenewalch King of the West-Saxons: which is thus described by Hun|tingdon:Huntingd. l. 2. Cenwald (so he calls him) King of the West-Saxons in the seaventeenth year of his raign fought against the Brittains at Pennum. For they knowing that he had been overcome by the stou King Penda, and (almost) driven out of his kingdom, imagined that he was unable to sustain the burden of a battell. Whereupon having gathered a numerous army, they with great pride invaded his Dominions. At the beginning of the fight the Brittains feircely setting on the Saxons,A. D. 659 made them give ground: But the Saxons with great courage and constancy resisting them, for they preferred death before flying, at last so wearied the Brittains, that their forces melted away like snow, so that they turned their backs to the pursuers, and fled from Pennum as far as Pedredan. The wound which the Progeny of Bru|tus received this day, was incurable.
2. The place where this battell was sought was an obscure Village in Somersetshire at this day called Pen: but anciently famous for this Victory over the Brittains, and ano|ther which in after ages King Edmond Iron|side gaind there against the Danes. From thence the Brittains fled to the River Pedre, now called Parret, where was seated the town called by the Saxons Pedridan, but now Pederton, and it was sometimes the Royal Seat of Ina King of the West-Saxons.
3. After this combat and Victory the Saxons became so terrible to the Brittains, that they never afterward descended from their mountains to encounter them. Besides this, their State became divided among severall petty Princes, each of which sought to secure and enlarge his own territory, so that they never combind in any gene|rall design against the Saxons or English.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1.2. Wolfer King of the Mercians: His wife S. Erminilda. Trumhere Bishop of the Mercians.

1. KING Peoda, as hath been declared, having been slain by the treachery of his Wife in the time of the Paschall So|lemnity,A. D. 659. that Kingdom of the Southern Mer|cians returned to the Dominion of King Oswi:Wigrn. hic. But three years after the Princes of the Nation of the Mercians rebelled against him: their names were Immin, Eaba and Eadbert. These exalted to the throne Wulfer the Son of Penda, then a young man, whom they had pre|served and kept conceald among them. And so with their new King, they ioyfully persevered in Profession of Christianity.
2. The wife of this King Wulfer was S. Er|minilda:Ap. Caepgrav in S. Ermi|nild. Whose parents were Ercombert King of Kent and S. Sexburga. By their pious instructions she became so zealous in pro|moting the Christian faith, that by her per|swasions, kindnes and holy example that perverse and rude Nation of the Mercians was brought to submitt to the sweet yoak of Christ. And her husband complying with her desires assisted her in extirpating Idolatrous Superstitions, and filling the kingdom with Churches and Preists. Whence appears that King Wulfer himself was also a Christian.
3. In the beginning of his raign Trumher,

who as hath been declared was consti|tuted Abbot in the Monastery of Gethlingum (or Gilling) founded in the place where the Holy King Oswin was slain, was made Bishop of the Mercians, after that Celiach the Successour of Diuma a Scot, had relin|quished his Bishoprick and was returned into his countrey. This Trumher was by Nation an Englishman, and kinsman or King Oswin: but he had his education and instruction among the Scotts. There is no more recorded of him, but only that by him Edilwalch Prince of the South-Saxons was baptised, as shall be declared.


I. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2.3. c. S. Ethelreda maried to Tom|bert: remains a Virgin.
8 9 c. She a second time maried to Eg|frid Prince of the Northumbers preserves her Virginity.
15.16. c. She flyes from thence: and is mi|raculously preserved from her husband King Egfrid.
20. c. She builds a Monastery of Virgins and another of Monks at Ely.

A. D. 660. Wigorn. hc.1. IN the following year Egfrid the Son of King Oswi took to wife Etheldrith (or Ediltrudis) a daughter of Anna King of the Eastangles. The Sanctity of this Lady, twice a Widow, and always a Virgin, is highly and worthily celebrated by all our Historians: and therefore her Memory must not be slightly passed over in this Sto|ry.
2. She was born in the Province of the Iceni,Camden in Suffolk. or Suffolk at a town called Ix|ning, which saith Camden though now an obscure Village, was anciently famous for the birth of Etheldreda daughter of King Anna, a king wonderfully blessed by God in a Saintly offspring. Some Writers affirm this Holy Virgin to have been the eldest of his daughters: But S. Beda expressly testifies that S. Sexburga was elder then she.
3. Polydor commends her for her beauty, a quality very useles to vertue, which notwithstanding may worthily enter among her praises, because the purity of her mind triumphed over all the snares and machines which her beauty suggested against her. In her infancy she dedicated her self to chastity: wherein the suitable piety of her Sisters did confirm her: and during that tender age free from tenta|tions, though her affection to purity en|creased, yet her constancy was not expo|sed to any tryall till the year of Grace six hundred fifty one,A. D. 660. when being mariage|able, her parents provided a husband for her. The Holy Virgin who had fixed all her affections on Christ alone; though her desire was to confine her self in a Cloyster, yet durst not renounce her obedience to her parents.
4 The Husband designed for her was Tombert Prince of the Girvians, a people inhabiting the fenny Islands in Cambridg|shire, whose countrey we read thus des|cribed by an ancient Writer named Felix,Camden in Cambridg|shire. cited by Camden: There is a fenny marsh of an exceeding large extent, which beginning from the banks of the River Gronta reaches northwardly to the Sea. In some places there grow nothing but sedges, elsewhere there are springs from whence issue black Waters which cause foggy vapours, and among these there are severall Islands with uneven winding bancks, which are pleasantly coverd with woods. Huntingdon calls ths Region a most delicious and fruitfull countrey,Ibid. waterd with many pleasant rivers, painted with severall lakes great and small, and flourishing with many groves and Islands. The whole Territory, from the principall Islands name is called the Isle of Ely: which is therefore here more accu|ratly described, because it was by Prince Tombert assigned to Saint Ediltrudis, or Etheldreda (vulgarly called Saint Audrey) for a ioynture, and thence became our Lords Patrimony.
5. To this Prince therefore S. Ediltrudis was given in mariage, which was a state of life greivous to her who had entertained a far more Sublime affection. Yet some hope remained, that though she could not incline her parents mnds to dispence with her mariage, she might perhaps obtain of her husband a permission to preserve the in|tegrity of her body. Therefore all her inno|cent arts she made of use to engage her hus|band affections, to the end he might be induced to approve her design. She spar'd no pra|yers nor praises of Virginall purity. Neither did her endeavours want effect: For admiring her Angelicall chastity, he gave her a hope of complyance with her desires. But not long after, reason being overcome with the violence of corrupt nature, he yeilded to his own desires, and required of her that right which the Laws of Mariage al|lowd him, and which he would not defer till the night following.
6. In this extremity God alone was her refuge. To him therefore she had recourse by her most devout prayers, beseeching him, that if her Vows were acceptable to him, he would send the Angel of her Vir|ginity to guard her, and suggest to her mind such thoughts, and to her tongue such words as might find a gratefull admittance into the heart of her Prince.
7. Presently after this Tombert entred into her chamber, with a resolution to

extort her consent to his impatient desires. But God prevented him: for he found the Holy Virgin encompassed with a wonderfull light and celestiall flame, which dazeled his eyes, and consuming the fire of lust boyling in his bosom, changed his mind not only to admiration but love of Chastity: insomuch that now perceiving that our Lord challe~ged her for his own Spouse, he not only relinquished his clame to her, but pro|fessed himself a companion with her in the same vow of consecrating himself to God. Thus they lived together the space of seaven or eight years in perfect concord: during all which time Saint Etheldreda, being se|cure of her husbands fidelity and constancy in his promise, employd her self wholly in the delicious exercises of Prayer and devo|tion.
8. But Almighty God, who had given to the Holy Virgin a most constant mind, prepa|red new combats, and new triumphs for her. For her Husband Prince Tombert dying, whereas this Virgin-Widow esteemed herself out of danger of being exposed to any more tryalls, as being now in her own disposall, yet a new tempest drove her out of the ha|ven to Sea again. For Egfrid the Son of Oswi, and Heyr of the Northumbrian kingdom, in|vited by the fame of her sanctity and perfe|ctions, demanded her in mariage. Her pa|rents together with the Nobles of the Eastan|gles esteeming this mariage extremely bene|ficiall to that Province which languished under the government of her Brother Ethel|wald, pressed her therefore most earnestly to accept of it, and at last conquered her re|sistance: So that once more for the com|mon good she was compelled to submitt her self to a new servitude. For Almighty God intended in her to shew to the world an admirable example of constancy and Cha|stity.
9. This year therefore she was conducted to the Kingdom of the Northumbrians. In which iourney,Bed. lib. 4. c. 3. saith S. Beda, she was attended by a certain person named Oswin her prime ser|vant and steward of her house. A man worthy to serve such a Queen. For he afterward became a Monk, being a man of great merit, and who out of a pure intention forsaking the world to ob|tain an eternall retribution, became worthy to receive many revelations of Divine Mysteries from our Lord.
10. S. Etheldreda (or Ediltrudis) thus accom|panied was conducted and maried to Egfrid Prince of the Northumbers. Who being pos|sessed of such a treasure, omitted nothing whereby he might conciliate her affections. But one onely thing could content her, which was the preservation of her Virginall integrity: all other blandishments which a Princely State could afford, without this, were tastlesse and noysom to her.
11. Once more therefore she made use of her former arts to obtain that from Egfrid, which had been granted her by Tombert, that there might be between them a con|junction of minds onely, with a separation of bodies. Egfrid was a Prince in whose veyns youthfull blood was then boyling: Yet such power had the prayers and reasons alledged by his chast Princesse, that by an example scarce hitherto heard of in the Church, they lived twelve years together without any prejudice or diminution of Saint Ethelreds Virginity. Her youth, beauty and other admirable perfections of mind produced in him nothing but reverence: they conversed together as if they had been devested of their Bodies.
12. To the present sensuall age this may seem incredible:Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 2. c. 1. but there is not wanting a clowd of witnesses to testify it. William of Malmsbury thus writes: Ethel|drida though maried to two husbands, by a happy continence lived free from any stirring of lust, so that without the least deminution of her chastity she victoriously obtained in heaven the garland of perpetuall Virginity. To the same purpose Henry of Huntingdom:Huntingd l.: Aeldiltrida was the wife of King Egfrid, yet to the end re|mained a pure Virgin.
13. But before these,Bed. l. 4. c. 19. Saint Beda who lived in the sme age with her, thus more expressly testifies the same: King Egfrid, saith he, took to wife a Lady named Edil|truda the daughter of Anna King of the An|gles, who was a very Religious Prince and every way illustrious. The same Lady had been before, wife to a Prince of the Southern Gir|vians named Tombert: after whose death, which succeeded not long after the mariage, she was given to the foresaid King. And though she continued the space of twelve years his Consort, yet she remain'd glorious in the perpetuall integrity of her Virginity. Hereof the Blessed Bishop Wilfrid gave mee an assurance, when upon the occasion of some persons who cal|led it into doubt, I ask'd him concerning it: For he professed that he himself was a most certain witnesse of it: in so much as King Egfrid pro|mised him great store of money and lands if he could perswade the Queen, who respected none so much as him, to afford him the use of mariage.
14. Thus writes Saint Beda: and as if he foresaw that there would arise in our Nation a Sect either disgracing Virginity, or Professing that Continence is a Vertue exceeding human forces,Id. ibid. he adds, Neither ought we to distrust that that might happen in our age which faithfull history testifies to have sometimes formerly come to passe: since it is a gift of the same Lord who promised to be present with us to the end of the world. More|over God was pleased by a Divine miracle to witnes the same: For the flesh of S. Edil|dreda a long time after she was buried could not be corrupted: which was a sign that whilst she was alive she remaind uncorrupted by hu|man touches.
15. After twelve years thus conversing ogether, during which time King Egfrid used all means, but force, to expugn his wives purpose: at last he gave her free permission to spend the rest of her dayes ac|cording to her own desire, in a stare of Religious retirement, where she might ive free from all solicitations, and en|tirely employ her whole affection on her heavenly Bridegroom. Thus writes Saint Beda, After she had made many earnest re|quests to the King that she might be per|mitted to relinquish all worldly cares,Bed. l. c. 4.19. and serve our Lord Christ alone, the true King, in a Monastery: at last with much adoe she obtaind her petition, and entred into a Mo|nastery, where Ebba the Aunt of King Egfrid was Abbesse, and which was seated in a place calld the Citty of Coluda or Colding|ham: There she received the Sacred veyle of Religions from the foresaid Bishop Wil|frid.
16. Wee must here interrupt the Narra|tion of Saint Beda, and insert the occur|rents hapning to this Blessed Virgin upon her departure from Saint Ebba, before she arrived at her own Territory of Ely: as we find recorded in the ancient Archives of that Monastery.
17. There we read how not long after her permission to retire her self,Hist. Elius.  daffic. 9. King Egfrid repenting his indulgence towards her was desirous to recall her, and by the instigation of his servants resolved by force to take her out of the Mona|stery. Which being made known to the Holy Abbesse Ebba, she counselled Saint Ethelreda to fly speedily away, and not to rest till she came to her own house at Ely. Whereupon the Holy Virgin without delay taking with her two other devout Vir|gins, Selbenna and Selbera, went out of the Monastery and went up a high Moun|tain not far distant called Coldeburches-heved (which signifies the Head of Coldeburt.) In the mean time King Egfrid was come to the Monastery, and hearing of her flight, pursued her. But Almighty God to defend his servants, had encompassed the Hall with deep waters from the Sea, insomuch as the King could find no means to passe them. At which being amazed, and perceiving a Divine hand in it, he re|turnd to York, and shortly after took to wife Ermenburga. And after that time he conceived a deep hatred against Saint Wilfrid, which broke forth afterward as shall be declared.
18. The Tradition of that region informs us that the Holy Virgin, and her compa|nions were sustained by God seaven dayes on that mountain without any corporall food. After which they descended, and passing over the River of Humber they came prosperously to a place called Win|tringham, and rested at a Village named Alfham, where she took order for buil|ding a Church. From thence travelling with great labour, and finding in her way a commodious shade, she there layd her down to sleep. And when she awaked she found her staff which she had fastned in the ground at her head had taken root and began to flourish with leaves. In succee|ding times it became a very large and tall Tree, and continues to this day called Ethel|dredstow, or Ethelreds rest. And in memo|ry thereof a Church was there after|ward built to her honour. She therefore pursuing her iourney, through many diffi|culties and dangers at last arrived safe at Ely with her two companions. There she found a Holy Preist called Huna, who ioyfully received her, and performed all Ec|clesiasticall functions.
19. Now in that Island there had an|ciently been a Church built by King Ethel|bert at Saint Augustins request, which not long before this time had been de|stroyed by the cruell Tyrant Penda, who had also slain or chased away the Preists attending it. This Church the Holy Virgin restored in a more ample form, and con|secrated it, as it had been formerly, to the Honour of the most blessed Virgin Mo|ther of our Lord. Thereto likewise she by the assistance of her Brother King Adulf adioyned a Monastery of devout Virgins, which with great fervour flocked to her: over whom she was constituted Abbesse. And concerning her manner of life there, wee thus read in S. Beda.
It is reported (saith he) that from her first entrance into the Monastery she never used any linnen vestments,Bed. l. 4. c. 19 and very seldom any warm bathes, except before the solemne Feasts of Easter, Pentecost and Epipha|ny, and then she would be the last to wash her self, after she had ministred to all the other Virgins. She rarely eat any thing more then once a day, unlesse on the great Solemnities, or when any infirmity forced her to doe otherwise. From the time of Midnight Mattins till break of day she remaind in the Church intent on her Prayers. Some affirm that by the Spirit of Prophecy she foretold both the Pestilence of which she her self dyed, and likewise in the presence of her whole Convent she signified the number of those who were to be taken out of the world.
21. The sweet odour of her piety and ver|tues drew many Virgins and Widows, some of Royall descent to follow her. For her Sister Sexburga Queen of Kent, after the death of her husband Ercombert, (to whom she bore two sons, Egbert and Lothair, who succee|ded in the Kingdom) became a Nunne under the Government of S. Etheldred, to whom likewise she succeeded in the care of the Monastery. Moreover the daughter of the same Sexburga, calld Erminilda Queen of the Mercians, when her husband Wulfer was

dead retired to the same Convent, brin|ging with her her only daughter S. Werebur|ga, of whom more hereafter.
Reyner. in Apostolat f. 3722. Besides the Monastery of Religious Vir|gins, S. Ethelreda built likewise or rather restord, in a place neer adioyning, a Convent for Monks, over whom she as Abbesse retaind Iurisdiction. In both which Cloysters there were no fewer then a hundred devout per|sons continually attending on the service of God.


V. CHA.V. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Ethelreds Body found incorrupt.
7 Taudrey-lace.
8.9. c. Apparitions and Miracles wrought by the Holy Virgin.

1. SEaven years the Blessed Virgin Ethelreda governd her Monastery of Ely,Bed. l. 4. c. 19 exhibiting her self a glorious example of Piety and all vertues: after which in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy nine our Lord calld her out of this world to receive her reward,Wigorn. ad A. D. 679. on the eighth day before the Calends of Iuly: and according to her own command she was buried among her own Religious Virgins in the same coffin of wood, wherin she lay when she gave up her Spirit: and her Sister Sexburga, who had been the Wife of Earcom|bert King of Kent, succeeded her in the Office of Abbesse.
2. The wonderfull testimonies which God was pleased to afford in approbation of the Sanctity and purity of this Holy Widow, twice a wife and always a Virgin, are commemora|ted by S. Beda, who himself might have been a witnes of them. He was three and twenty years old when those things hapned, and wrote them forty years after. The relation by him given thus follows:Bed. l. 4. c. 9.3. Sixteen years after the Blessed Virgin Saint Ethelreda was buried, her Sister Sexburga Ab|besse thought fitt to take up her bones, and put|ting them into a New Coffin to translate them into a Church (dedicated to her honour.) She commanded therefore certain of the Monks to search out a Stone commodious for that purpose. Now the region of Ely being all encompassed with rivers and marishes, afforded no such stones of a convenient largenes. They therefore taking boat, went to a certain Citty not far distant, which lay desolate, calld in the English tongue Grandacister, where presently neer the walls of the Citty they found a Coffin of white Marble, elegantly made, and fittly coverd with a stone of the same. Perceiving hereby that God had pro|spered their iourney, they with great ioy and thankfullnes brought the Coffin to the Monastery.
Id. ib.4. Now when her Sepulcher was opened and the sacred body of this Holy Virgin and Spouse of our Lord discovered, it was found s free from any cor|ruption as if she had been buried the same day. This the foresaid Bishop Wilfrid and many other eye-witnesses have testified. But a more certain Witnes hereof was her Physician calld Cinfrid, who assisted her at her death, and was likewise pre|sent when her body was taken up. He frequently made relation how in her sicknes she had a great swelling under the hollow of her arme. Whereup|on he was advised to make an incision in the said swelling that the noxious humour might flow out.Which I having done, saith he, for two days after she found her self at more ease, insomuch as many thought she would recover. But the third day after her paines returning, she was suddenly taken out of the world, and made a happy exchange of paines and death for life and perpetuall health.
5. And many years after when her bones were taken out of her Sepulcher,Id. ib. a Pavilion was sett up, about which the whole congregation of Reli|gious men and Virgins stood singing Psalmes In the mean time the Abbesse attended with a few of the Nunnes where busy within the Pavilion, taking up the body: and on a sudden we heard the Ab|besse from within cry out with a distinct voyce, Glory be to the name of our Lord And presently after they opened the dore of the Pavilion, and calld mee in: where I saw the Sacred Body of the Holy Virgin taken out of her Sepulcher and placed in the Coffin, where it lay as if she had been asleep. After which taking the cover from her face they shewd mee the wound of the incision which I had made, perfectly cured, insomuch as instead of a wide gaping wound which was in her body when she was buried, now only some small signs of a scarr appeared, and those likewise were so fresh, that they seemd as if they had been clo|sed that very day.
6. The Religious Virgins also reported,Id. ib. that when by reason of the foresaid swelling she was tor|mened with extreme pains in her neck and side of her face, she took great contentment in her infirmity, and was want to say, I know of a cer|tainty that I am iustly paind in my neck, because when I was a young maid I wore about my neck weighty chains of iewells: Therefore God in his mercy has thus punished mee, that the fiery heat and rednes of the swelling in my neck may satisfy or my former pride and levity,
7. Harpsfeild from this passage in S. Beda well collects,Harpf. aec. 7. c. 24. that the custom in England for women to were a neck-lace of fine silk, came from this Exemple and saying of S. Ethelred: and therefore the said neck-lace is vulgarly calld Taudry-lace, that is the lace of S. Audrey or S. Ethelreda. And it were to be wished that by such a monument the minds of our woe|men and Virgins would be incited to imitate the Vertues of this Blessed Virgin.
8. S. Beda thus proceeds in his Narration:Bed. ubi upr When the Holy Virgins body was translated into the Church dedicated to her, it hapned that by the touching of her Vestments Devills were driven from the bodies of the obsessed, and many infirmi|ties were cured. The Coffin likewise of wood in which she was first buried restored sight to the blind, and tooke away pain from the eyes of

such infirm persons as applied their head to the same when they prayed. The Religious Virgins therefore washed the Saints body, and putting new vestments on it, caried it into the Churchs placing it in the new Marble Coffin latey brought thither: where it remains to this day in great ve|neration. And which was very strange, the said Coffin was found so exactly fitt for the Holy Virgins body, as if it had been made on purpose for her. The place likewise of the head which was distinct|ly framed, did properly suit with the measure of the Virgins head.
Matt. Angl 7. Oct.9. This Translation was on the seaven|teenth of October, on which day it is com|memorated in the Calender of Sarum. And the same day in following ages was solemnly observed as a Feast: For in a Charter made by King Henry the first for the erection of the Monastery of Ely into an Episcopall See, we find it dated, in a Synod held at Nottingham Castle, on the day of the Translation of the Blessed Virgin Ethelreda: though as M. Selden observes, there be there an antichronism, the ninth being written, instead of the one and twentieth of the Calends of Novem|ber.
10. In succeeding times when the fury of the Danes layd wast all places, and their rage was cheifly exercised against the Sa|cred Relicks of Saints, God by a speciall Mi|racle preserved the Monument of this Holy Virgin.Malmsbur. de . Pontif. l. 4 f. 293. For thus writes William of Malms|bury: The Danes (saith he) rushing violently into that fenny countrey, drove out the Religious Virgins, and demolished their buildings. Among which one, more outrageous then the rest, stole away the Mantle which covered the Virgins Tomb, and with his sword smote the Marble: by which stroke a splinter of it rever|berated from the pavement into the Sacrile|gious Soldiers eye, and he fell distracted to the ground. Whereupon his companions raising him up, sled away, and against their former design left untouched all the other Sepulchers of the Holy Virgins which had been buried there.
11. The same Authour further relates, how in the age next following,Id. ib. when the Danish troubles were ceased, there were placed in the said Monastery Secular Preists to perform Divine service there: Among which one more rh and saucy then his companions, tempted the rest to make a tryall whether the Sacred Virgins body yet remaind uncorrupted. But they upon an apprehension of danger refu|sing, he foolishly adventured on it. And fa|sting a candle to the end of a rodd, he passed it through a hole which the Danes had made in the Sepulcher, and looking in as curiously as he could, searched round about the Tomb. And not content with this, with the end of a forked stick he endeavoured to draw to him the cloa|thes in which the Sacred Body was enwrapped; and some part of the Body he discovered: When the Holy Virgin having indignation that a Vile person should presume to look upon her naked body,A. D. 960 with great violence drew back the cloathes, insomuch as he striving against her, fell back ward, and was forcibly dashed against the pavement: by which fall he became lame all his life, and afterward was strook with madnes. That hole made in the Sepulcher the Holy Bishop Ethelwold caused to be damned up with stone and morter: and thrusting out the Secu|lars, brought Monks into the place: and moreover conferred on the Monastery an in|credible number of Mannours and possessions which he bought with his own money.
12. This hapned about the year of our Lord nine hundred and sixty, in the raign of King Edgar. Now what speciall lands then belonged to that Mo|nastery does not distinctly appear. Yet we find that the part of Suffolk adioy|ning to Ely was anciently divided into three portions, of which one was calld The liberty of Saint Ediltrudis, because it appertaind to her Convent: On which, saith Camden,Camden in Suffolk. our Kings heretofore bestowd territories Cum Sacha  Socha, as we read in the Records of Ely, granting thereto an entire exemption from all Iurisdiction, Eccle|siasticall and Secular.
13 These possessions were continual|ly encreased by the great devotion born to her during the Saxon Government and Monarchy. But when the Norman race came in, this and many other Religious houses and Churches suffred much pre|iudice, many of their Lands and Man|nours being either confiscated to the Kings Exchequor, or bestowd on Officers and soldiers assisting in the Conquest. Notwithstanding after all such extor|tions, yet there remaind very conside|rable revenews to Saint Ethelreda's Mona|stery: Concerning which William of Malmsbury thus wrote above four hun|dred years since:Malmsbur de Pontif. l. 4. f. 273. You may coniecture the largenes of the possessions of Saint Ethelreda by this, that though very much was by fraud taken away, and more by violence usurped, the last Abbot Richard putt up in his own purse yearly a thousand and four hundred pounds, allowing scarce three hundred for the maintenance of the Monks; besides those ex|penses which were consumed on his servants and guests.Godvvin. in Elieus. Episcop This Summ saith B. Codwin if compared with the present rate of coyn amounts to more then four thousand pound yearly rents.
14 But it will be more expedient that we should celebrate this Holy Virgins ri|ches in Divine Graces, then worldly pos|sessions. In the days of the said Richard the last Abbot (for after him that Church was made an Episcopall See) the uncorruptednes of her body was not questioned, as we shall shew presently when we treat of her Sister S. Withburga a Holy Virgin also. To avoyd tediousnes I will omitt many wonderful

things which God was pleased to work by S. Ethelreda in severall following ages. Yet without a great fault we must not passe by two apparitions of the holy Virgin, related by a faithfull Historian, and approved by many witnesses, wherein she promised her speciall patronage to the inhabitants of our Island who should have recourse to her in|tercession.
Walsingh. in Rich. 1. f. 338.15. In the year of Grace thirteen hundred eighty nine (saith Thomas Walsingham) at Ely the Blessed Virgin and Queen Ethelreda appea|red to a certain young man admonishing him to beware of some dangers ready to befall him, and informing him likewise of far greater calamities coming on the Kingdom, except Almighty God being pacified by the prayers of his servants, would mercifully hold his hand. Therefore she advised him to require the Priour and Monks of her Convent in her name to pray unto our Lord for the common safety of the Kingdom, adding, that She her self would also add her prayers for the same purpose. And when the young man had not the courage to perform her commands, she told him, that for a sign he should be con|tracted in his members, lame and disabled to every thing till the day of her Deposition: on which solemnity if he were caried to her Sepul|cher, he should recover his perfect health. Here|upon the young man published his Vision, inso|much as many beleived it, being induced thereto by seing the penalty layd on him: For to shew that there was no fiction in the matter, his leggs were so slender, that there was nothing but skin and bones, and his hamms were so drawn up, that his heeles stuck to his hanches.
16. The report of this being spread abroad, many came to see him, and for tryal they prickd his leggs and feet with iron bodkins, but the skin being dead, he felt nothing: Others endea|voured, but in vain, to draw back his leggs. They determined therefore to expect the prefixed day, wherein the event would prove his speeches either true or false. On the solemnity therefore of the glorious Virgin-Queen the young man was caried to the Church. There being layd he began first to fall into a slumber, but being wakd, he leapt up. Those who were near heard the cracking of his sinews, after which followed the stretching forth of his members: and the young man began to leape and in the presence of many he went about the Virgins Sepulcher. And whereas by command of the Holy Virgin he had foretold ma|ny secret matters touching particular persons (the which he revealed to his Parish-Preist under seal of Confession) all which were found to be true: men therefore did assure themselves that all the rest which he sayd should afterward come to passe, were true likewise. Among which he foretold that the summer following the heats would be so extreme, that the leads on some Churches would be melted, unlesse God would qualify it. And indeed we felt a very great heat, which but for the prayers of some devout persons would have been intolerable. Moreover by lightning from heaven the lead on some Churches was melted, as at a town called Manfeild in Sussex: the Colle|giat Church of Canterbury likewise was burnt, with a great part of the Citty, severall farm-houses also in Essex, and in some places both ships and mariners were consumed by fire from heaven.
7 This Vision and prediction was more|over confirmed by another shortly follow|ing,Id. ibid.
made by the same glorious Saint to an old decrepit woman of fourscore years, who was healed of a long continued lame|nes at her Sepulcher, as the same Historian at large recounts: to whom the Reader is re|ferred. To conclude, we will here only add the Testimony given to this Holy Virgin in the Roman Martyrologe, where on the three and twentieth of Iune we read these words,Martyrolog. Rom. 23. Iun. In Brittany on that day is the Commemoration of S. Ediltrudis Queen and Virgin, illustrious for Sanctity and Miracles, whose Body eleaven years after she was buried, was found un|corrupted.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of S. Withburga Sister to S. Ethelreda.
6:7. c. Her Body likewise uncorrupted, after many ages.
10.11. The Priviledge of England above other countreyes.

1. THE same year in which S Ethel|reda was the second time maried to Egfrid Prince of the Northumbers,A D 660. her Sister S. Withburga daughter of Anna King of the East-angles according to our ancient Marty|rologe is sayd to have dyed, though in a later and more correct Edition her death is placed ten years after.
2. This Holy Virgin S. Withburga, having scarce passed the years of child hood, was enflamed with a desire of retiring from the tumults and conversation of the world, that she might more freely attend to God: And accordingly she built for her self an Ora|tory in a village of Norfolk called Derrega now Derham, where as if she had been de|vested of her body, and estranged from all delectations of sence, she gave her self en|tirely to Divine Contemplation, living an Angelicall life in perfect chastity and neg|lect of all contentments of the flesh.
3. Now it hapned that her self, and her innocent family of Virgins her attendants, being solicitous only to feed their minds with spirituall delicacies, fell into want of necessary sustenance.Capgrav. in S. Withburga. Whereupon the Holy Virgin carefull of her companions, addressed her prayers to her heavenly Master, whose care extends it self even to the foules of

the aire, beseeching him to provide for his hand maids,Capgrav. in S. Withburga Malsb. de Pass. 14. who only attended on his ser|vice.After such Prayers she fell into a slum|ber, in which she saw standing by her the Queen of Virgins adorned with inexpressible beauty and Majesty, who bid her still putt her confidence in God, and not to trouble herself for the morrow. Send, sayd she, two of the mayd servants every morning to the bridge which passes over the neighbouring River, for there will meet them two milch Does, which will afford sufficient nourishment for this small fami|ly. According to this command the next morning she sent her two mayds, to whom two Does offred themselves, from which they drew a sufficient quantity of milk for their sustenance.
4. This effect of the Divine Providence towards his servants continued a long time; till at last the Devill full of envy and rage incited the like passions into the mind of a rude barbarous man, of principall authority in the same village, who deriding so great a miracle, and agitated with a malicious, spite|full indignation, with arrows killed the said beasts. But he that despised miracles, peri|shed with a miracle: for presently after being smitten with the jaundise, he consumed away and miserably dyed.
5. But mans envy could nor shorten Gods hand, who is not confined to one mean of providing for his servants. He who fills every creature with his benediction; was not wanting in his care for the sustenance of this Holy Virgin and her devout family, who persevered to the end in the same course of piety. How many years she spent therein is not expressly declared by any an|cient Writer.Martyrolog. . Onely the eighth day before the Ides of Iuly is in our Calendr assigned for the day of her deposition.
Camden in Nourfolk.6. She was first buried, saith Camden, in the same town of Derham whither she had retired herself: and for her aversion from all luxury and vanity, was by our Ancestours reckond among the Saints. And with great reason, since God was pleased not only to beatify her Spirit with immortality, but her chast body like|wise with incorruption.Florent. ad A. D. 79. For by the testimo|ny of Florentius, her body fifty five years after being translated and more honourably reposed in the Church built by her self, was found entire, un|touched by any corruption.Ap. Capgrav. The Authour of her life addes; that not her body only, but vestments likewise were found as fresh as if she had the same day been layed in her tomb. And moreover from the place where she had been first buried there issued a spring of most pure water, which had ver|tue to confer health on many persons afflicted with sundry diseases.
7. This Holy Virgin was for many ages ce|lebrated with great honour in our Church, and the town of Derham where her Sacred body reposed esteemd it a most precious Treasure. For thus we read in her life: The holy Bishop Ethelwald repaired the Monastery of Ely, and assembling a congregation of Monks he placed Abbot over them Brithnot who had been Priour of Winchester. And King Edgar added to that Monastery the Convent of Derham, together with the cheif Treasure thereof, the Body of the Holy Virgin S. Withburga.
8. Then it was that her Sacred Body was a second time translated, and reposed toge|ther with her Sister S. Ethelreda. But the inha|bitants of Derham at first earnestly resisted this translation:Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 4. f. 293. till the authority of King Edgar, Bi|shop Ethelwald and the Abbot Brithnot prevay|led. The said inhabitants notwithstanding rose against the Monks sent to remove it, and encom|passed the Church with a guard. But the Monks deceived them, and in the dark night cunningly conveyed away the Body. Which being although too late perceived by the people, they pursued them: and had not the Abbot Brithnot made great hast to putt off from shore the boat in which the Body was placed, he had not escaped without mischeif: for at that time there was no entrance into the Isle but by boat. But our age more sharp-witted then the former, hath overcome nature, and by filling the marish with great banks and rampires, has at last made it easily accessible on foot. The boat-men therefore hastily committing them|selves to the Vast poole of which they had no ex|perience, ran into danger, but a pillar of fire from heaven descending, directed the boat safely and swiftly to the shore.
9. The untainted Bodies of these two in|contaminate Virgins and Sisters reposed to|gether in the Monastery of Ely till the year of Grace a thousand one hundred and six in the raign of King Henry the first: And then again Richard the last Abbot caused them to be taken up, that they might be more ma|gnificently buried. At which time for the removing a scruple entertained by some, the miracle of their incorruption was publickly manifested. This we read thus related by the same Authour:Id. ibid. A doubt entring into the minds of some touching the incorruption of S. Withburga, in the time of the Abbot Richard, when the Bodies of those two Holy Virgins were translated, that doubt was putt to the tryall. And as tou|ching S. Ethelreda, considering the ancient proofs of her incorruption, none durst presume to touch her body. But they discovered the Body of Saint Withburga as far as her breasts: and she was seen perfectly entire, more like to one asleep then dead, with a silk cushion under her head, her veyle and Vestments shining as if they had been new, her countenance chearfull with a rosy blush, her teeth white, her lipps a little opened, and her breasts ex|ceeding small. The Authour of her life addes,Ap. Capgrav. That one of the Monks adventuring to touch her body, a lively blush coloured her cheeks, as if she still had breath in her: her dead body expressing the same shame|fastnes, which her self would have done when alive.
10. Surely if S. Athanasius his iudgment may be acceped,Athanas. Apolog. 1. who affirms That Vir|ginity

is a great proof of the true Religion, that Religion which the Virgins of this age were taught was undoubtedly the true one: for the Garden of Gods Church was never adorned with so many Lilies of so bright a candour: Neither can any Christian province boast of so many Saints whose purity has been so visibly glorified by Almighty God.Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 2. c. 1. And therefore William of Malmsbury discreetly observes in how extraordinary a manner the Divine piety did illustrate our Nation, for, says he, I sup|pose that not in any part of the Christian world can be found so many Bodies of Saints exempted from corruption after their deaths, being images of the last eternall incorruption. This I conceive to have been an especiall grace and benediction of God, to the end that our Nation seated as it were out of the world, by considering the incorruption of his Saints, may be animated to conceive a more assured hope of the Resurrection. There are no fewer truly then five Saints of my knowledge (and others boast of more among them) to witt, S Ethel|reda and S. Withburga Virgins, King Edmond, Arch-bishop Elpheg, and the ancient Father S. Cuthbert, all whose bodies do still remain with a seeming exteriour Vitall warmth, as representing persons asleep.
11. So many visible proofs of Gods ap|probation of chastity and Virginity profes|sed by Vow, testified by so many Authours, confirmed by the experience and sight of such a world of persons for many ages together, by which our Island was illu|strated above almost any other Christian Province, such evidences as these, I say, in all reason ought to have been a de|monstration even to the weakest iudg|ments, that the New pretended Reforma|tion of Religion, begun by the impure, incestuous mariage of a Religious Friar and a consecrated Nunn, and continued with a professed condemnation of such Vows as unlawfull, because impossible to be ob|served, was far from deserving the name of a Reformation, which endeavours to root out of the Churches garden the most beautifull ornaments of it, those candid Lilies so precious in Gods sight, that Sa|lomon himself in all his glory was not adorned like one of them.


VII. CHAP.VII. CHA.

1.2. The Holy Offspring of Anna King of the East-Angles.
3. 4. c. The Gests of S. Eartongatha, S. Sedrido, and Saint Edilburga, Holy Vir|gins.

1. NEVER surely did any Princes Court and family afford so many and such illustrious examples of Sanctity and purity, as that of Anna King of the East-Angles. He was blessed with a numerous issue, and not any of his children, of each sexe, but is fi|xed like a bright starr in our Ecclesiasticall Calendar. Besides the two glorious Virgins last treated of, there was another Sister, Wife to Earcombert King of Kent, S. Sexbur|ga, who in obedience to her parents became a most pious chast wife, and by her own ele|ction, after she was Widdow, became a consecrated Nunn under the obedience of her younger Sister S. Ethelreda, to whom, as hath been said, she succeeded in the Of|fice of Abbesse, by the pious administra|tion whereof she deserved a place among Gods Saints. These glorious Sisters either were examples to invite and promote their Brother S. Erconwald in the course of Sanctity, for which he is worthily glorified in our Annals, or followed the pattern which he gave them: for their ages are uncertain. Con|cerning him we shall treat hereafter, and shew how he relinquished all pretentions and designs of the Court, to consecrate him|self to the service of God in an Ecclesiasticall employment, which he discharged with ad|mirable charity, humility and zeale.
2. Besides all these, three other Virgins eminent for Sanctity proceeded out of the same family: S. Edilburga the naturall daugh|ter of King Anna, Saint Sedrido daughter to King Anna's wife Hereswida by another husband, and Saint Eartongatha neice to them both, being daughter to Earcombert King of Kent and his wife Saint Sexburga. These three Holy Virgins, though they dyed in severall years, yet since Saint Beda ioyns them together, we will here follow his ex|ample, placing their Gests this year of Grace six hundred and sixty, in which S. Sedrido, according to our Martyrologe, dyed.
3. They all out of a desire of a more strict and perfect life went over into France, by reason that as yet there were not in Brit|tany many Monasteries for Religious Virgins: and there betook themselves to the Monaste|ry of Saint Phara, whom formerly Saint Co|lumban had instructed in Piety and a love of Christian Perfection. The relation which Saint Beda gives of them is as followeth:4. Eartongatha the daughter of King Ear|combert (and S. Sexburga) was a Virgin of emi|nent vertues,Bed l. 3. c. 8. as became the offspring of such parents. She spent her life in our Lords service in a Monastery of France built by the most illu|strious Abbesse S. Phara, in a place called Brige (or Brye.) For at that time by reason there were not many Monasteries erected in Brittany, it was the custome for many parents in this Island, to send over their daughters into French Monaste|ries, there to be instructed in piety, and conse|crated to our Lord, especially in the Monasteries of Brige, Cale (or Chelles) and Andilegum. In the number of such noble Virgins so sent into France was Sedrido daughter of the wife of Anna King of the East-angles, and likewise Edilburga a naturall daughter of the same King. Both these Virgins for the merit of their vertues, though strangers, were constituted Abbesses of the Mo|nastery of Brye (now called Pharmonstier.) And hence may those Writers be corrected, who place Saint Sedrido in the Monastery of Chel|les, which as yet was not built by the Holy Queen S. Bathildis.
Martyrolog. Gall. c. 7. Decemb.5. Therefore Andrew Saussay in his Mar|tyrologe on the seaventh of December truly writes concerning Saint Phara and these Virgins after this manner: The Father of Saint Phara being at last better advised, built for her a Monastery in the forest of Brye, in a place then called Eboriacum, but after|wards it took the name of Pharmonstier, from the said Holy Abbesse. She being settled there, by the odour of her Sanctity drew many other devout Virgins thither, over whom she becoming a Mother, excelled them more in Grace and vertue, then in her preeminence and dignity. And indeed so great was the some of her Sanctity, that great numbers of Noble Virgins, yea and Princesses, out of all the Provinces of France, yea Germany, England and Ireland contended to be there re|ceived, and to those, being inflamed with Di|vine love, she communicated her own vertues and Graces. Among those devout Virgins the most renowned for Piety was Edilburga. (na|turall) daughter of Anna King of the East-angles, who after the death of Saint Phara supplied her Office in the government of the Monastery, and by the divine progresse of her life deserved to be inscribed in the number of Saints after her death. Where succeeded her in the same Office her neece Saint Earthongatha, daughter of Earcombert King of Kent, a worthy branch and well beseeming so noble a Stock, for she flourishing with eminent piety and ver|tue, served our Lord there till her death, in wonderfull purity both of body and Spirit.
6. Our Martyrologe seems to make Saint Sedrido the immediate Abbesse of Pharmon|stier after S Edilburga, and after her S. Ear|thongatha is supposed to have succeeded, though her name, which is strange, be there omitted. And as touching S. Sedrido her commemoration in the French Martyrologe is on the tenth of Ianuary,Ibidem 10. Ianuar. in these words: On that day is celebrated the memory of S. Sethrida Virgin in the Monastery of S. Phara in the terri|tory of Brye: Who being an English Lady, out of zale to Perfection came to the same Monastery, where she professed a Religious state, and having consummated the course of an Angelicall life upon earth, departed to the heavenly society of Holy Virgins. Her praises are written by vene|rable Beda.
7. We must not here omitt what the same Saint Beda writes concerning S. Earthongata:Bed l. 3. c. 8. Many things are related very miraculous by the inhabitants of that territory concerning this Holy Virgin. But we will onely mention breifly her death, and the wonders succeeding it. When the day approached in which she was to be called out of this world to eternall happines, she went about the Monastery visiting the Celles of the Religious Virgins, especially such as were more ancient and eminent for piety, to whose prayers she humbly re|commended her self, not concealing from them that she was taught by revelation that her depar|ture was at hand. The manner of which revelation was sayd to be this: She saw a great troop of men in white garments enter the Monastery: and asking them, what they sought for there, their answer was, That they were sent thither to receive and carry back with them a precious Medall of gold which came thither out of Kent. Now on the same night toward the end whereof near break of day she passed from the darknes of this world to the heavenly Light, many of the Monks whose lodg|ings were adioyning to the Monastery, report that they heard distinctly a Melody of Angells singing, and a noyse as it were of a great multitude entring the Monastery: Whereupon going forth to see what the matter was they saw a wonderfull great Light from heaven, in which that holy soule, when deli|vered from the prison of her body, was conducted to eternall ioyes They add many other wonders hap|ning the same night: which we, pursuing other matters, leave to their relation.
8. The Sacred body of the Virgin and Spouse of our Lord was buried in the Church of the Proto|martyr S. Steven. Three days after they having a mind to take up the Stone which covered her Se|pulcher, and raise it higher, as they were busy about this, a sweet odour of so wonderfull fragrancy evaporated from beneath, that it seemd to the Religious men and Sisters there assisting, as if a cellar full of precious baum was then opened, Thus writes S. Beda touching S. Earthongata.
9. And concerning S. Edilburga he addes.Idem Ibid. Likewise S. Edilburga formerly mentioned, the Aunt of S Earthongata by her Mother, she like|wise preserved the glory of perpetuall Virginity with great purity and perfection: and of how emi|nent merits she was, appeared yet more after her death. In the time whilst she was Abbesse she began the building of a Church in the Monastery to the honour of all the Apostles, where her desire was to be buried. But death snatched her away be|fore half the building was finished: notwithstand|ing she was buried in the same place where she had desired. After her death the Monks who had care of the Monastery employd their minds in other

matters, so that the building was interrupted. Insomuch as seaven years after they resolved by reason of the excessive charges to give over that structure, and to translate the Body of the Ab|besse into another Church already finished and de|dicated. Therefore opening the Sepulcher they found the Body of the Holy Virgin as free from all corruption, as it had been during her life free from carnall affections. Therefore the Religious Virgins having again washed and cloathed it with fresh vestments, they translated it into the Church of S. Steven the Martyr.Martyrol. Gallic.  Anglic. 7. Iulij. The so|lemnity of her Deposition is there with great glory celebrated on the Nones of Iuly. On which day likewise her name is recited among the Saints in our English Martyrologe.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. The Gests of S. Beuno and S. Elerius Brittish Saints, and Masters to Saint Winefrida.
4.3. c. The Gests of the glorious Martyr S. Winefrida.

A. D. 660.1. AT the same time Virginity and chasti|ty triumphed likewise in the Brit|tish Church: for excepting the difference a|bout the celebration of Easter, there was a perfect agreement in all points of Faith between the Brittains and Saxons. The person whose Victorious Chastity illustrated this age was the glorious S. Winefride, who wil|lingly offred her self a Sacrifice to preserve her Virginity consecrated by vow to her Cele|stiall Bridegroom: Which voluntary Oblation was so acceptable to Almighty God, that he recom|penced it with so stupendious a Miracle, as neither the precedent nor following ages of the Church could afford one to equall it.
2. This love and valew sett upon holy Virginity was instilld into her by her Spirituall Teachers, two Brittish Saints, Saint Beuno and Saint Elerius: of both which the Memory is ce|lebrated in our Martyrologe:Martyrol. Anglic. 14. Ianuar. Ib. 13. Iun. Of the former on the fourteenth of Ianuary, where he is sayd to have been famous for Sanctity and Miracles: and of the latter on the thirteenth of Iune: and the year of both their deaths is assigned this six hundred and sixtieth: in which also the Authour of Saint Winefrides life in Surius says that she flourished. Now the Gests of these three Saints we will here deliver to|gether, from the credit of Robert Abbot of Shrewsbury, who above five hundred years since wrote the life of Saint Winefride out of ancient Brittish Records: which he begins thus:Robert. Slop. Abb. Ap. Capgrav in S. Winefrida.3. There was a certain holy man of great per|fection, who dwelt in the Western part of Brittany. He was descended of Princely parents, but despising his hereditary glory, he fled away poore, and became a Monk, eminent in all vertues. And having built severall Churches in many places, in which he placed Monks for the ser|vice of God; he was divinely admonished to seek out an habitation provided for him by God.At last he came to the territory of a certain man of great power named Thewith, or as some call him Trebwith, to whom he said, I beseech you to grant me out of your hereditary possessions a small portion, which may serve partly for mine own use, and partly for the service of God, that I may there build a Church, in which I may attend on Gods worship, and dayly pray for your salvation. The Noble man readily granted his request, and withall committed to him his onely daughter named Wenefred, to be instructed by him in piety.
Whensoever therefore the holy man taught the people, preaching to them the do|ctrines of salvation he sett the said young maid at his feet, admonishing her to attend diligently and affectuously to his admonitions. By this means the Virgin through Gods Grace and mercy encreased every day in piety and spirituall Wise|dom, and entertained a purpose of renouncing mariage: yet durst not make known to her pa|rents such her resolution. But coming to the man of God, she freely declared her most secret thoughts to him, telling him, That the seed of the Divine Word which he had sowd, had wrought such effect in her, that she determind to renounce all the pleasures of the world, and for the honour of God to preserve her Virginity entire and undefiled.Now that I may perform this my purpose, said she, I must desire your intercession with my parents.
4. The Holy man having heard the Virgins request, promised her his utmost endeavour to obtain her parents consent. And presently after having proposed the matter to them, they with teares blessed God for their childs piety, and willingly granted her desire. From that time the devout maid assiduously sate at the Holy mans feet, and with an ardent affection attended to the prai|ses of her heavenly Spouse proceeding from his mouth: She suffred no earthly cares to enter into her mind: she frequently watched whole nights at her prayers in the Church: She would oft im|portunely sollicite the Holy man to discourse to her of the life, graces and perfections of her Lord: which when he delivered, the comfort and pleasure which she received from thence exceeded all worldly or sensuall concentment. Thus though she was of tender years, yet in vertues and piety she was very aged, and as it were dead to all concu|piscence.
5. Now it hapned on a certain Sunday when her parents were gone to Church, some necessary occasion detaind her at home. At which time a certain young man, named Caradoc the Son of Alan Prince of that countrey, entred the house, where he found the Virgin alone sitting near the fire. She knowing the Prince, hastily rose up, and humbly desird to know his pleasure.His an|swer was, You are not ignorant who I am, and how I abound in riches and honour: all these

riches and honours you shall partake, if you will yeild to my will. The modest Virgin perceiving his foule intent, held down her dead, and blushed extremely:At first she seemd as if she was much troubled that he should find her un|ready and unadorned, and she told him, Sir you being a Prince, there is no doubt but you are able to heap upon mee all worldly happines in abun|dance, if I were your wife. However be pleased to expect here awhile till my Fathers return; in the mean time I have some busines in my cham|ber, and will come back presently.
This she said to gain a little time, for she saw the unhappy young man, burning and almost enraged with lust. With much adoe he permitted her to goe to her chamber, having some hope that she would return assoon as she was dressed and adorned. She therefore entred hastily her chamber, and as hastily went out of the dore on the other side, and with all her force ran toward the Church.
6. Assoon as the young man perceived this, he became all in a fury, and drawing out his sword he ran swiftly after her, soon owertaking her: and with a stern look told her, I have a long time loved thee and desired to enioy thee, and darest thou scorn mee? Be now assured, that if thou refusest my embraces, I will presently cutt of thy head. She hearing and nothing affrighted with these threats, answered him saying, I am by Vow espoused to the heavenly King: and be|sides him as long as I live I will never admitt another Lover. Therefore use thy sword if thou pleasest, for be assured that neither thy flatteries nor threats shall have power to draw mee from him to whom I an by vow obliged. The lustfull young man enraged to see himself so contemned, and the maid so inflexible, beleiving he could never enioy rest as long as she lived so resolved, mad with lust and rage presently strook of her head: and immediatly in the place where it fell to the earth a most pure and plentifull Spring gushed forth, which flowes to this day, and by the Holy Virgins merits gives health to a world of diseased persons.
7. It being in the steep descent of a hill where the Virgins head was cutt of, it lightly rouling down to the bottom, slidd into the Church: whereas the body remaind in the place where it first fell. The whole congregation there attending to Divine Mysteries were wonderfully astonished to see the Head tumbling among their feet, de|testing the crime of the murderer, and imprea|ting Divine vengeance on him. But the parents of the Virgin broke forth i to tears and sad com|plaints. They all went out, and found the mur|derer near the liveles body, wiping his sword on the grasse: For being the Princes Son, he ap|prehended no danger, and as for the crime com|mitted against God, he was unsensible of the heynousnes of it.The man of God therefore seing his pride and obstinacy, and having in his hands the Virgins head, looked earnestly upon him, and sayd, Impious Villain, hast thou no shame of the slain wherewith thou hast defiled thy high birth, and shewst thou no repentance of this horrible crime? Thou hast disturbed the peace, thou hast polluted the Church with thy sacrilegious murder, thou hast highly provoked Almighty God, and doest thou shew no sorrow for all this? Since therefore it is so, that thou hast not spared Gods Church, nor reverenced his solemn day, I beseech him without delay to inflict on thee a iust punishment for this thy un|worthy and detestable crime. Assoon as the Holy man had ended these words, the young man immediatly fell to the ground, and gave up the ghost: and, which was more wonderfull, his body presently disappeared from the eyes of the by|standers: and many say that it was swallowed up by the earth, and with the wicked soule sunk into Hell.
8 But the man of God often kissing the head which he held in his hands, could not refrain to weep bitterly. Afterwards ioyning it to the body and covering it with his mantle, he returned to the Altar, where he celebrated Masse. Which being ended, he returned to the Virgins body: and there began a devout sermon to the people, in which among other passages he said, That the Holy Virgin had made a vow (of Religious Profession) but being thus intercepted by death, had not opportunity to perform it: Therefore he exhorted them ro prostrate themselves on the ground, and earnestly beseech Almighty God to restore her to life. The Congregation readily obeyd him, and after they had so continued a good while in prayer, the man of God rose from the earth, and stretching forth his hands to hea|ven, sayed, O Lord Iesus Christ, for whose love this Virgin despised all earthly things, and desired only heavenly, we most ardently beseech thee in mercy to hear our prayers, and grant the request we make to thee. And although we doubt not but that this thy Virgin, who suffred onely for thy love, shall be received by thee into thy ioy, and therefore little regards our society and con|versation, yet vouchsafe to grant the humble requests of thy servants, and command this Virgins soule to return to her body, and thereby shew that thou hast an entire power and rule both over our soules and bodies: and likewise that she being by thy mercy restored to life, may for ever magnify thy Name, and encreasing in the fervour of a holy conversation, may after ma|ny years return more pure to thee her Spouse, who art the onely Son of the Eternall Father, with whom and the Holy Ghost thou livest and raignest one God world without end. This Prayer being ended, to which all the people cryed aloud, Amen: the Virgin presently rose up, as from sleep, clean|sing her face from the dust and sweat, and filled the Congregation with wonder and ioy.
9 Now in the place where the Head was re|ioynd to the body there appeard a white Circle compassing the neck, small as a white thread, which continued so all her life, shewing the place where the Section had been made. And the report in that countrey is, that from that white circle she had the name of Winefrid given her, whereas at first she had been called Breuna: For in the Brittish language Win signifies White. And moreover the Tradition is, that after her

death whensoever she appeared to any, that White mark was always visible. The place where her blood was first shed was not much di|stant from a Monastery in North-Wales calld Basingwerk: The Name of it formerly was, The dry vale: but after her death to this day it is called Saint Winefrids Well. The Stones likewise, both where the spring gushes forth, and be|neath in the Current, having been sprinkled with her blood, retain the rednes to these times: which colour neither the length of so many ages, nor the continuall sliding of the water over them, have been able to wash away: and moreover a certain Masse which sticks to the said stones, renders a fragrant odour, like Incense.
10. The Holy Virgin being thus miraculously revived, did dayly attend the man of God, and devoutly hearkned to his exhortations: and at last received from him the Holy vayle of Religious Profession Whereupon assembling severall Maids of Noble families, the instilld into their minds a Love of Purity, and con|tempt of all flattering delights of the world: so that they willingly submitted their neks to the easy Yoke of Christ, and by a Re|gular vow consecrated themselves to his ser|vice.
11 Not long after the Holy Man Beuno dyed, and by Divine admonition Saint Wi|nefrid had recourse to another devout Man named Deifer, who was of so great San|ctity, and so highly favoured by God, that he made a fountiain break out of the earth, and conferred health on many infirm persons.When Saint Winefrid therefore came to this Holy man, a voyce from heaven signified to him whilst he watched that night in prayer, Saying, Tell my most deare daughter Winefride that she repair unto a man named Saturn, from whom she shall be informed in what place she is to spend the remainder of her life. Assoon therefore as the Holy Virgin came to him he said to her, There is a certain place calld Witheriac (it is vulgarly named Guitherine in the Province of Denbigh) which is held in great reverence by all the people: This place it is Gods will that thou visit, and re|main there whilst thou livest, by thy good example informing others in the way of piety. There inhabites an Abbot of Eminent ver|tues, named Elerius, who by continuall Pen|nance and Prayer is become so exempted from secular cares, that nothing in this pre|sent life has any tast to him, all his affe|ctions being employed on celestiall mat|ters.
12. Thither therefore the Holy Virgin di|rected her steps, and the said Abbot Ele|rius by Gods holy Spirit being admonished of her coming, went out to meet her, and re|ceiving her with great honour, brought her into a Convent of Religious Virgins, recommen|ding them to her care and government. Whosoever was sick and came to her, returned back with perfect health: and if any were sad or deiected in mind, they received consolation and inward peace of soule.
13. At last on a certain night as she was in|tenive to her devotions, our Lord appeared to her, and signified to her that the day of her dissolution was at hand. Wherefore on the fourth day before the Nones of November, being full of vertues and good works, she gave up her Spi|rit to God: And was buried neer the bodies of Saint Chebi and Saint Senan. By her inter|cession Almighty God was pleased to work ma|ny Miracles: among which this was one, that she gave fight to a certain Carpenters daughter who had been blind from her Nativity, c.
14. This is the account which Robert Abbot of Shrewsbury has given of the Gests of this glorious Virgin Saint Wine|frid. From what particular Records he extracted his Relation, doth not appear. But Tradition delivers, that immediatly after her death her Story was written by the Holy Abbot Elerius, her last Spirituall Father: and probably from him the said Ro|bert received most of the passages in his Narration.
19. The Sacred Relicks of this Holy Virgin lay at Witheriac or Guitherine till the year one thousand one hundred and thirty eight, at which time her Body was translated to a Monastery of Monks in Shrewsbury, where Almighty God approved the Veneration which men with great devotion shewd to her, by wonderfull miracles. So fre|quent and so great a concourse there hath been ever since to her Shrine and like|wise to her Well, that in severall of our Kings raigns the fame of almost continuall Miracles wrought by her intercession hath invited severall Popes to confer speciall In|dulgences on those which Visited them. Her Feast on the third of November was generally celebrated in England with Nine Lessons, and in her Office this Prayer was added,O Almighty everlasting God, who hast honoured the Blessed Virgin Saint Winefride with the reward of Virginity, Grant to us we beseech thee by her intercession, that we may despise the allurements of this world, and together with her obtain the Seat of ever lasting glory. Amen.
16. Now it ought not to be esteemd a preiudice or ground of suspicion of the Truth of these Gests of Saint Winefride, that Saint Beda and some other of our ancient Saxon Historians have not men|tioned her among the other Saints of this age, in whose praises they have so large|ly employed their Eloquence: For Saint Beda professes his design to have been to relate the History of his own Saxon Nation onely (in which he was imitated by following Historians:) and besides this, so great a divorce there was in the affe|ctions of the Brittains and Saxons,

that they renounced all commerce toge|ther. Hence it is that in the Writings of S. Beda, c. there is a proound Silence, not only of S. Winefride, but likewise of S. Patrick, S. Vrsuls, S. David, S. Dubritius, S. Kentigern and others of whom we treated heretofore, who yet without doubt were most illustrious Starrs of their respective ages and of the Brittish Church.


IX. CHA.IX. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of severall Brittish Saints: Saint Beuno: S Chebeus: S. Senan: S. Deifer: S. Elerius.

1 IN the forogoing Narration we have the Memory of five Saints celebrated,A. D. 660. Saint Beuno, S. hebeus, S. Senan, S. Deifer and S. Elerius: whose Names being written in the Book of Life, have worthily found a place likewise in our Martyrologe. As for S. Beuno, no more of him is found, then what hath been written already.
2. S. Chebeus is no doubt the same whom heretofore we called S. Kebi sirnamed Cori|neus, a Disciple of S. Hilary Bishop of Po|tiers, in the year of our Lord three hundred sixty one, who having instructed the Inha|tants of Anglesey (Monae) in the Faith of Christ, dyed and was buried in Northwales, in whose Monument the Sacred Body of S. Wine|fride was layd His Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the ninth of November.Martyrol. Arl. 9. No+vemb
3. S. Senan the assistant and instructour of S. Winefride in the perfection of a Religious lie is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the twenty ninth of April,Ib 19. April. where his death is assigned to this year six hundred and sixty. He was for his Sanctity famous not onely in Wales, but Cornwall also, where there is a small haven and Town of Fishermen called from his Name.
4. S. Deifer at the same time lived a reti|red life not far from SS. Winefrids Monastery built by S. Beuno, whose Successour he was in the direction of the said Holy Virgin. He for his Sanctity and Miracles is in our Mar|tyrologe placed among the Saints on the sea|venth of March:Ib. 7 Mar. and his death is ascribed to the year of Grace six hundred sixty four.
5. The Memory of S. Elerius is more ce|lebrated then the rest: he lived longer with S. Winefride, and built a Monastery in the vale called Clutina (saith Leland c.) because watered with the River Cluid, which divides the Province of Flint from that of Denbigh. There it was that S. Winefride directed by se|verall Divine admonitions found him. He so conjoynd the exercises of an Eremiticall and Monasticall conversation, that he had diverse Disciples of both sexes, which imi|tated his example and Institut of life.
6. He for some time, to decline the frequent concourse of Visitants, and that he might more freely attend to God,Pits. in Elerio retired into a desart, saith Pits. And from hence Malbranque a French Antiquary collects, that he passed over into France, and fixed his habitation in the Nor|thern parts o it amongst the Morini: For thus he writes: About the year of Lord six hundred and sixty, Elerius a Noble personage of Brittany passing the Sea,Malbranc. l. 3 de lorn. c. 26. and travelling the way which from Bouloign leads to Teroanne, came to Fruge a little distant from the rising of the River Life, where he chose a seat for his Solitary li|ving. To this day a fountain and little Chappell are monuments of his Memory, These in ancient times afforded great benefit and help both to the inhabitants of those places and strangers.
7. The same Authour acknowledges that he returned into Brittany, where he also dyed, as the Acts of S. Winefride doe testify. Now though our Martyrologe doe consign his death to the year of our Lord six hundred and sixty, yet since Pits and many other of our Writers doe affirm that he wrote her life, and consequently out-lived her, his death is to be placed severall years later.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of Saint Foillan, Mar|tyr And of S Vltan, both of them Bre|thren of S. Fursey.

1. THIS year was wonderfully fruitful in Saints: For in the same, S. Foilla was crownd with Martyrdom. He was Bro|ther of S. Fursey, and with him came ot o Ireland into Brittany, where he lived a  in the Monastery of Knobberri-burg and ate his departure, succeded him in th Oce o Abbot, as hath bene already decld in th year six hundred forty two. He is commemorated in our Martyrolg on the thirtieth of OctoberMartyrolog.  . Oct and held in great veneration not only in Brittany, but Ireland also and France.
2. Concerning him we read thus in the French Martyrologe,That out of Brittany he went to Rome to obtain a benediction and faculties from Pope Martin,Martyrolog. Gall. 0 Oct. to convert Infi|dels Which having received, he went into France, where after some progresse made in his Apostolicall Office of preaching, he was received with great reverence by S Gertrue with whose assistance he founded the Mo|nastery of Fosse. Yet he did not so fixe him|self in that place, as if he had found there a quiet abode and secure haven, and would dispense with his Apostolick Office: but on the contrary his zeale to exalt the glory of Christ was so urgent in him, that like light|ning he went up and down, plucking up

the seed of Idolatry yet remaining there, and sowing the true Faith he incited the inha|bitants, as yet spiritually blind, to admitt the Light of Truth, the Grace of God, and eternall life to their soules: those who were obstinat against the light he sharply repro|ved, and both by exhortations and good example instantly besought, and with a pious zeale even compelled them to be saved. But the Enemy of mans salvation could no longer endure so watchfull a preacher of the Mystery of piety: He there|fore arms certain impious men with a blind envy and malice against hm, who violent|ly and furiously assaulted this Holy Messenger of God in a forest of Hannow, where with their swords they barbarously massacred him, who did not resist them, but dyed praying for them. But God was not wan|ting to honour his servant, for both from the merits of his past life and the miracles following his death he was ac|knowledged and honoured as a glorious Martyr, and not long after a magnifi|cent Monument was erected at his grave near Rdium a Town of Hannow, which remains illustrious to this day, where there is seen a Noble Monastery of Canons Regulars of the Order of Saint Norbert, which takes its appellation from this Blessed Martyr.
3. We must not separate Brethren: There|fore we will here adjoyn the commemo|ration of Saint Vltan, Brother to S. Fursey and Saint Foillan, whose death in our Mar|tyrologe, is assigned to the same year, on the second of May: Concerning whom the Gallican Martyrologe thus writers on the first day of the same month:Martyrolog. Gallc. 1. Maij. At Peronne is the commemoration of Saint Vltan Confessour, Abbot of the Monastery in the same town, and Brother and Successour of Saint Fursey and of the glorious Martyr S. Foillan. He was a wonderfull observer of Religious piety, and by the assistance of Saint Gertrude of Nivelle having finished the Mona|stery of Fosse in the territory of Liege, and empar|ted wholesome instructions to the Religious there, returned to this Monastery of Peronne (the Ab|bot whereof he was after his Brothers death) he there honourably received, and in a fatherly manner entertained S. Amatus Bishop of Sns, who for his zeale to iustice was banished his Dio|cese, and having spent the remainder of his life in a most holy conversation, was called to his eternall reward: and presently after was followed by S. Vltan. Both whose Sacred Relicks are with due honour preserved partly at Peronne, and partly at Fosse.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of S. Christiana an English-Saxon Virgin.

1. ABout this time most probably a Holy Virgin named Christina, or Christiana, derived from an English-Saxon family ended a most holy life: yet her memory is not ce|lebrated by any of our English Histories. But Miraeus in his Belgick Calendar on the twenty sixth of Iuly thus writes concerning her, Teneramund, a town of Flanders Imperiall, in the diocese of Gaunt,Miraeus in ast. Blg. 26. Iulj. seated at the meeting of the Rivers Scaldis and Tenera, acknowledges two Tutelar Saints, S. Hilduard Bishop, and S. Chri|stiana a Virgin, whose Sacred Relicks are preser|ved there in a College of Canons. S. Christiana was the daughter of a King of England: And Saint Hilduardus flourished in the year seaven-hun|dred and fifty.
2. But some what more particularly tou|ching her parents and manner of life we read in the Gallican Martyrologe as followeth:Martyrolog. Gallic. 7. Septt On the seaventh of September at Teneramund in the Bishoprick of Gaunt is commemorated the Translation of S. Christiana a Holy Virgin the daughter of Migranus King of England, who coming into Flanders, at Diclivena was re|ceived among the Religious Virgins, and having devoutly performed her course of vertue in the service of our Saviour the Spouse of Holy Virgins, there happily dyed, and was buried with a great esteem of Sanctity. And afterward being glori|fied by innumerable miracles, to the end her ve|neration might be more frequent, her Sacred Re|licks were translated to Teneramunda, and ho|nourably reposed there in the Collegiat Church of the most Holy Virgin-Mother of God together with the bones of S. Hilduardus the Apostle and Tutelar Saint of the same town, together with whom she is by the inhabitants of the same Town and Territory adioyning honoured as companion of the same Saint in the protection of that place.
3. Again touching the manner how being born and educated a Pagan, she was miraculously converted, and exalted to so high a degree of Sanctity is thus further re|lated in the same Martyrologe:Ibidem. 27. Iulij. On the twenty seaventh of Iuly at Teneramunda in Flanders is celebrated the Memory of S. Christiana a Virgin, who being the only daughter of Migramnus King of the English, was in her tender age most devout to her false Gods and Idols, according to the Tra|dition of her Ancestours. But Almighty God looking on her with eyes of Mercy, sent an Angell from heaven to her in the shape of a beggar who instructed her in the Christian Faith, and com|manded her to be baptised. By whose conduct like|wise she came to Dikelvenna, where after she

had with great perfection consummated her course, she attained to eternall Beatitude. Her Body afterward shining with many Divine Mi|racles, was from thence translated to Tenera|munda: For whose honour and veneration Rin|got Prince of that place having reedified a Church which had been demolished by the Normans, commended the Patronage of that Citty to the same Holy Virgin. Hence it was that to this day she is honoured by the inhabitants as their pecu|liar Protectresse.
4. This Translation was performed in the year one thousand ninety two. But who this Migramnus, said to have been an English King, was, and what time he lived, does not appear in any History. Probably he was some inferiour Saxon Prince in Brittany, for among the Kings of that Heptarchy no such name is mentioned. And later then this time he could not probably live, since very few of the Saxon Princes did now remain in their ancient Heathenish Idolatry. His daugh|ter S. Christiana's name is placed among the Saints recited in our Martyrologe on the same seaven and twentieth of Iuly.Martyrol. Anglic. 17. Iul.


XII. CH.XII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of S. Cedde and his Brethren.
6.7. The death of Sigebert King of the East Saxons: denounced by Saint Cedde.

1. AT the same time our Island of Britta|ny received a notable luster by the piety of four Brethren, all of them conse|crated Saints, their names were S. Cedd, Saint Celin, S. Cimbell and S. Ceadda (or Chad.) they were all of them Preists, and two of them exalted to the dignity of Bishops, to witt, S. Cedd, who was now Bishop of London, and S. Ceadda who shortly will be the first Bishop of Lichfeild.
A. D. 660.2. As touching S. Cedd, how in this year of Grace six hundred and sixty he founded the Monastery of Lesting in Yorkshire,Bed. l. 3. c. 23. S. Beda at large thus relates: It was the custom of the man of God S. Cedd whilst he was Bishop of the East-Saxons, frequently to visit his own native coun|trey of the Northumbers, to the end he might impart among them his Spirituall exhortations. Now Edilwald, the son of King Oswald, raigning then in the Province of the Deir (or York|shire,) perceiving him to be a holy and wise man of great integrity, desired of him that he would accept at his hands a certain possession of land, there to build a Monastery, where to himself might repair to perform his devotions, and heare Gods word, as likewise bury the dead: For this King be|leived that he should receive much benefit by the dayly prayers of those that served our Lord there.A. D. 661. Now the said King had then in his atten|dance a Brother of the said Bishop, named Celin, a man of great piety, who was wont to administer to him and hi family the Sacraments of our Faith, (for he was a Preist) and by his information he came to know and love the Holy Bishop. S. Cedd therefore complying with the Kings desire made choice for the Seat of a Monastery a place among steep and remote mountains, which seemd fitter to be a retrait for theeves, or lurking place for wild beasts, then a habitation for men. Now the man of God being desirous by prayers and fasting first to cleanse that place from the filth of crimes formerly executed there, and consequently to lay the foundation of a Monastery, desired permission of the King that he might abide there in Prayer the whole Lent then at hand. Which being gran|ted, he according to the Ecclesiasticall custom, pro|longed his Fast till evening every day, except Sundays; and then also he contended himself with a small portion of bread, one egg, and a little milk mingled with water. For he said that such was anciently the custom of those who founded Monasteries, and from whom he had received the Rule of Monasticall Profession, by prayers and fa|sting to consecrate the places where they intended to build a Monastery or Church.
3. Now toward the latter end of Lent, when onely ten days remained, one came to call him to the King. He therefore to the end so Religious a work should not be intermitted for the Kings af|faires, desired his Brother Cymbel, who was a Preist, to continue there the devotions which he had piously begun. Whereto he willingly condescended: And thus the full time of Prayer and fasting being consummated, he there built a Monastery, called now Lestinghen, and instructed the Monks with such Religious Instituts as were practised at Lindesfarn, where he had been brought up. The care of which Monastery he recommen|ded to his Brother Ceadda who was afterward Bishop, first of York and shorly after of Lich|feild.
4. Now whereas Saint Beda calls this Edilwald King of the Deiri, he is to be esteemed only a King by courtesy of Os, o whom the whole Kingdom of the Northum|bers at this time belonged: And therefore in the Catalogue of the Northumbrian Kings extant in Mathew of Westminster, Edilwald is omitted. And as for the Monastery of Lestinghen, in the Breviary of Sarum it is sayed to belong to the Isle of Lindesfarn. Which Island notwithstanding did not pertain to the Province of the Deiri, but of the Bernicians. Wheresoever it was placed, there flourished in it many persons emi|nent for Sanctity, among which Osi a Monk in our Martyrologe is reckoned in the number of Saints, who dyed in the year of Grace six hundred sixty sea|ven.
5. Saint Cedd remaind among the Nor|thumbers no long time:A. D. 661. for the year follow|ing hapned the death of Sigebert the good King of the East-Saxons, inflicted on him

for contemning the Ecclesiasticall Cnsure im|posed by this Holy Bishop Cedd on one of his Nobles. The Story is thus particularly recoun|ted by S. Beda.Bed l 3. c. 22. One of the Nobles of King Sige|berts Court had contracted an unlawfull mariage against the Orders of the Church. Which the Bi|shop not being able to prevent nor correct, he ex|communicated him, commanding all under his care to abstain entring into his house, or eating of his meat. Which prohibition the King not regar|ding, when he was invited by the said Count, he went to feast at his house. At his return the Holy Bishop mett him: Whom as soon as the King lookd n he began to tremble, and leaping from his horse prstrated himself at his feet, begging pardon for his offence: for the Bishop likewise who was on horse-back, had lighted down.And being angry, he touched the King as he lay with his rodd which he held in his hand, and with an Episcopall au|thority said to him, I tell thee, O King, because thou wouldst not abstain from the house of that despe|rat excommunicated person, thou thy self shalt dye in the same house.
6. This denunciation of the Holy Bishop was accordingly accomplished: for as the same Authour relates, Whilst the Christian Faith encreased dayly in that Province to the great mutuall ioy both of the King and people,Idem ibid. it hapned, by the instigation of the Enemy of all good, that the King himself was murdred by the hands of his own kinred. They were two Brethren who execu|ted this heynous crime: And being askd why they did it, they could give no other answer but this, That they were enraged enemies to the king because he was wont to be too mercifull to his enemies, and quietly to pardon injuries when|soever those who did them begged his mercy. Such was the fault for which this good King was slain, because with a devout heart he ob|served the Precepts of the Gospell. Yet by this death hapning to him without his fault, a former reall fault was punished, according to the Prophecy of the man of God. Now we may piously beleive that such a death of this Religious Prince did not only wash away the stain of such a fault, but moreover encreased his Merit, since it hapned to him for iustice sake, and for his zeale to obsere the Precepts of our Lord. Thus writes S. Beda: and the same iudgment is gi|ven also by William of Malmsbury.Malmsbur de Reg. l. . c. 16. Bed. vbi sup.
7. The Successour to this good King Sige|bert, was Suidelm the son of Sexbald: who was baptised by the same Holy Bishop Cedd in the Province of the East-angles, in a vil|lage belonging to the King called Rendeles|ham, or the mansion of Rendilus. And Edel|wald King of the East-angles, the Brother of Anna formerly King, was his God father, who received him ascending out of the Sacred Font. His raign continued only three years.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. c. The Province of the West-Saxons divided into two Dioceses, Dorchester and winchester: For which the Holy Bishop Agilbert retires into France.

1. IN the same year of our Lord six hun|dred sixty and one,A. D. 661. Godvvin in Winton. E|pisc. which was the eighteenth of the raign of Kenewalch King of the West-Saxons, the said King perfected the Structure of the Church of Winchester begun by his Father Kinegils, and not only ratified his Fathers donation thereto, but moreover added the Mannours of Dornton, Altesford and Wor|dyam: thus writes B. Godwin.
2, And at the same time the Church of the West-Saxons by the industry of Agilbert Bishop of the same Province, was so migh|tily encreased, that the King thought good to divide that Province into two Dioceses. One other Motive hereto the King had, because Agilbert being a stranger, could not, but very imperfectly speak the Saxon tongue.Bed. For saith Saint Beda: At last the King who understood no other but his Native language, being weary to heare the Bishops barbarous pronunciation of the Saxon tongue, or his expressing himself in French which the King understood not, brought into the Province another Bishop of his own tongue, named Wini, who was ordained in France. Thus he divi|ded the Province into two Dioceses, and to Wini he gave for his Episcopall See the Citty Venta, called by the Saxons Wintancestir (or Winche|ster.) Herewith the Holy Bishop Agilbert being greivously offended, because the King had done this without his advice, returned into France, where he received the Bishoprick of Paris, and died there an old man and full of dayes.
3. Andrew Saussay in his Martyrologe assigns another cause of Bishop Agilberts indignation and departure,Martyrolog. Gallican. for saith he, the King being corrupted with money, gave a portion of that Bishoprick to Wina. Which abo|minable Simony Agilbert having an Excora|tion, quitted his Episcopall Seat, and returned presently into his native countrey, retiring himself to Paris, as a secure harbour. But herein he much wrongs the memory of King Kenewalch, who is not taxed by any of our Historians for that Crime. Indeed it was justly imputed to Wina, who by such an exe|crable negotiation purchased the Bishoprick, not of Winchester but of London:Bed. for so S. Beda testifies, saying, Not many years after the de|parture of Agilbert out of Brittany, Wini was thrust out of his Bishoprick of Winchester by Kene|walch, and retiring to the King of the Mer|cians, named Wulfere, bought with money of

him the See of London, where he remained Bishop till his death.
4. As for the Holy Bishop Agilbert after his relinquishing of his See at Dorchester he did not presently goe into France, but as Huntingdon relates,Huntingd. l. 3. he retired to Alfrid the son of Oswi King of the Northumbers, who was his freind: And three years after this we read that he was present at a Synod or so|lemne Conference touching the Celebration of Easter, and the Preistly Tonsure, of which we shall treat shortly: where he declared him|self for the Roman Observation against the Scotts.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. c. The SouthSaxons last con|verted: And their King Edilwalch baptised.
8 9. c. The Martyrdom of Vlfald and Rufin, sons of King Wulfere.

A. D. 661.1. THE same year was illustrious in the Conversion of the South-Saxons. That was one of the first Saxon-Principalities settled in Brittany by Ella, then the most po|tent of all the Kings: and it was the last which admitted the Christian Faith. The manner how that Kingdom came to be con|verted is thus described by Henry of Hun|tingdonHuntingd. l. 2. Kenwald (or Kenwalch) King of the West-Saxons in the twentieth year of his raign fought against Wulfere King of Mercia the Son of Penda, a Prince who inheed both his Fathers courage and successe in Martiall affaires in which battell the King of the West-Saxons was defeated and compelled to fly Whereupon Wulfere entred his countrey in a hostile manner, insomuch as pene|trating to the utmost confines of it, he invaded and conquered the Isle of Wight. In which expe|dition by Wulfers industry and zeale Adelwold (or, as S. Beda calls him, Edilwalch) King of Sussex was converted first of all to the Faith Vpon whom at his Baptism Wulfere being his God father, bestowed as a sign of adoption, the Isle of With (or Wight) and withall for the conversion of the said Island, he sent thither a Preist named Epa to preach the Gospell. But his preaching as yet had not any good successe.
Speed Hist. f 220. lib. de Hist. c. 3.2. It is no easy matter to find out who the person was that baptised this King. The Hi|storiall Books of S. Swithun of Winchester in Speed,  of S. Hilda relate how Athelwold was the first King of Sussex who was converted to the Faith of Christ and baptised in Mercia by S. Biri|nus a Monk and Apostle of the Gevisses, in the presence and by the suggestion of Wolfere King of the Mercians. But this cannot consist with the truth of Story and Chronology: because S. Bri|nus was dead long before Wulfere was King of the Mercians. Others ascribe his Baptism to S. Wilfrid Bishop of York: But these Writers place his Baptism too late, as the former did too early: for S. Wilfrid was not yet Bishop. And though they would ground their assertion on the authority of S. Beda, yet S. Beda plainly disproves them, affirming that this King was baptised before S. Wilfrid came into his Province.
3. His words are these: S. Wilfrid turning out of his way into the Province of the South-Saxons,Be. l. 4 c. 13.
and finding the people as yet addicted to Pagan Idolatry, preached to them the word of Faith, and baptised many. Now the King of that Nation Edil|walch not long before had been baptised in the Province of the Mercians in the presence and by the perswasion of King Wulfere: By whom as he came out of the Font he was recei|ved and for a mark of adoption had bestowed on him the Isle of Wight, and the Province of the Meanvari, belonging formerly to the West-Saxons (but lately conquered by Wulfere.) Which little Province seems to be a small Territory in Hampshire, containing three Hundreds, East-mean, West-mean and Means-borough, which preserve still the Marks of the old name in S. Beda, Meanvari.
4. Therefore in all probability King Edil|walch was by the Sacred Waters of Baptism admitted into the number of Christians by Trumhere Bishop of the Mercians, whom be|fore we declared to have been of English pa|rentage and kinsman of Oswin King of the Northumbers,Vid. sup. l. c. that he had his education from the Scotts, was a Monk and afterward Abbot of the Monastery of Gethlin, and last of all consecrated Bishop of the Mercians.
5 But a greater difficulty remains, How King Wulfere should deserve the Elogy here given him of piety and zeale for the propa|gation of the Orthodox Faith beyond the limits of his own Kingdom. Yea besides this, in other Authours we find him employd in building of Monasteries and Churches: And William of Malmsbury gives him this generall Character,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c 4. that at his first Assumption to the throne, to the end he might not deceive the expe|ctation of his Subiects, he spared no diligence, study or labour to shew himself a good Prince who sought the proffit and felicity of his Kingdom. Moreover that by his favour and countenance he earnesty advanced the Christian Faith then even gasping for life, as being but a little before newly brought in by his Brother. Whereas severall other Au|thours, particularly such as have written our Saints lives paint him forth for a most hor|rible persecutour, insomuch as seaven years after this Conversion of the South-Saxons by his incitation he is sayd to have putt to death his two sons Vlfald and Ruffin, because by the preaching of S. Ceadda then Bishop of Lichfeild they embraced the Christian Faith:
6. How can those things consist together? Perhaps some will imagine that the praises given this King proceeded from flattery in the first Authours, by whom those which followed were seduced. Yet we shall find

that those very Historians who so much ce|lebrate his praises, have not conceald his vices.Id. ibid. Thus the last mentioned Authour after the passage even now cited, thus tem|pers the commendations given him, Not|withstanding in these, and whatsoever other vertues were in him, were corrupted and de|pressed by the infamous crime of Simony, of which he was the first King of England that was guilty, selling for money the Sacred Bi|shoprick of London to a certain ambitious man, called Wina. He moreover adioyns the Off|spring of King Wulfere, Kinred and Werebur|ga, without any mention of the two Mar|tyrs Vlfald and Ruffin. So that in this Kings Story there is an obscure Mist, which we may conceive to proceed from our An|cient Writers of Saints Lives, who having a Story, for the substance of it true, to relate, deliver it undigestedly, without any choice of names, times and other circumstances. In order therefore to the clearing of this obscurity, we will first breifly sett down the Summ of the Story of those two Martyrs, and consequently endeavour to correct the circumstantiall faults of the relatours.
Martyrol. Anglic. 24. April.7. Vlfald and Ruffin were Brethren, sons of Wulfere King of the Mercians and Hermenilda, who was daughter of Earcom|bert King of Kent and his wife S. Sexburga. Wulfere their Father was an Infidell: But Herminilda a devout Christian Lady of great Sanctity. She during the tender age of these her children was diligent to imbue their minds with Christian Principles of piety: and when they were come to riper ears she sought out a Master for them, but with great secrecy, least her Husband, who was horribly averse from Christianity, should know it. She had recourse there|fore to Ceadda Bishop of Lichfeild, who instructed them more perfectly, and re|generated them to Christ by the Water of Baptism. These young Princes oft went forth pon pretence of hunting, and either by their Mothers perswasion, or their own inclination took that opportunity to Visit the Holy Bishop. But being at last depre|hended by their Father, he agitated with the furies of his false Gods would compell them to renounce their Religion: which they constantly refusing to doe, he cau|sed them both to be slain in the Sacred place of Prayer. Their Holy Mother having understood the cruell death and Martyr|dom of her children, was desirous to give them an honourable buriall; for which purpose she according to the Roman cu|stom, gathered a mighty heap of Stones for their Monument. The place of their Se|pulcher by its name still testifies the same, for it is to this day called Stone, a place which upon this occasion is grown to a popu|lous Town. Now when the death of these Holy Martyrs Vlfald and Ruffin was made known to the people, and the cause like|wise for which they dyed, they began to be held in great honour: and a Church, with a Monastery, was built, consecrated to S. Vlfald, yet so as that his Brother also became partaker of his honour. By this means the place came to be frequen|ted. Neither was their Father King Wul|fere more slow then others in honouring them. For the guilt of the parricide com|mitted by him wounding his conscience, he in an humble manner went to Saint Ceadda, and with great greif acknowledg|ing his crime, embraced the Christian Faith, and with the Sacred Waters of Baptism ex|piated all his offences.
8. This account doe our ancient Re|cords give of the Martyrdom of these two Princes: the substance whereof cannot rea|sonably be questioned, considering the lasting monument yet remaining, and that their names are extant among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the four and twentieth of Iuly.Martyrolog. nglc. 24. Iuij. But that they should have been instructed by S. Ceadda then Bishop of Lichfeild, and slain in the year of Grace six hundred sixty eight by their Father then a Pagan, this contradicts all our most au|thentick Histories, in which long before that time King Wulfere is celebrated for his Faith and Piety. Therefore it will be necessary to affirm that they were instru|cted by some Bishop of the Mercians be|fore their Father began his raign, during the time that their cruell Grand Father Penda lived, who earnestly laboured to extinguish the Christian name, and effe|ctually caused the death of many Christian Kings.
9. Therefore the Narration given by Cam|den deserves our acceptation, who more distinctly and simply recounts the story in this manner: To Peada King of the Mercians succeeded his Brother Wolfer,Camden in Coritants. who having been most averse from Christian Religion, with barbarous inhumanity slew his Sons Wolfald and Ruffin, because they had given up their names to Christ. But a few years after himself also em|braced the Christian Faith, and to the end he might by some pious work expiate that his im|piety, he finished a Monastery begun by his Brother.



XV. CHA.XV. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of S. Winoc.

1. SOme refer to this year the retiring of S. Winoc into the Monastery of Saint Bertin.Iperius ap. Mirgum in st Belg. 6 Novemb. vbi sup. i. Thus writes Iperius in his Chronicle: About the year of Grace six hundred sixty one S. Winoc Son of Iudicael King of the Brittains, and brother of S. Iudocus (of whom we have already treated) despising the world, became a Monk in the Monastery of Sithiu under Saint Bertin, together with his three brethren, Kadanoc, In|genoc and Modoc: S. Bertin then was Abbot over one hundred and fifty Monks: among whom Saint Winoc shone like the Morning Starr.
2. Marcellinus in his life of S. Suibert affirms that S Iudoc and S. Winoc, Anchorets and Preachers were sons of a King of England. But the Saxon Annalls, exact enough in recounting their Kings names, mention no such King as Iudicail. Most probable there|fore it is that they were children of some Brittish Prince of this age. For many ex|amples we have of Brittains which for devo|tion passed over into Little Brittany or Bel|gick France: but scarce any of the Sa|xons.
3. Saint Winoc having spent severall years in great fervour under the government of Saint Bertin, was commanded to sett his Light of piety on a Candlestick, to enligh|ten others by his Doctrine and example. This he admirably performed in severall places. At last being sent to a Town of Heremare, then called Wormholt, but now Womholt, he there layd the foundation of a Monastery, where to his death serving God with great purity, he was by him glorified by many Miracles. He his supposed saith Iperius, to have dyed in the same Monastery about the year of Grace seven hundred and seaventeen: where he was likewise buried. His Memory is in benediction: For in the year nine hundred and twenty the same place was fortified and became a pleasant Town, which to this day takes its name from S. Winoc, being seated in the confines of France and Flanders.
Greg. Turon. Hist. ancor. l. 5.5. c. 21.4. Some doubt whether that passage in Gregory Bishop of Tours, be to be understood of this S. Winoc, where he says, At that time Vinoc a Brittain, a man of admirable absti|nence came out of Brittany to Tours, having a desire to goe to Ierusalem. He wore no other Vestment but one made of Sheep-skins without wooll. And because he seemd to us a man of great piety, to the end we might detain him amongst us more easily, we honoured him with the dignity of Preist-hood, If this be the same person, we must conclude that Iperius places him much too late: For Baronius refers that Narration of Gregory of Tours to the year of our Lord five hundred and eighty.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1 2. c. The Gests of Saint Wilfrid conti|nued.
4.5. c. Controversy touching the Obser|vation of Easter.

1. IN recounting the rudiments of Saint Wilfrids pietyVid supr l. we have already declared how in his younger years undertaking a iourney of devotion to Rome: in his pas|sage through France he was with great be|nignity received and for some time detaind by the Holy Bishop Ennemond or Dalfinus Bi|shop of Lyons: likewise how in his return from Rome he again visited him and remaind with him to his death and Martyrdom by the cruelty and injustice of Ebroinus Maire of the Palace to Clodovaeus Second of that name King of France.A. D. 662.
2. Now according to the best Chronology it was in the year six hundred sixty two that the said Holy Bishop was martyrd: after which Saint Wilfrid having nothing to detain him longer in France,Malmsb. de Pontif. l. 3 f. 260. returned into his own Na|tive Countrey of Brittany. Where being ar|rived the fame of his vertues and abilities was quickly spread abroad: whereupon, saith William of Malmsbury, Alfrid the son of Oswi, and by his permission King of the Province of the Deiri, (or Yorkshire) sent for him: and with great kindnes received him, taking great pleasure to hear him discourse of the occurrens of his iourney and dangers, the Elegance of France, the Roman pompe, as likewise of the Lawes and Orders of Ec|clesiasticall Discipline. Many dayes he continued in this Kings Court, and for his vertuous conver|sation, industry, preaching, profound learning and copiousnes of elocution he was admitted into a near freindship with him. Now this Alfrid was natural son of King Oswi, born to him of a Concubine: and when Edilwald the same Kings legitimate Son was dead, whom he had made King of the Deiri, Alfrid suc|ceeded him in the same Kingdom.
3. What followed after this is thus re|lated by Saint Beda: Wilfrd (saith he) being returned to Brittany was ioynd in freindship with King Aldfrid, who had been taught to love and obey the Catholick Rules of the Church. Wherefore finding Wilfrid to be a perfect Catho|lick he shortly gave him a possession of ten fami|lies, in a place called Stanford. And not long fter he added a Monastery of thirty families in a place called Inrhypum (now Rippon in York|shire.) Which place he had ormerly bestowed for building a Monastery on certain Monks who con|formed to the Scottish discipline. But because they, having the choice given them, would rather

quitt the place then conform to the Catholick cu|stomes of the Roman and Apostolick Church in the celebration of Easter and other Canonicall Rites,A. D. 664. the King conferred upon Wilfrid the said Monaste|ry, perceiving that he was imbued with better disciplines and manners. At which time by command of the said King he was in the same Monastery ordained Preist by Agilbert who had been Bishop of the Gevissi among the West Saxons: For the King was very desirous that a man of so great erudition and piety, as Wilfrid, and one admitted to so near a freindship, should be made a Preist and Doctour.A. D. 64.
4. S. Wilfrids fame was presently after much enlarged by occasion of a great Con|troversy then renewd and with greater heat then ever agitated between him and the Scotts, cheifly about the Celebration of Easter. In which Controversy not only the Monks and Ecclesiastick persons were enga|ged, but great partialities and divisions were by occasion of it caused among the Laicks, and even in the Princes Courts, where some celebrated the Solemnity of our Lords Resurrection on one Sunday, and some on another: so that when one Company re|ioyced, another were in Pennance and fa|sting. The order how this Question was agi|tated is thus accuratly described by Saint Beda.
Bed. l. 3. c. 25.5. In those days, saith he, a Notable Que|stion was raised touching the celebration of Easter. For all those who were come into those Northern parts either out of Kent or from France, reso|lutly affirmed that the Scotts observed the Feast of our Lords Resurrection contrary to the custom of the Vniversall Church. There was among them one named Roman, a zealous defender of the true Observance, he was by Nation a Scott, but had been taught the Rule of Ecclesiasticall Truth in France and Italy. This man in former time had had many conflicts with Finanus Bishop of Lindesfarn: and many persons were reduced by him to the right way, and many were incited by him to a more diligent inquisition of the Truth. Yet he could never perswade Finanus to yeild: on the contrary being a man of a rude feirce nature, the more he was reprehended, the more sullen he grew, insomuch as he declared himself a profes|sed Enemy of the Truth.
6. Besides this Roman, Iacob the foremen|tioned Deacon of the late Venerable Arch-bishop S. Paulinus observed Easter after the true Ca|tholick way, together with all those whom he could instruct and perswade thereto. The like did the Queen Eanfleda, with all that attended her out of Kent: from whence she brought a Preist named also Roman, a man zealous for the Catholick Observance. And hence it oft fell out in those times that in the Kings Court Easter was twice observed the same year: For whilst the King solemnised the Feast of our Lords Resurre|ction, having ended his Fast, at the same time the Queen with her attendants, persisting still in their Fast, celebrated Palm Sunday.
7. This dissonance in the Observation of Easter was patiently tolerated by all whilst Bishop A|dan lived: because it was well known that though those who sent him would not permitt him to celebrate the Feast of Easter otherwise then they were accustomed, yet he was zealous to per|form all Christian duties of Faith, Piety and Charity according to the custom practised by all Gods Saints. And therefore he was deservedly beloved by all, even those who differently cele|brated Easter; and not only by such as were of mean condition, but by Bishops themselves, though following the Roman observance: as Honorius Arch-bishop of Canterbury and Felix Bishop of the East Angles had a venerable esteem of him.
8. But when his Successour Finanus was dead, and Colman in the year of Grace six hundred sixty one was sent by the Scotts to succeed him in the Bishoprick of Lindesfarn, the Controversy about the Observance of Easter, as also other points of Ecclesiasticall Discipline began to be agitated with greater heat: insomuch as some did not without reason fear, considering the pretended importance of the Question, least an errour in it might preiudice their salvation, and that, though they calld themselves Christians, they had or might run in vain.
9. This Controversy was so publickly agitated by the Ecclesiasticks, that it came to the know|ledge of King Oswi and his Son Alcfrid, both which interessed themselves in it: King Oswi having been taught and baptised by the Scotts, and perfectly understanding their language, be|leived the Truth to lye on their side: But Alcfrid whose Teacher in matters of Religion Saint Wil|frid, a most learned man, was, followd his iudg|ment, who had made a voyage to Rome on pur|pose to learn true Ecclesiasticall doctrine, and had spent much time in France with the Holy Bishop of Lyons Dalphinus, from whom also he had re|ceived the Crown of Ecclesiasticall Tonsure. These things considered, King Alcfrid had reason to beleive that the teaching of S. Wilfrid deserved to be preferred before Scottish Traditions. And for the esteem he had of his piety and learning he had bestowd on him a Monastery of forty families, in a place called Inrhipun (or Rippon,) which before had been in the possession of the Scotts, but because they chose rather to quitt the place then change their countreys custom, the King confer|red it on him, who both for his lerning and piety well deserved it.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

i.2. c. A Synod or Solemne Conference touching the Paschal Solemnity, between S. Wilfrid and Colman a Scottish Bishop.

1. AFter this Narration, S. Beda conti|nues to relate how for the setling of peace in mens minds, who were much di|vided, it was necessary to assemble a Synod for so he calls it, though indeed it was more

properly a solemne Conference, saith Baronius, in asmuch as all the Bishops of that Province were not convoked to it,Baron. ad A. D. 664. but only such as then hapned to be present debated the mat|ter before the King.
2. As touching the time when this Assem|bly was convoked, S. Beda setts it down pre|cisely, saying,Bel. l. 3. c. 26 This Question was agitated in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred sixty four, which was the two and twentieth of the Raign of King Oswi, and the thirtieth from the time that the Scotts administred the Bishoprick of Lin|desfarn in a Province of the English. For Aidan held that Bishoprick seventeen years, Finn ten, and Colman was now in his third year.
Id. ib. c. 25.3. The same Authour likewise elsewhere relates the names of the persons who were present in the said Assembly: About the same time, saith he, Agilbert Bishop of the West Sa|xons, a freind of King Alcfrid and of Abbot Wil|frid, was come into the Province of the Northum|bers, and stayd some time with them. Moreover upon the entreaty of King Alcfrid he ordained Wilfrid a Preist in the foresaid Monastery. He had likewise attending on him a Preist named Aga|thon. When therefore the Question about Easter; the Ecclesiasticall Tnsure, and other Rites was moved, it was orderd that a Synod should be assem|bled in the Monastery called Strenes-halch or Beacons-bay, whereof Hilda a devout woman was Abbesse, and that there the controversy should be determined.
4. Both the Kings, Oswi the Father, and Alcfrid his son, came thither, and these Bishops, Colman with his Clarks from Scotland, and Agil|bert, with the Preists Agathon and Wilfrid, with whom also ioyned Iacob and Romanus. As for Hilda the Abbesse with her dependants, and the Venerable Bishop Ceadda, who as we have former|ly declared, was ordained by the Scotts, they de|clared for the Scottish opinion. This last Bishop was a most vigilant Interpreter for both parties.
5. When all these were mett, King Oswi first of all by way of Preface advising them that since they all professed to serve the same God, and to expect the same heavenly kingdom, they there|fore ought all to hold the same Rule of living, and uniformly celebrate the Divine Sacraments: And for this reason, the principall Enquiry ought to be, Which side held the truer Tradition, for that certainly was to be followd by all. Having said this, be in the first place commended his own Bishop Colman to declare, What Rite that was which he in practise followd, and whence he took its Originall.
6. Hereto Colman thus answered, The manner of celebrating the Paschal Solemnity which I in practise conform to, I received from my Superiours who sent mee hither and ordained mee Bishop: And it is the same which all our Ancestours, men known to have been beloved and highly favoured by God, have always practised. This Rite let every one take heed how they contemn or reprove, for it is the very same which, as we read in Eccle|siasticall Story, the Blessed Evangelist S. Iohn, as likewise all the Churches governed by him have from the beginning celebrated.
7. After that Bishop Colman had spoken these" and other words to the same effect, the King next commanded Bishop Agilbert to declare publickly likewise the manner of his Observance, whence it sprung, and upon what authority be conform'd thereto.Agilbert answer'd, I beseech your Ma|iesty that in my stead my Disciple Wilfrid the Preist may speak, for wee are both of the same iudg|ment, and agree with the rest here sitting, who follow the generall Ecclesiasticall Tradition. Besides, he can much better and more perspicuously declare our sense in the English tongue, then I can by an Interpreter.
8. Wilfrid therefore, the King so commanding, thus began:The manner of celebrating Easter pra|ctised by us, we our selves saw generally practis'd at Rome, where the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul lived, taught, suffred and were buried. The very same observance we saw in the rest of Italy, and in France likewise, through both which countreys we travell'd, partly in devotion, and partly with an intention of gaining instruction in Ecclesiasti|call matters. Moreover we are certainly infor|med, that in Africk, Asia, Egypt, Greece and all other rts of the world through which the Church is spread, how different soever the inhabi|tants be in language and manners, yet they all universally celebrate Easter at the same time with us. So that these Scotts and their complices the Picts and Brittains, inhabitants of two remote Islands, and not all of them neither, are the only persons which with a foolish obstinacy contend against the whole world.
9. Whilst Wilfred was thus speaking, Colman in|terrupted him, saying, I wonder you will call our practise foolish, since no man can deny but that therein we follow the example of so great an Apo|stle as S. Iohn, dignified by our Lord to be permit|ted to lye in his bosom, and who certainly can not be charged with folly.
10. Hereto Wilfrid replied, God forbid that any of us should impute folly to S. Iohn for observing litterally the Rites of Moyses his Law at a time when the Christian Church did as yet Iudaize, because it was not possible for the Apostles on a sudden to cast off all the Legall observances. The Iewish Church therefore at first being the only true Church of God, the Gentiles who were converted, when they were admitted into it, were obliged not only to cast away all their Idols invented by the Devill, but likewise in many countreys where the Iews abounded, to conform to many of their Rites, for fear of giving scandall to them. Hence it was that S. Paul circumcised Timothy, that he offred Sacrifices in the Temple, and together with Aquila and Priscilla at Corinth cutt off his haire in sign that he had made a vow: all which Cere|monies were in themselves of no proffit at all, but were done by him because he would not offend the Iewes. And upon this ground it was that the Apostle S. Iames said to the same S. Paul, Thou seest, Brother, how many thousands among the Iews there are who beleive, and are withall extremely zealous for Legall Observances, c. But notwith|standing these practises of the Apostles in the be|ginning,

yet now that the Gospell is clearly preach'd and beleived through the world there is no neces|sity: yea it would be unlawfull either to be circum|cised, or to offer carnall sacrifices to God. Therefore it was that S. Iohn in a charitable complyance with the Iews, according to their custom celebrated the Paschall Solemnity on the fourteenth day of the first Month at even, not regarding whether that day hapned to be a Sabbath, or any other day of the Week.
11. But as for S. Peter, he preached at Rome, and considering that it was on the first day of the Week that our Lord rose from the dead, therby giving the world hope likewise of a resurrection, he un|derstood that Easter was so to be celebrated, that, according to the precept of the Law, the fourteenth day of the Moon of the first Month was first to be expected, as S. Iohn did also in the East. And that day being come, if it hapned that the next following was Sunday (call'd in Scripture our Lords day, or first of the Week) then at even of the Sabbath day he began to celebrate the Paschall Solemnity. But if the next day after the fourteenth Moon was not Sunday, but the Sixteenth, Seaventeenth or so following to the one and twentieth, he expected till Sunday came, and the Saturday-even before, he began the Paschal Feast. Thus Easter-day, being a Sunday, was observed from the fifteenth Moon till the one and twentieth. Neither does this Evan|gelicall and Apostolick Tradition dissolve, but fullfill the Law, by which the Paschal Feast is to be observed from the even of the fourteenth Moon of the first Month, untill the even of the one and twentieth Moon of the same Month. Which Obser|vance is imitated by all S. Iohns Successours after his death, and by the Vniversall Church through the world. And that this is indeed the true Ea|ster, and only to be observed by all Christians, hath been, not newly ordained, but confirmed as an an|cient practise by the first General Nicene Council, as Ecclesiasticall History informs us.
12. Hence it is manifest, O Colman, that you Scotts neither follow the example of S. Iohn, what ever you pretend, and you directly contradict the Tradition of S. Peter: so that in Observing Easter you neither conform to the Law nor Gospell. For S. Iohn observing the Paschal time according to the Letter of the Law, had no regard whether it was our Lords day, or no: Wheras you keep it only on our Lords day. And S. Peter observed it from the fifteenth to the one and twentieth Moon; but you from the fourteenth to the twentieth, insomuch as you oft begin that Solemnity on the thirteenth Moon at even for which the Law it self gives no warrant. Neither did our Lord himself, the Au|thour of the Gospell either eat the ancient Pasch on that day, but on the fourteenth Moon at even, or deliver the Sacraments of the New Law to be observed by the Church. Moreover by your disor|derly observance you sometimes exclude the one and twentieth Moon from your Solemnity, which yet the Law commands to be celebrated most so|lemnly. Thus, as I said, in your Rite you neither agree with S. Iohn nor S. Peter; you are neither conformable to the Law nor Gospel.
13. Against this discourse of Wilfrid, Colman thus obiected: Will you presume to say that Ana|tholius, a Holy man, and highly commended in Ecclesiasticall Story, did in his iudgment contra|dict both the Law and Gospell, who yet wrote that the Feast of Easter was to be observed from the fourteenth Moon to the twentieth? Or is it credible that our most Reverend Father Columba and his Successours did teach contrary to Divine Scrip|tures, when as their Sanctity has been attested by many celestiall Miracles? For my part, being assu|red that they are Saints, I will never desist follo|wing their practises and Discipline.
14. Here to Wilfrid reioynd:It is not to be doub|ted, said he, but that Anatholius was a man of ad|mirable Sanctity and learning: But why doe you alledge him since you doe not somuch as observe his Decrees? For he in his Paschall Computation, ob|serving the Rule of Truth, placed the Cycle of Nine|teen years (or Golden Number:) Which Cycle either you are ignorant of, or if you understand it, you impudently despise it, though in use through the whole Church. He did so compute the four|teenth Moon in the Sunday on which he perform'd the Paschal Feast, that on the same day at even he according to the Egyptian custom, confessed that it was the fifteenth Moon. In like manner he did so reckon the twentieth Moon in his account on the Easter Sunday, that the declining part of that day he attributed to the one and twentieth Moon. Now it is manifest that you are ignorant of his distin|ction since some times you celebrate your Paschal Solemnity before full-Moon, that is when it is onely thirteen days old.
15. And as touching your Father Columba and his Successours, whose Rule you say you follow, and whose Sanctity has been asserted by many Mira|cles; I might answer, That in the last day many will say to Christ, that in his name they have prophe|cied, cast out Devills and wrought many Miracles; to whom he will say, That he never knew them. But far be it from mee to apply this to your Fathers, since it is more iust that I should beleive good, then evill of persons unknown to mee. Therefore I will not deny but that they were devout servants of our Lord, and favoured by him, since with a pious in|tention, though rusticall Simplicity, they served him. And my iudgment is, that such an erroneous Observance of Easter did not much preiudice or endanger them, because not any one had shewd them Rules of a more perfect Institut. Wheras, no doubt if any Catholick skilfull in calculation had rightly informed them, they would as well have followd his instructions, as they did obey these Pre|cepts of God which they had learnt. Wheras if thou and thy Companions henceforth contemne to obey the Decrees of the See Apostolick, yea of the Vni|versall Church, which are moreover confirmed by Holy Scriptures, without all doubt you will sin grei|vously. For though your Fathers were Saints, are they, so few in number, living in the corner of a remote Island to be preferred before the Vniversal Church spread over the whole world? And if your Columba, yea ours also if he were Christs, was a Saint powerfull in Miracles, shall his authority outweigh that of the Apostle, to whom our Lord said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevayl

against it: And to thee I will give the keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven?
16. Wilfrid having thus finished his discourse, the King addressing his speech to Bishop Colman, said, Tell mee, Were these words in very deed spo|ken by our Lord to S. Peter? Who answered. They were indeed spoken to him. The King replied, Can you produce any proof of so great power given to your Columba? He answered. No, Sir. The King added, Doe both sides then among you agree that these words were spoken principally to S. Peter, and that the keyes of Heavens gates were given him by our Lord? They answered, We both acknowledge this. Thereupon the King concluded, saying, And I also assure you I have no intention to contradict the Porter of heaven: but according to my know|ledge and power I will obey his Ordinances in all things: for feare when I come to heaven gates, and he who keeps the keyes be displeased with mee, there be none to open them and let mee in.
When the King had said thus, all that were present, both accessours and bystanders applauded his speech, and relinquishing their former imperfect instituts, speedily embraced those which appeared to be better.
17. Thus ended this Synod ot Conference. What effect it produced among the Scotts shall be shewed, when we have concluded the Narration of another Controversy at the same time agitated, touching the manner and fashion of the Ecclesiasticall Tonsure.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. A Controversy in the same Synod touching Ecclesiasticall Tonsure. Three severall manners of Tonsure.
12. Agreement between the Saxons and Scotts, c. in all Points of Doctrine.
13. Obstinacy of the Scotts.

1. THAT at this meeting there was a di|spute touching Ecclesiastical Tonsure, S. Beda expresly testifies. But does not ex|plain the point wherein the difficulty lay. Yet this is certain, that there was not any one in that Assembly which either derided or neglected the said Tonsure, as Protestants now doe.
2. The primitive antiquity of this Tonsure, by which Ecclesiasticall persons for a sign of distinction fro~ the Layty, by cutting off some part of the hair on the top of their heads, formed it into the fashion of a Diadem, or Crown, is referred by S. Isidor to the Apost|les,Isid. de Divin. Off. ap. Ba|ron. ad A. D. 58. and said to be an imitation of the Naza|rites, for thus he writes: If I be not deceived, the practise of the Ecclesiastical Tonsure was derived from the Nazarites. Who first nourishing their hair and suffring it to grow long, undertook by vow a laborious Exercise of Continence, abstinence and other austerities: which having performed, they shaved their heads, and by Gods command cast their hayr into the fire of the Sacrifice, signify|ing thereby that they consecrated the perfection of their Devotion to our Lord. The practise ac|cording to this example was introduced by the Apostles, importing that Ecclesiastical persons devoted to the service of God are consecrated to him, as the Nazarites were, which they testified by cutting off the hayr: so professing that they devested themselves of the old man and his acts.
3. The Controversy therefore was about the manner and fashion of the Tonsure: of which there were severall kinds, the Prin|cipall whereof are said to have taken their Originall from Saint Peter, or Saint Paul. The manner of Saint Peters was to shave the top of the head, leaving below toward the forehead and ears a Circle or Diademe representing the Crown of thorns which our Lord bore:Amalar. de Eccl.
Off l 4 c. 39. Alcuin. de Divin. Offic. cap. 35.
Ap. Vsser. in Prim. Eccl. Brit. f. 922. Thus write Amalarius, and Al|cuinus: who addes, that this Saint Peter or|daind to the end that Clergy-men might be di|stinguished from secular, not only in their cloa|thing, but form of wearing their hayr. And Steven the Preist, called also Eddius, writes of Saint Wilfrid that he willingly received from Saint Dalfinus Arch-bishop of Lyons the form of S. Peters Tonsure, resembling the Crown of thorns encompassing our Lords head.
4. This is the form of Tonsure at this day in use among the Disciples of S. Benedict and S. Francis, as likewise some other Religious Orders, and no doubt was anciently received by all Ecclesiasticall persons: and which by the Greeks is called . But in follow|ing times,Balsam. in 21 Can. Trullan. Bellarm. l. de. Monach. as Bellarmin observes, Ecclesia|sticall persons among the Secular Clergy changed this Tonsure, instead of the said Diademe about the lower part of the head, shaving only the top or crown of the head in form of a Circle, the which Circle at this day is enlarged according to the degrees of their Orders. By which change the ordinance made by the fourth Council of Toledo is ma|nifestly transgressed: Let all Ecclesiasticall per|sons and Lectours, as likewise Deacons and Preists shave the whole upper part of their head, and leave below only the crown of a Circle: Not as in the parts of France the Lectours are obser|ved to doe, who weare long hair, as lay-men doe, and onely shave a small Circle on the top of their heads. For such a fashion is observed in Spain only by Hereticks. Wherefore it is necessary for the taking away scandall from the Church that this mark of shame be abolished, and that there be one onely fashion of Tonsure, as is practised ge|nerally in all Spain.
5. The Second manner of Tonsure is sup|posed to have descended from Saint Paul, and,Bd. Hst l. 4. cap. 1. saith S. Beda, was in practise among the Eastern Ecclesiasticks: though he does not describe the fashion of it. But it seems to have consisted in a totall shaving, or at least close polling of the whole head. For he affirms that Saint Theodore Arch-bishop Elect of Canterbury, who came out of Cilicia, was obliged to expect four months, till his hair was grown sufficiently to have a crown made round about his head, after the Roman manner.
6. The present Dispute therefore was

whether S. Peters manner of Tonsure in use at Rome was to be onely received in Brittany. This seems to appear from an Epistle of S. Aldelm by command of a Synod directed to a certain Brittish Prince called Geruntius,Aldelm. Epist ad Geru. in which he reprehends the Brittains for using a Tonsure different from the Roman. The passage of the said Epistle pertinent to this purpose is this: A rumour, saith he, is largely spread that there are certain Preists and Clergy-men in your Province who obstinatly re|ject the Tonsure of Saint Peter: alledging for their only excuse, that herein they imitate their Pre|decessours, whom they with swelling language de|scribe as persons wonderfully illustrated with Di|vine Grace.
7. The care which the Popes of this age had, that S. Peters Tonsure should be only received in Brittany, is manifested by Pope Vitalian, who would not suffer Theodorus Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who had been shaved after the Eastern manner, to come into Brittany, till his hair was grown so as that he might be shorn after the Roman manner. Thus writes S. Beda,Bed. l. 4. c. 1 Theodorus, saith he, after he was ordaind Subdeacon, expected four months, till his hair was grown to a length sufficient to be cutt into a Crown. For his Tonsure before was after the Eastern fashion; attributed to S. Paul.
8. But besides these there was a third man|ner of Tonsure, by which onely a half crown was formed on the lower part of the head before, from one ear to the other, all the rest of the hair being left at full length. And this fashion in these times came in use among the Irish Clergy: This form, the Irish Writers condemning it, call Simon Magus his Crown: which appellation they received from Rome. Now how this practise came into Ireland we read in an ancient Book of Canons cited by B. Vsher.Ap. Vsser. f. 924. The Romans say, that this Tonsure took its beginning from Simon Magus, who shaved him|self only from eare to eare, thereby to expell the vertue of the Tonsure of Magicians, by which onely the fore-part of the head was covered. The Sermon likewise of S. Patrick testifies that the first Authour of this kind of Tonsure in Ireland was one who had been Swine-heard to Loiger the Son of Nele King of Ireland: and from him the Irish have generally received this fashion.
9. Against this manner of Tonsure the En|glish Abbot Ceolfrid in S. Beda writes to Naitan King of the Picts: In which letter he affirms the most excellent sort of Tonsure to be that of S. Peter, in practise at Rome and the most detestable this of Simon Magus. Adding for a proof of the excellency of S. Peters Crown these words, We are shorn after that manner,Ibid. not only because S. Peter was so, but because S. Peter thereby com|memorated our Lords Passion: and therefore we desiring and hoping to be saved by the same pas|sion, bear the sign of it, as he did, on the higher part of our body. For as every Christian baptized being made so by the death of our Saviour, is wont to bear the sign of the Holy Crosse on the fore head, that by its defence we may be guarded from the incursions of Evill Spirits, and also be admonished that we ought to crucify the flesh with its vices and lusts: So likewise ought those Ecclesiasticks or Monks who more strictly oblige themselves to continence for our Lord, to bear on their heads that form of a Crown which he in his Passion caried on his head, and which was made of thorns, that he might take away the sharp thorns of our Sins.
10. Now whether the Picts and Scotts had received from the Irish the Tonsure ascribed to Simon Magus, is not certain. However, it is manifest that this was a practise introduced in Ireland after S. Patricks time, and contrary to his Institut:A. Vsser. . 924. For in a Synod celebrated there in his time, we read this Canon: Whatsoever Clergy-man, from the Dore-keeper to the Preist, shall be seen abroad without a Tunick or Cassick, and not cover the nakednes of his belly: or who shall not wear his hair thorn after the Roman manner: And if his wife shall not wear a veyle when she walks abroad, Let such be contemned by Seculars and separated from the Church.
11. From the severall passages here alledged we may conclude that the Motive of the Di|spute in this Synod or Assembly of Strenes-halch, proceeded from a zeale in S. Wilfrid and other Ecclesiastical persons from Kent, c. to reduce the Scotts and Picts to their first Prin|ciples and Rites which they received fro~ Rome;  which by negligence had been deprav'd: which was a design very commendable, since Vniformity even in small things once negle|cted, draws after it divisions in greater. Not|withstanding that they urged not this Vni|formity in Tonsure as a matter in it self of any necessity, the forementioned Abbot Ceolfrid declares in his Letter to Nattan, where he says,Ap. Bed. l. 5. cap. 22. We doe freely professe that the Errour about Tonsure is not harmfull to those who have a pure Faith to God; and Charity to their Neighbour: Especially cinsidering that in the ancient Catho|lick Fathers we cannot reade that there have been any Controversies about the manner of Tonsure, as there have been about differences in mat|ters of Faith; or Celebration of Easter.
12. These were the Points debated in this Conference, concerning the Canonicall time of celebrating the Paschal Solemnity, and Eccle|siasticall Tonsure. Other small differences like|wise there were about External Rites, but of so small consideration, that our ancient Re|cords have not vouchsafed to mention them. And surely they were very small, since the fa|shion of Tonsure deserved to be mentioned, as a matter of Dispute. And from hence we may undeniably conclude, that the Scotts, Picts and Brittains in all matters of Faith without exception, agreed with the Saxon, that is, the Roman Church. Those dissenters had through neglect or ignorance varied from the Vniversal Church in some outward Obser|vances, but in all Doctrines, and publick Practi+ses consequent to such Doctrines, they still remaind unreproveable: Otherwise, no doubt, they would at this time have been called to an account for their Errours.
13. Now what successe this Conference or Synod produced, as to the Scotts, S. Beda thus breifly declares: The debate being ended; and the Assembly dissolved, Agilbert returned home (namely, into France.) But Colman Bishop of Lindesfarn perceiving his Doctrin and Sect now exposed to contempt, took a long with him those who had a mind to follow, to witt, all those that refused to admitt the Catholick Observance of Ea|ster, and the Tonsure of the Crown (for of this also no small debate was made:) And went back into Scotland, with a purpose to treat there with his Countrey-men whether for the future he should conform to the Catholick Rites, or no. But not long after he returned to his See: and forsaking the Scottish custome, submitted to the Catholick way of celebrating Easter.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2 c. B. Colman goes into Ireland: Where he builds a Monastery for Saxon-English Monks.
5.6. c. His death: and Elogy. Monks then in great veneration.

1. COlman Bishop of Lindesfarn, though he returned presently out of Scotland well reformed from his former Errours, yet his abode at his See was very short: For, saith Saint Beda,Bed. l. 4. c. 4. he relinquished Brittany (upon what Motive is not expressed) and took with him all the Scotts which he had assem|bled in the Isle of Lindesfarn: And besides them, there went with him thirty of the English Na|tion, who had likewise been imbued in Monasticall Exercises by him.
2. Thus having left a few Religious Brethren in his Church, he went first to the Island His (or Iona) from whence he had formerly been sent to preach the Gospell to the English Nation. After that he retired from thence into a little Island West-ward from Ireland which in the Scottish language is called Inhys-bovinde, or The Isle of the White Calf. There he built a Monastery, in which he placed the Scottish and English Monks, which had attended him from Lindesfarn. But shorly after a disagreement hapned between them, upon this occasion. The Scotts in Summer time when fruits were to be gathered, were wont to leave the Monastery; and to wander up and down in the countrey where they had much ac|quaintance. But the Winter following they would return, and expect their part in the Provisions gathered by the English, which they thought un|reasonable to allow them.
3. To remedy this dissension therefore Colman after much travell up and down, at length found another place in Ireland commodious for building a Monastery, called in the Scottish (or Irish) tongue Magi (or Maiyo.) There he bought of a certain Count to whom the possession belonged, a part of it, to found his Monastery; adding withall this Condition, That the Monks in their dayly Devotions should be obliged to pray for the said Counts prosperity. Having therefore with the assistance of the Count and Neighbours adioyning built a Monastery, he placed the English Monks there, having left the Scotts in the foresaid Island. Which Monastery is to this day possessed by English Monks: and from a slender beginning enlarged very much, being vulgarly called Intugeo. Here resides a famous Congregation of Religious Monks gathered out of England, who are much refor|med in their Institut, and following the Example of their Venerable Fathers, doe live under a Ca|nonicall Rule and Abbot by the labour of their hands, with great continence and simplicity.
4. When Colman left Lindesfarn,Id. ib. c. 25. saith the same Authour, he took with him part of the bones of his Predecessour the most Reverend Bi|shop Aidan: and part he left in the Church which he had governed, commanding they should be buried in the Secretary, or Chancell of the same Church. Whereby it is plain that certain Protestant Writers doe unjustly impute the in|troducing of these practises of Veneration of the Relicks of Saints to Roman Missioners after the departure of these ancient Preachers from Scotland. These Relicks Bishop Colman re|posed in his Monastery of Bovinde: in which Island S. Rioch Nephew of S. Patrick by his Sister Darerca, had long before fixed an Epi|scopall See.
5. In that Island the same Venerable Bi|shop Colman ended his dayes in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy five, as the An|nals of Vlster doe testify.Martyrolog. Angl. 13. Octob. Though our Marty|rologe signifies that he went into Austria, and there preaching he Gospell of Christ was slain by Infidels, about the year of our Lord seaven hundred and five.
6. To honour the Memory of this wor|thy Bishop, we will here adioyn the Cha|racter given of him by Saint Beda,Bed. l. 3. c. 25. together with that of the Religious Monks of that age: How great the parsimony and continence of the Venerable Bishop Colman was, the very place which he governed will declare: For when they were departed, excepting the Church only, scarce any other buildings were found, that is, no more then were absolutly necessary for Civil con|versation. They had no money at all, for they contented themselves with a few cattell. For indeed there was no need neither of money nor buildings for the reception of great men which oft repaired to that Monastery: for they never came upon any other busines but only to pray; or hear the Word of God preached, The King him|self upon occasion would some times come atten|ded only by five or six servants, and as soon as he had ended his Prayers in the Church, he would depart: Or if sometimes they took any refection there; they would desire no more then the dayly simple Provisions of the Monks.
7. For the Teachers of that age employd all their solicitude in serving God, not the world: all their care was to garnish their soules not their bel|lies. And for this cause the Habit of Religion was

in those dayes held in great veneration: insomuch as whithersoever any Ecclesiasticall or Religious person went, he would be ioyfully entertained by every one, as a faithfull servant of God. And whensoever such an one was met in a iourney, the people would approach to him, and bowing down their heads, would desire him to sign them with the Crosse, or give them his benediction. And they were very attentive to their good admoni|tions and exhortations. Vpon Sundays likewise and Feasts the people with great fervour would repair to Churches or Monasteries, not for refre|shing their bodies; but hearing Gods Word. And if any Preist occasionally came into a village, all the Inhabitanes would gather together, and desire him to communicate to them the Word of life. For indeed Preists and Clergy-men in those dayes had no other busines to call them out of their Solitude into towns or Villages, but only to preach, baptise, visit the sick or to doe some other spirituall good to soules. They were then so perfectly free from the in|fection of covetousnes, that without some violence and constraint they would not so much as accept of lands and possessions from men for building Mo|nasteries. And this devout conversation of Clergy-men and Monks continued a good while after this in the Churches of the Northumbers.


XX. CH.XX. CHAP.

1.2 c. A great plague. Death of King Earcombert: and of the Arch-bishop Deus-dedit.
4.5. c. Apostacy of one King of the East-Saxons: and piety of the other.
8. Of the Holy Bishop Iarumannus.
9 10. wini the first Simoniacall Bishop in England.

A. D. 664. Westmenast. hc Huntingd. l. 3.1. THE same year in the Month of May there was a great Eclipse of the Sun, and a mor|tality or plague followed it, so raging, as no memory had been of the like, saith Mathew of Westmin|ster. The destruction caused by it in Brittany and Ireland was so great, that it almost layd wast both those Islands, as Huntingdon testifies. It began, saith S. Beda,Bed. in Epi|tom. in the Southern parts of Brittany, which were even depopulated by it: and from thence it proceeded to the Province of the Nor|thumbers, where it raged in all quarters, and de|stroyd a wonderfull multitude.
2. Now because he says it began in the Southern parts, and also recounts severall il|lustrious persons taken away by it: wee will follow its course in our Narration: and begin|ning with Kent, we there are told of the death both of the King and Arch-bishop. The King was Ercombert,Malmib. de Reg. f. 11. a Prince so devout, that nei|ther the luxury of the Court, nor solicitudes of the Kingdom could withdraw him from the ser|vice of God. And hereby living secure under the Divine Protection and favour, all things both at home and abroad succeeded prosperously to him, and he lived in great tranquillity to a very old age. Thus writes William of Malms|bury. So that it may be a doubt whether it was of the pestilence or some other disease that he dyed. But whether that or the Ec|clipse was Gods Messenger to summon him, we may piously beleive that he was cal|led from an earthly to a heavenly King|dom.
3. The like we may affirm of the Holy Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Deus-dedit, who sate the sixth in that Chair, and after nine years devoutly and zealously spent in admi|nistring that See, received this year the reward of his labours, and has deserved a place among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the last of Iune.Martyrol. Angl. 30. l. A worthy Character of his vertues is afforded us by the Authour of his life in Capgrave. After his death the See was vacant for a considerable time, for by reason of the raging pestilence, care could not be taken to provide a Successour.
4. From Kent we passe to the East-Sa|xons, governed by two Kings, Signer the Son of Sigebert sirnamed the Little, and Sebb a Prince of great Sanctity, and Son (not of Edilred, as Harpsfeild affirms, but) of that King Seward, who shamefully be|traid the Christian Faith, and was slain by the King of the West-Saxons.
5. In this Kingdom the pestilence was more violent and furious, then any other. And we may iudge that Gods design thereby was by kindling the furnace of this calami|ty to sever the gold from the drosse, and to render the Piety of one of those Kings more illustrious, by opposing it to the impiety of the other. For King Sigher upon this Vi|sitation fell back to his former Pagan Su|perstition, hoping to obtain from his Idols a remedy against the infection, whereas nothing but impurity could proceed from them, whose infection was more mortall then that of the pestilence. Which Apo|stacy of the King became an Example to his inconstant Subjects: Yea, saith Saint Beda, his Nobles,Bed. l. 3. c. 30. who loved onely this present life, and had no care, or perhaps beleived not a fu|ture, began to restore the Idoll-temples formerly demolished, and to adore their senceles Idolls, as if by them they could be defended from the Mortality. But the violence of the pesti|lence afterward more encreasing taught them that what they hoped would be a re|medy, more inflamed the disease.
6. As for the other King Sebb, his portion of the Kingdom was free from this Supersti|tion, and his Piety, being more purified by Humility and Resignation to Gods Visitation, became a pattern to all his Subjects. For, saith the same Authour, he was a man very devout to God,Id. l. 4. c. ii. and fervently intent to Religious Acts, fre|quent Prayer, and pious exercises of Charity and Alms-giving. In his own inclination he pre|ferred a private Monasticall life before the riches

and pompe of a Kingdom,A. D. 678. and if the obstinate re|fusall of his Wife to admitt a Separation had not hindred, he would long before have forsaken his throne to retire into a Monastery. Hence it was that many were of opinion that a man so qualified was fitter to be ordained a Bishop, then a King.
Yet he shewd himself to be a very good King: and his Kingly solicitude was not con|fin'd to his own portion, but extended it self to the reducing to Christian Profession Sigher his companion in the Throne. For which purpose he advised Wulfere King of the Mer|cians of the danger his Kingdom was faln into of ruine from an infection far more horrible then the Pestilence. Whereupon Wulfere, as became a good Christian Prince, sent thither Iarumannus Bishop of the Mercians, lately there succeeding to the Holy Bishop Trumhere, by whose endeavours the Christian Faith was again restored among the backsliding East-Saxons.
Id. l. 3. c. 30.8. Concerning this venerable Bishop Iarumannus, S. Beda thus writes: He was a Reli|gious good man, very industrious, and passing through all quarters he preached the Word of Life, and by his labours reduced both King Sigher and his Subiects to the way of iustice, which they had forsaken, insomuch as relinquishing or demo|lishing their Idoll-temples and Altars; they ioy|fully confessed the Name of Christ formerly re|nounced by them, and desired much rather to dye in him with a beleif of the Resurrection; then to live in the filth of Infideity among their Idols Iarumannus having gloriously finished so good a work, together with the Preists and Teachers at|ending him returned home with great ioy.
9. The piety of King Sebb rested not here, but out of a care to provide against the in|constancy of the East-Saoxns, he treated once more with Wulfere King of the Mercians to send him a Bishop to govern and administer the See of London. There was then residing among the Mercians Wini, who had been Bi|shop at Winchester in the Kingdom of the West-Saxons, but for some now unknown crime was driven from his See by K Kenewalch. This man incited by an inordinate ambition and desire of Rule and wealth, most shamefully with money obtained of King Wulfere to be recommended to the Bishoprick of London; into which he entred in the year six hundred sixty sixe, and is marked in our Annalls as the first Simoniacall Bishop in our Island. Hence William of Malmsbury thus writes:Malmsbu. de P. l. 2. c. 241. Wina ha|ving bought the Bishoprick of London; quickly ended there the remainder of his days. He became an ominous and fatall example to posterity, so that it cannot easily be discerned to whom the greater sin and infamy is to be imputed; to him who sold, or who bought with money this Sacred Dignity.
10. However certain it is that King Sebb was perfectly exempted from this stain. His desire was to obtain, and ioy to receive a Bishop, Orthodoxe in the Faith. As for his man|ners, being a stranger to him, he hoped well and undoubtedly was wholly un interessed in the infamous bargain which passed between wulfere and Wini.


XXI. CHAP.XXI. CH.

1.2. The plague among the East-angles: which destroyed many Religious Virgins in Cheresey.

1. IN the Eastern parts of Brittany li kewise the pestilence was very feirce.Bed. l. 4. c. . The dismall effects wherof S. Beda particularly relates, hapning in a Monastery of Religious Virgins. For, saith he, Erconwald Son of An|na heretofore King of that Nation, had formerly built two Monasteries, one for himself, and the other for his Sister Edilburga. His own Monaste|ry was seated in the Province of Suderige (or Surrey) near the River Thames, in a place called Ceorotesey, that is, the Island of Ceorot (the present name is Chertsey.) His Sisters Monastery was in a place called Berekingham (Barking) in the Province of the East-Saxons, where that Holy Virgin became a Mother and Nurse of many de|vout Virgins, shewing her self worthy such a Bro|ther, being Zealous to advance the Spiritual per|fection of those under her charge as severall Di|vine Miracles did testify.
2. The fury of the pestilence wasting the coun|trey about,Ib. c. 7. invaded likewise this Monastery, as well the part where the Virgins inhabited; as that of the Monks which attended the Altar. Whereup|on the Holy Abbesse consulted with her Reli|gious Subiects concerning a place commodious for the burial of the dead. But receiving no resolution from them, she purposed to expect an answer from God. On a certain time therefore after they had ended their Midnight-devotions, the Virgins going out of the Church to sing at the graves of the Monks on a sudden a wonderfull Light, like a Sheet, came over them, wherewith they were so affrighted that they were forced to intermitt their Psalmody. A little after the said light removed to the Southern part of the Monastery, which lay west-ward from their Oratory, and presently was taken up into heaven, in the sight of them all, in|somuch as not any of them doubted but that the same light which was o conduct their Soules to glory; marked also the place where their bodies were to expect a glorious Resurrection.
3. The names of those Spouses of our Lord which out of this Monastery during this plague; went to heaven, are written in the Book of life. S. Beda names only one before the death of S. Edilburga: her name was Eadgida. How she was called to her eternall reward he thus relates: There was; said he; in the same Monastery a little boy not above three years old called Esica,Ib. c. 8. who by reason st his infant-age was bred up and taught by the Religious Virgins. This child having been struck with the sayd infection, and ready to dye, called aloud to one of the said

Virgins,A. D. 664 as if she had been present, crying out, Eadgid, Eadgid, Eadgid, and with these words ended his present life, and entred into life eter|nall. And the same Virgin which the child at his death called, on that very day dyed also of the same disease, and followd him who had called her, to the celestiall kingdom.
4. Another likewise of those Handmaids of our Lord being struck with the same contagion, and drawing to her end, began about midnight to call to those which attended her, desiring them to putt out the candle standing by. This she often did, but none obeyed her.At last she said, I know, you think I speak I know not what: but it is not so: For I assure you I see so wonderfull a light in the room, that the candles light is darknes compared to it.
And when after all this, none answered her, or complyed with her desire, she said again,Well let the candle burn if you please; but know, that is not my Light: For my light will come at day|break. After this she told them how a certain Holy man who dyed the same year had appeared to her, assuring her that the next morning she should goe to everlasting light.
And the truth of this Vision was confirmed by the death of the said Virgin, who expired at the break of day.


XXII. C.XXII. CHAP.

1.2 c. The Plague among the Northum|bers the death of S. Cedde: and of Tuda Bishop of Lindesfarn.

1. THe same horrible infection spread it self Northward likewise,A D. 664. and there wrought the like destruction, not only among the lay people, but Religious also: in|somuch as many eminent for learning and Sanctity ended their mortality by it. Among which the most illustrious were Cedd Bishop of London, who according to his custom vi|siting his Monastery in the Province of the Nor|thumbers, was seised upon by that disease: And Tuda Bishop of Lindesfarn.
Bed. l. 3. c. 2. Concerning the former Saint Beda thus writes: The Venerable Bishop Cedd having for the space of many years administred the Bishoprick of London in the Province of the East-Saxons, and thereto ioynd the care likewise of the Monastery of Lestinghen in the Province of the Northumbers, ver which he appointed Superiours, it hapned that coming to visit the said Monastery in this time of Mortality, the contagion surprising him, he dyed there. At first he was buried abroad: but not long after a Church of Stone being built in the said Monastery, and dedicated to the honour of the Blessed Virgin-Mother of our Lord, his Body was removed, and layd at the right hand of the Altar. He committed the government of his Mo|nastery after his death to his Brother Ceadda, who was afterward consecrated a Bishop, as we shall shortly declare.
3. When the Monks of another Monastery of his in the Province of the East-Saxons heard that he was dead and buried in the Kingdom of the Northum|bers,Ibid. about thirty of them went thither, being de|sirous to live, and, when the pleasure of God should be, to dye and be buried near the Body of their Venerable Father. They were willingly received by their Brethren there, and in a short time they all dyed of the same infection, excepting one young child onely, who, as was constantly beleived, was preserved from death by the prayers of the Holy Bishop. For whereas he lived a long time after, and gave himself to reading the Holy Scriptures, he found at last that he had not been regenerated by the Waters of Baptism. Whereupon being presently baptised, he afterward was promoted to the Order of Preist-hood, and did much good to many in Gods Church. Therefore I doe not doubt, as was said, but that he was detaind from death by the interces|sion of his Holy Father, out of love to whom he was come thither, by whose prayers he thus escaped the danger of eternall death, and also by h teaching afforded the ministery of life and Sal|vation to others.
4. In the same Province of the Northum|bers by the same pestilence was snatche away also Tuda Bishop of Lindesfarn, who had a little before, upon the departure of Bishop Colman,Id. ib. c. 26. been ordained his Successour: For so writes S Beda: Colman, said he, being return into his Countrey, the servant of our Lord Tuda re+ceived after him the Bishoprick of the Northum|bers. He had his instruction among the Southern Scotts, and by them was ordained Bishop. He re+ceived the fashion of the Ecclesiastical Tonsure ac+cording to the Custom of that Province, but he ob+served the Catholick Rule of the Paschal Solem+nity. He was a good Religious Bishop: but his go|vernment of that Church lasted a very short time. He came out of Scotland during the life of Col|man, and with great diligence both by preaching and good example he taught every where things belonging to Christian Faith and Truth. Pre|sently after his consecration, being struck with the contagion then raigning in that Province, saith Huntingdon,Huntingd l. 3 he dyed, and was buried at a place called Womalet. But in S. Beda it is called Peynalech, who adds, that it was a Monastery.
5. Moreover,Bed. ib. as S. Beda testifies, when the Scottish Monks living in Lindesfarn departed thence with their Bishop Colman, those which re|maind, received for their Superiour, with the au|thority of Abbot, the most Reverend gentle and mild man Eata, who before was Abbot in the Mo|nastery called Mailros This Translation was made, as the report is, upon the request of Bishop Colman at his departure to King Oswi Because the same Eata was one of the twelve children which Saint Aidan in the time of his Bishoprick, had received from the English Nation, to instruct them in the Doctrine of Christ. The said request of Bishop Col|man was easily granted by King Oswi, because he loved him very much for his gravity and pru|dence. This is the same Eata, who a while after was ordained Bishop of the same Church of Lin|desfarn.
6. Presently after the death of the Vene|rable Bishop Tuda there followed great com|motions and debates in the Church of the Northumbers, by reason of severall preten|ders to the administration of the same Church, as shall shortly be declared more at large.


XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2. The Plague in Ireland.
3.4. c. The Gests of S. Egbert a Saxon Preist: He reduces the Scotts to Catholick conformity: his death.

1. THere are severall other Saints com|memorated in our Martyrologe, whose death is assigned to this year, as the two Royall Martyrs Etheled and Ethelbert, Sons of Wulfere King of the Mercians of whom we have already treated, demonstrating that their Martyrdom could not fall so late. Like|wise two Royall Virgins, S. Mildreda and Saint Milburga, Neices of the same King by his Brother Merevald, of whom we shall treat more commodiously hereafter.
2. Following therefore the progresse of this Pestilence, it will lead us into Ireland, were we shall find matter proper for our present Subiect, and related by S. Beda, in the manner following. The same killing infe|ction, faith he,Bed. l. 3. c. 27. with equall destruction raged in Ireland. Now there were at that time in the same Island many persons both of noble extraction and meaner state, who in the times of Finan and Col|man Bishops, leaving their native countrey, re|tired thither, some to gain instruction, and others to attend to their Spirituall Exercises and Morti|fication. Severall of them therefore undertook a Monasticall Profession: and not a few going from Cell to Cell where learned Masters inhabited, ad|dicted themselves to Reading and Study. All these were freely and with a good will entertained by the Scotts, who afforded them upon free cost both dayly nourishment, books to read, and instru|ction likewise.
3. Among these there were two Noble young men of vertuous and towardly disposition: Their names were Edelhum and Egbert. The former of these was Brother of Edilhum or Ethelwin a man of great Sanctity, who likewise the year following went into Ireland to enrich his mind with lear|ning: and being well instructed, returned into his Native countrey, Brittany, where he was ordained Bishop of Lindisse; or Lindesfare, and worthy go|verned that Church many years: (of whom we shall treat more at large hereafter.)
4. The said two young men being in a Monaste|ry; which the Scotts (or Irish) call Rathmesige, where all their companions were either taken out of the world by the infection, or dispersed in other places, they likewise both of them were struck with the same disease, and greivously affected. And of these two, Egbert (as a certain grave and sincere Preist, who professed that he heard it from Egbert himself, assured mee) beleiving that he should not escape, went one morning out of the In|firmary into a retired place, where itting alone, he began seriously to call to mind his former actions, and feeling great compunction by the me|mory of his past sins, he bedewd his face with teares, and from the depth of his soule prayed to Almighty God not to take him out of the world till he had more perfectly performed Pennance for his past negligences and faults committed in his child hood and youth, and till he had more plen|tifully exercised himself in good works. He made a Vow likewise that he would live all his days a stranger, and never return into Brittany where he was born: likewise that besides the Solemn Canoni|call Office, he would every day recite the whole Psalter in memory of the Divine praises, and also every week passe one whole day and night in fa|sting, except he should be hindred by some bodily infirmity.
5. Having concluded his weeping, prayer and Vows, he returned to his Cell, where finding his companion asleep, he likewise layd himself on his bed, and falling into a slumber, he was presently awaked by his companion, who looking earnestly upon him, said,O Brother Egbert what have you done? I hoped we should both together have gone to heaven: But know that the things thou so earnestly prayed for, are granted thee. For he had learnt by a Vision both the subiect of Egberts prayers, and that God would perform his desires.
In a word, the following night Edelhum died.
6. But Egbert in a short time shaking off the pains of his disease, recovered and lived many years after. He received the degree and Order of Preisthood, which he adorned by many good actions suitable to that Profession, and according to his desire being full of vertue and piety, he a little while since, to witt, in the year of our Lords Incarnation seaven hundred twenty nine, being fourscore and ten years old, went to everla|sting ioyes.
7. He lead a life with all perfection of Humility, meeknes, continence, simplicity and iustice: In|somuch as both by the example of his life by his assiduity in teaching, zeale in correcting, and li|berality in giving what he had received from rich men, he was very beneficiall both to his own countreymen, and also to the Scotts and Picts among whom he lived.
8. He added likewise to his forementioned Vows, this, Of never tasting any thing in Lent but once a day, and then also onely bread, and a small mea|sure of thin milk. Which milk his custom was to putt the day before in a glasse, and when the night was past, to take off the cream, and drink the rest with a small portion of Bread. The like mea|sure of abstinence he was wnt likewise to observe forty days before our Lords Nativity, and as many after Pentecost.
9. This is that S. Egbert who was the first and cheif mover of the glorious design of twelve Apostolicall English Preists to convert certain German Nations our Primitive Ance|stors

to the Christian Faith, which they under|took, and in a great measure performed. These were S. Subert, S. Willebrord, S. Boniface and the rest of their illustrious companions.See l. S. Egbert was desirous to have ioynd in their labours and dangers, but was miraculously forbidden and hindred, as we shall shew more at large when we come to the season of that Mission. For Almighty God designed him for another employment, which was the reducing of the Scottish Monks and Clergy to a conformity with the Catholick Church in the Celebration of Easter, in Canonicall Ton|sure and other Rites. How this was effected, S. Beda thus relates:Bed l. 5. c. 210. Not long after, saith he, those Monks also which inhabited the Island of Hy, of the Scottish nation, together with all the Monasteries subiect to them, were by Gods Providence brought to the Catholick Observance of Easter and Canonicall Tonsure. For in the year after our Lords Incarna|tion seaven hundred and sixteen, in which after that Osred King of the Northumbers was slain, Coered governed there, there came to them out of Ireland the holy and Venerable Preist Egbert (of whom we spoke before) and was with great reve|rence and ioy received by them. He being a very winning Teacher, and moreover one who devoutly practised what he taught, was willingly hearkned to by them all, and by his diligent and pious ex|hortations changed the inveterate Tradition of their Ancestours: to whom we may apply that saying of the Apostle, That they had a zeale of God, but not according to knowledge: and taught them to celebrate the Prime Christian Solemnity, and to receive the Canonicall Tonsure after the Catholick and Apostolick manner. And herein we may admire the mercifull dispensation of Di|vine Providence, that the same Nation which for|merly had with great willingnes communicated to our Ancestours the Light of Divine knowledge, should afterward by our English Nation be brought to a perfect form of living, in things whereof they were formerly ignorant. As on the other side, the Brittains, who refused to communi|cate to the English the knowledge of the Christian Faith, now that the same English were perfectly instructed in the Rule of Christianity, yet they re|maind in their inveterate Errours, and celebra|ted Christian Solemnities and Rites in a manner different and opposite to the Vniversal Church.
11. Now the said Monks of Hy by the teaching of Egbert received the Catholick Rites when Dunchad (the tenth from S. Columba) was Abbot of that Monastery, and about fourscore years after they had sent Aidan to preach the Gospell to the English Nation. The man of God Egbert remaind thirteen years in the said Island, which he had consecrated as it were anew to our Lord, by bringing among them the Spirit of Chri|stian communion and peace.
12. At length in the year of our Lords Incar|nation seven hundred twenty nine, in which the Paschall Solemnity fell on the eighth before the Calend of May,Id. ib. when he had solemnly celebrated Masse in Memory of the said Resurrection of our Lord, the same day he likewise went to heaven, and there in the Society of our Lord and his Apo|stles finished the ioy of that highest Festivity, which he had begun on earth with his Brethren whom he had converted to Vnity: Yea now he never ceases to celebrate it without end.
13. And truly it was a wonderfull dispensation of the Divine Providence, that this Venerable man not only passed out of this world to the Eter|nal Father upon the Paschal Feast, but when that Feast was celebrated aright on such a day, as it never had been before in those places. This was great ioy to the Monks that they were arrived to the certain Catholick time of that Feast, and that they were assured to enioy the Protection of the same Venerable Father by whom they were recti|fied. And it was a ioy to him that he was preser|ved alive till he might see his Disciples solem|nise that day together with him, which formerly they had always avoyded. Thus being assured of their amendment, the most Reverend Father exulted to see that day of our Lord: he saw it, and was glad. Thus happily he dyed, and both in the Roman and other Martyrologes his name is recited among the Saint on the four and twentieth of April.Martyrolog. Angl. 14. April.




THE SEAVETEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. Pope Vitalians Letter to King Oswi, concerning the election of an Arch-bishop of Canterbury in the place of Wi|gard who dyed at Rome.

1. _BY reason of the distractions caused by the late raging Pe|stilence;A. D. 665. the two principall Sees of Brittany were some years vacant: But in the year of Grace six hundred sixty five by the care of two pious Kings, Oswi King of the Northumbers and Eg|bert King of Kent, order was taken for sup|plying them. Thus writes Saint Beda, King Oswi,Bed. l. 3. c. 9. saith he, though he had received his edu|cation and instruction from the Scotts, yet now came to understand of a truth that the Roman was the Catholick Apostolick Church, therefore ioyning in counsell with Egbert King of Kent, they with the election and consent of the English Clergy sent to Rome to be ordained Arch-bishop of Canterbury a certain vertuous Preist and fittly qualified for that dignity, named Wigard, one of the Clergy of the late Arch-bishop Deus-dedit: to the intent that he being invested with Ar|chiepiscopall authority might ordain Catholick Bishops over all the Churches in Brittany.
2. Moreover in token of their respect to the See Apostolick, together with Wigard they sent Letters and presents to Pope Vitalan who then sate in S. Peters Chaire,Id. l. 4.1. with vessels of gold and silver in no small number, saith the same Authour.
3. Wigard being arrived at Rome, and having acquainted the foresaid Pope with the cause of his iourney,Id. ib. presently after both himself, and almost all those of his attendance were swepd away by a pestilence which suddenly seised on them.
4. Pope Vitaliam by his Letters to King Oswi,A. D. 666. dated the year following, and which are extant in S. Beda,Id. ib. gave him an account of these things:In which Letters he first con|gratulates the Kings Orthodoxe faith, and zeale for propagating the same Faith among his subjects: Exhorting him earnestly in all things to follow the pious Rule and Tradi|tion of S. Peter and S. Paul who were the two great Lights of the Vniversall Church: Parti|cularly he instructs him how the Catholick way of observing the Paschall Solemnity came from their teaching and practise.
5. Consequently he informs him how he could not so soon find a man in all points adorned with such qualities as they requi|red in a Prelate, considering that the great distance of their countrey deterred men from accepting the Episcopall charge there. But assoon as a fitt person could be found he would not fayle to direct him thither to pluck up all the tares which the Enemy had

sown in their Churches.A. D. 666
6. Then he adioyns his gratefull acknow|ledgment for the Gifts which he had sent in honour to the Blessed Prince of the Apostles, assuring him that both himself and his whole Clergy would dayly pray to Almighty God for his health. But as for the design'd Arch-bishop Wigard, who brought those gifts, he with great greife recounts his sudden taking out of the world, whom he buried honourably in the Church dignified with the Sacred Bodies of the Prime Apostles.
7. He further tells him that he had deli|vered to the present Messengers, as tokens of his Fatherly respect, certain Relicks of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and of the Holy Martyrs Saint Laurence, S. Iohn and Paul, Saint Gregory and Saint Pancratius: which they were commanded to present to him. Adding withall that he had sent a Crosse in which was a golden key containing of the filings of the chains of the same Prime Apostles, which were to be presented to the Queen his spirituall daughter, the fame of whose piety caused great ioy in the whole Roman Church.
8. Then he concludes his letter with ex|hortations to proceed in his zeale of redu|cing the whole Island to an uniformity of Catholick Faith and Practise: which he doub|ted not but would be effected; if to his di|ligence he would adde his Prayers to our Lord to give a successe to his endeavours: Withall assuring him that his own conti|nuall Prayers should not be wanting for Gods assistance in all pious works in this life, and an eternall kingdome with Christ in the world to come.
9. The Queen here generally mentioned, though not named, was Eanfleda the daugh|ter of S. Edwin King of the Northumbers and Ethelburga, daughter of Ethelbert the first Christian King of Kent. She was the first who received Baptism in that Kingdom, by the Ministry of S. Paulinus: and after her Fathers death was forced to retire with her Mother into Kent but at last was sent back to become the Wife of this King Oswi.
10. It may seem strange, why this letter concerning the Election of an Arch-bishop of Canterbury should be addressed to Oswi King of the Northumbers, without any men|tion of Egbert King of Kent. But the diffi|culty will cease if we consider, that though in Brittany there was a Heptarchy of Kings, yet among them one for the most part had a generall superintendence over the rest, being in a sort the Monark of the whole Is|land, so that without his advice and concur|rence no matters of moment or generall concern might passe, such as was the consti|tuting an Arch-bishop with authority to or|dain Bishops in other Provinces and regulate their actions. Now such a Monark at this time was Oswi King of the Northumbers, the most potent of all the Saxon Princes.
11. Almost three years passed before an Arch-bishop was sent in the place of Wigard, who dyed at Rome. Therefore it will be con|venient to intermitt awhile the prosecution of this subject, that we may insert other Ecclesiasticall affairs regarding the Saxon Churches in Brittany which intervened.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2.3. Saint Wilfrid constituted Bishop of York by King Alcfrid. And Saint Ceadda, by King Oswi.

1.KING Oswi, whose care we have seen in providing for the Widowed State of the See of Canterbury, was not wanting at the same time in supplying the Vacancy of the Churches of the Northumbers by the death of Tuda last Bishop of Lindesfarn. Now the Kingdom of the Northumbers consisting of two Provinces, one more Northerly, called the Province of the Bernicians containing all beyond the River Tine to the Frith of Edin|borough: and the other the Province of York and Lancaster, called the Province of the Deiri: The Former was governed imme|diatly by King Oswi himself: and the Latter by his Son Alcfrid subordinatly to him.
2. King Alcfrid being likewise solicitous for a Spirituall Pastour to govern his Chur|ches, sent his freind and Instructour S. Wil|frid into France to Agilbert, who, as hath been said, was lately departed out of Brittany into his Native countrey France, where presently after his coming, upon the death of Impor|tunus Bishop of Paris, he was substituted Bishop of the same See.Martyrlog. Gallican. 1. Octob. To whom, as to the most resplendent Starr of all France, when Saint Wilfrid newly elected Bishop of York came out of England to receive Episcopall Consecration, he was by him solemnly ordained, eleaven other Bishops assisting. These are the words of the French Martyrologe.Huntin. f. 333 Huntingdon adds, That S. Wilfrid was consecrated in the village called Compendium (or Compiegne)
3. Whilst these matters were transacting in France, King Oswi, either prevented by the suggestions of those whom S. Wilfrid had maisterd in the late disputation, or impa|tient at his delay in France, without expe|cting longer sent the Holy Abbot Ceadda into the Western Province to be consecrated Bishop of York by Wina, who as yet did not ad|minister the See of London. Thus the Church of York had two Bishops at the same time: and moreover Ceadda administred the Va|cant See of Lindesfarn. Which Controversie between two Bishops, both of them emi|nent for Sanctity, how it was managed between them, and how upon occasion thereof great benefit accrewd to other na|tions

by enlarging the Churches bounds, shall be shewd hereafter in the proper Season.


III. CHA.III. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Martyrdom of Saint Clarus a Hermite: and of his Companion Saint Cyrius.

1. OVR English Martyrologe refers to the year of Grace six hundred sixty six the Martyrdom of an English Hermit called Saint Clare:A. D. 666. Whose Gests are more expressly and largely related in the Gallican Martyrologe, where on the fourth day of November the following Narration is inserted:2. This day is celebrated the Memory of Saint Clare an Ermit and Martyr,Mrtyrolog. Gll. 4. No|vemb. by birth an Englishman of a very Noble descent, and illu|strious for his outward comelines, and inward naturall endowments, but principally for his sin|gular piety and rare Chastity. Being come to years of maturity, he was by his parents affian|ced to a Noble and beautifull Virgin: But when the time wherin the Mariage was to be solemnised approached, the devout young man out of a desire to preserve his Virginall purity, privily withdrew himself from his parents house, and out of Brittany passed over to Neu|stria in France, and arrived at a town called Cherbourg (Casaris-burgum.)
3. There he retired himself to a certain Wood confining to that place, where assu|ming to himself two others who were de|sirous to imitate his pious conversation, he began to serve our Lord in all purity of body and mind, being wholly abstracted from secular cares and attending entirely to cele|stiall. But by the Devills envy he was ex|posed to many persecutions, so that unable to abide there longer, he repaired to a Holy man called Odobert Abbot of a Mo|nastery called Madvin, by whom he was kindly entertaind, and from him learnt and practised a more strict Rule of Monasti|call Discipline.
4. But when the fame of his eminent Vertue: occasioned a concourse of great mul|titudes of both sexes to the said Monastery; He fearing lest by his frequent conversing with such throngs of visitants his Chastity or Humility, which he earnestly desired to pre|serve, might be endangered, he obtaind pre|mission from Odobert to retire to another Mo|nastery, seated neer the River Epta. And there being exempted from all other care, he entirely addicted himself to the Spiri|tuall employments of Prayer and Preaching (for by the incitement of Odobert he had submitted himself to receive Holy Orders.) By which exercises of Piety the shining beames of his Sanctity were spread abroad, to the admi|ration of all.
5. The Enemy of mans Salvation could no longer support the brightnes of Divine Graces shining in this Saint: to obscure which he in|flamed with lust the mind of a certain Noble Woman dwelling near, who impudently attemp|ted to expugne the Chastity of the Seruant of God. But Saint Clare resolutly resisted the shameles Lady: notwithstanding which resi|stance, when her sollicitations still more encrea|sed, he was forced for his own quietnes and liberty, o forsake the Monastery.
6. The lascivious Woman desperatly enra|ged with his departure, sent two Murderers in search of him, who at last found him in a poor cottage where he had fixed his habitation with one onely companion named Cyrinus. There they first sett upon him with many opprobrious speeches, and at last drawing out their swords, they most cruelly cutt off his head, whilst he devoutly kneeling offred his Sacrifice of Cha|stity to our Lord, the lover of pure minds and Patron of innocence.
7. This glorious Champion of Chastity being thus Victorious by patience, presently after arose, and with his hands taking up his head, by the assistance of Angells caried it to a fountain not far distant, into which he cast it: and then caried the same back to the Oratory of his Cell, and going on a little further towards a Village seated near the River Epta, which since took a new name from this glorious Martyr, he there consummated his course, and transmitted his blessed Soule to Heaven.
8. Much to the same effect is the Narra|tion of this holy Saints Martyrdom extant in Capgrave: Where concerning his Compa|nion Cyrinus we read, That he being first dangerously wounded,Ap. Capgrav in . Claro. was by the prayers of Saint Clarus wonderfully restored to health. And hence it follows in the fore said Martyro|loge in this manner:9. Saint Cyrinus (miraculously recovered) took care of the Holy Martyrs buriall: Who also afterward in a conflict for piety consecrated his own name likewise to Martyrdom: whose memo|ry is there celebrated on the thirteenth of Iune.Martyrolog. Gall. 13. Iun Moreover the Sacred Head of Saint Clarus is with due Veneration conserved in a Village in the territory of Paris called by his name, whi|ther it was afterward translated. And at Paris it self in the ancient Monastery consecra|ted to Saint Victor the Martyr his commemo|ration is anniversarily repeated: For thither the most Chast Martyr (like the Patriark Saint Io|seph) is sayd to have fled from the face of the foresaid unchast Lady. And a fitt place it was for his retirement, being in those dayes divided from the noyse and tumult of that Citty.
10. The distinct place where this Holy Mar|tyr suffred, is there said to be in the Territory about Roen in Normandy (in tractu Vulcassino) neer the River Seyne; where in the Primitive times another S. Clarus a Preist and Martyr

is recorded to have suffred:A. D. 668. Who immediatly after the Apostles times being sent from Rome to preach the Gospell, illustrated a good part of Celtick Gaule first with his Doctrine, and after with his Blood. The day of his Pas|sion is said to have been the fourth of No|vember: as that of our present Martyr, the fifteenth before the Calends of August.Mart. Angl. 18 Iul.


IV. CH.IV. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Martyrdom of two Kentish Princes, Ethelred and Ethelbert.
6, 7. their murder miraculously disco|vered
8.9. c. Satisfaction made for it by King Egbert.

A. D. 668.1. A Little before the arrival of a New Arch-bishop of Canterbury from Rome, two young innocent Princes, Ethel|red and Ethelbert, in the Kingdom of Kent were crownd with Martyrdom; For that Name was given to the violent death by which they were taken out of this world without any demerits of their own, in|asmuch as God was pleased miraculously to testify their innocence.
2. We have before declared that Eadbald King of Kent had by his Queen Emma two sons, Ermenred the elder, and his Brother Ercombert. Ermenred dying before his Fa|ther and leaving behind him two infants, Ethelred and Ethelbert (of whose Martyrdom we now treat) not they, but their Vncle Ercombert succeeded in the Throne. Not|withstanding these two young Princes were bred as became their birth: and were yet more enriched with Divine Graces then se|cular ornaments:Westmnst A. D. 74. For saith Mathew of West|minster, after their Regeneration by Baptism, they remaining in their innocence and voluntary neglect of worldly advantages, fortified their other vertues by the safe-guard of Humi|lity.
Malmsbur. deeg as. 11. Id. de Font. l. 4. f. 291.3. King Ercombert at his death recom|mended them to the care of his Son and Successour King Egbert, who being a Prince of great benignity treated them with all Kindnesse and affection, not having any jealousy or preiudice against them, though their Title to the Kingdom in reason and iustice ought to have taken place of his who was their Vncle, since they were chil|dren to the Elder Brother.
4. But his kindnes to them did not last long: For by the ordinary fate of Courts, certain Sycophants suggested to him that by cherishing them he fomented his own danger. Among these the principall Counseller of mischeif was one called Thunr chie Minister of state in that Kingdom, who in a seeming care of King Egberts safety advised him to take out of the way these two Princes, now of an age fitt for govern|ment, whose vertues and excellent en|dowments had fixed them in the affections of the people, so that it was iustly to be feared that either they would challenge their right, or the people voluntarily give them it.
5. These Suggestions at first were un|willingly heard by King Egbert, who for|bad him to continue them. But Thunre (called by others Thimur) pretending duty and a zealous care of the Kings Safety, again renewed them more earnestly and eloquently then before, till in the end the King made no reply, but by silence seemed to consent to his proposall. Here|upon Thunre, promising to himself at least impunity, inhumanly murdred these two innocent Princes. It was easy for him to execute this crime, by reason of his fa|miliarity and privacy with them: for in his outward profession and behaviour he always expressed a great tendernes and affe|ction to them, in so much as they not suspecting any treachery at all from him, afforded him all advantages against them|selves, so that with drawing them into a so|litary place, amidst his caresses and embra|cings of them he stabbed them with his ponyard.
6. Having thus murdred them, as the report is, he buried their bodies in a deep trench which he digged under the Seat where the King was wont to sitt, supposing that none would seek for them there. But the Eye of Divine Providence from whom the secrets even of hearts are not concealed, quickly discovered them, and by many Mi|racles testified their innocence. For the next time that the King was sitting there, a flame issuing out of the Seat scorched and extre|ly terrified him. Whereupon his servants digging the ground under it, where they perceived the rubbish newly layd, disco|vered the bodies, and afterward a Church was built in the same place to honour their Martyrdom.
7. Hereupon King Egbert,Westmonast. A. D. 654. saith Mathew of Westminster, inwardly considering what had pas|sed, imputed the whole crime to himself alone, and being wonderfully confounded in his mind, spent the whole night following in tears. Assoon as the morning light appeard, he commanded an Assembly to be convoked of the newly arrived Arch-bishop Adeodatus (or Theodorus) and his Nobles, and to them he freely related all for|mer passages touching that busines, and like|wise how the night before a pillar of fire from heaven descended on the Bedies of those Holy Princes. The Arch-bishop hereupon gave his ad|vice that the Bodies should be caried to the Me|tropolitan Church, and there buried after a Royall manner. Thence proceeding therefore to the place, they found the Sacred Relicks un|decently

layed under the Kings Chair. These things befell in a village belonging to the King, called Eastrey. Wherefore taking up the Baes and honourably putting them in coffins, the Arch-bishop commanded to cary them to Christ-Church in Canterbury. But in vain they at|tempted this, for with all the force they ula use, they could not remove them out of the place. Whereupon changing his purpose, he advised to transport them to the Church of Saint Augustin: but with as little successe as be|fore. At last it was agreed that they should be caried to the Monastery of Wering (or ake|ring) of great renoun in those days: Which being resolved upon, the Sacred Bodies were as easily removed, as if they had no weight at all. Being arrived therefore at that place, the Exequies were solemnly performed by the Arch-bishop, after which the Saints bodies were honourably buried near to the great Altar: Where many wonderfull Miracles are dayly wrought to the glory of God and honour of his Saints. The fame of which Miracles en|creasing, a certain Count of the East-Angles, named Egelwin, caused them to be translated to Ramsey, in the time of King Edgar, as shall in due place be de|clared.
8 After this, King Egbert by the advice of the Arch-bishop Theodorus and the holy Abbot Adrian endeavoured to redeem his former note of impiety by liberall Almes and many Religious Works. Among which one memorable Monument of his Piety was the erecting a Monastery in the Isle of Thanet, at a place called Menstrey (or Minster.) This is testified by Thorne an ancient writer,Chron. Thorn. cl. 1906. who saith, The said Arch-bishop and Abbot sharply reproved King Egbert for his fault, and perswa|ded him to send for Domneva, Princesse of the Mercians, and Sister to the two murdred Princes and Holy Martyrs of our Lord, and to make sme satisfaction to her for the losse of her Brethren. She therefore being come, received in the Isle of Thanet as much ground as a hind, nourished by her, at one course encompassed by running, which contained forty eight ploughes. There Dom|nevae with the Kings assistance built a Monastery of Virgins, and sent for her daughter Milreda by Merwald Prince of the Mercians, from the Mo|nastery of Chelles (Cala) in France near Paris, who being arrived was consecrated Abbesse of the said Monastery by the Holy Arch-bishop Theo|dore.
9. Of this Lady Domneva we have already spoken: she is called by severall names in our ancient Monuments; Speed stiles her like|wise by the Name of Edburga, and Harps|feild of Ermenburga. As for her daughter Milreda, she was not the first Abbesse of Minster in Thanet, but succeeded to a Holy Virgin named Sabba, to whom the govern|ment of the said Monastery was first commit|ted.
10. Such satisfaction the penitent King made for a crime the guilt whereof was cheifly to be imputed to his impious Mi|nister Thunre: who though by the Kings taking upon himself the whole sin, he was not made a due Sacrifice to human iustice, yet he scaped not the Divine vengeance: For as William of Malmsbury writes,Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 4. When the said Thunere according to his usuall impu|dence with scornfull and depraved words mis|interpreted the Kings piety in building the said Monastery, he was swallowed up into the ground which opened wide under his feet, and so descen|ded quick into Hell.
11. There is yet extant a Charter gran|ted by King Edward the Confessour to the said Monastery, in which severall of these particulars are recorded, for therein we read this passage:Ap. Reyner. in Apostolat. s. 58. I likewise who am des|cended from the stock of the same King Edel|bert, and by the Divine Grace enioy his King|dom, doe in like manner grant the Isle of Thanet, which King Egbert gave for an hereditary pos|session to the Venerable Queen Domneva the Mother of Saint Mildreda, as much thereof as a Hind in her course encompassed, in satisfa|ction for the murder of her two Brethren Ethel|red and Ethelbert, who by command of the said King were uniustly slain by the accursed Thimur, whom presently after, the Divine ven|geance pursued in a terrible manner by a sudden death.


V. CHAP.V. CHA.

1.2. c. S. Theodore a Grecian sent Arch-bishop of Canterbury into Brittany: with Adrian an Abbot.

1. THE forementioned murder of the two innocent Princes hapned the same year that the new consecrated Arch-bishop Theodore arrived in Brittany: Concer|ning the manner of whose Election we will now treat.
2. The See of Canterbury had been now vacant four years, since the death of the Arch-bishop Deus-dedit: For Wigard who had been elected to succeed him, and sent to Rome to receive consecration from Pope Vi|talian, dyed there of the plague before that could be effected. After whose death the Pope, as he informed King Oswi by letters, undertook to provide that See and Church of a worthy Prelat.
3. For which purpose after much consulta|tion with his freinds,Bed. l. 4 c. 1. saith S. Beda, he at last re|solved to make choice of a certain Abbot named Adrian, residing in a Monastery called Nirida, not far from Naples in Campania, who was by birth an African, eminently imbued in Sacred Learning, as likewise in Monasticall and Ecclesia|sticall Instituts, and perfectly skilled in the Greek and Latin tongues. Him therefore he sent for, and enioyned him to accept of Episcopal Ordination,

and to repair into Brittany. But the humble Ab|bot answered, that he was unworthy of so high a degree, yet withall told him, that he could recom|mend another both for learning and age much better qualified for so sublime a charge then him|self. Therefore presenting to him a certain Monk named Andrew, who was Spirituall Father in a Monastery of Religious Virgins near adioyning, after examination he was acknowledged by all worthy of that Bishoprick. Notwithstanding by reason of his corporal infirmity he obtaind to be excused. Once more therefore the Abbot Adrian was urged to accept of that degree: who humbly begged a short respit, to the end he might try whether he could find any one more proper for that employment.
4. Now there was at the same time in Rome a Monk well known to Adrian, named Theodore, born in Tarsus of Cicilia, a man instructed both in secular and Divine litterature, and skilfull in Greek and Latin, withall very pious in conversa|tion and venerable for his age, for he was sixty six years old. Him the Abbot Adrian offred to the Pope to be ordaind Bishop: and obtaind his desire, but upon this condition, that he should be his con|ducter into Brittany, in asmuch as upon severall occasions having made already two iourneys into France, he had both better knowledge of the way, and of mens dispositions in those parts. Another more weighty Motive likewise there was inducing the Pope to oblige the said Abbot to attend Bi|shop Theodore, which was, that he might assist him in preaching Christian Doctrine,  also be watch|full that he should not introduce into the Church of Brittany any Greekish customes or Opinions swerving from the Truth.
5. And from the same consideration, when Theo|dore was to be ordained Subdeacon, he was obliged to expect four monthes till his hair was grown out, to the end he might be shaved after the Roman manner: For formerly he had received the Eastern fashion of Tonsure, called the Tonsure of S. Paul.
61 Thus we see how our Saxon Churches in Brittany received Teachers and Instructors, as well in Faith and Discipline both Ecclesiasticall and Monasticall, the one from Asia, and the other from Africk, both which agreed in Faith with the Roman Church, and conformed to her customes. The progresse of their iour|ney to Brittany, we will next declare,


VI. CHA.VI. CHAP.

1.2. C. S. Theodores iourney from Rome into Brittany: His Companions Benedict Biscop, and Adrian.

A. D. 668. Bed l. 4. c. 1.1. THeodore, saith S. Beda, was ordained Bi|shop by Pope Vitalian in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred sixty eight, on the seaventh day before the Calends of April, being a Sunday: and so attended by Adrian was sent into Brittany on the sixth before the Calends of Iune. They went together by Sea to Marseilles, and from thence by land to Arles, where they presented to the Arch-B. of that Citty, named Iohn, commendatory Letters Written by Pope Vitalian: And were detained by him till Ebroin Maire of the Kings house granted them leave to goe whither they pleased. Which permis|sion being eived, Theodore went to Agilbert Bishop of Paris, of whom we spoke before, and was with great kindnes entertaind by him a good space: But Adrian went to Emmesenon and afterwards to Faro Bishops of Meaux, where he likewise soiourned with them a good while. For the approaching Winter compelled them to repose quietly wheresoever they found convenience.
2. Another companion of their iourney was Benedict Biscop, who fifteen years be|fore went out of Kent to Rome together with Saint Wilfrid: and from thence repaired to the Isle of Lerin, where he associated himself to a Congregation of Monks living there, among whom he received the Tonsure, and abode with them two years in Regular Ob|servance. Afterward he returned into Kent, and was constituted Abbot of the Monaste|ry of Saint Augustin by King Egbert. From thence he returned again to the Monuments of the Apostles in Rome,Malmsbur. d Pontif. l. 4. saith William of Malms+bury, at the time when Pope Vitalian sent Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury into Brit|tany: in whose company he also returned, carying back with him many Relicks of Saints.
3. In the French Martyrologe we read that it was by Pope Vitalians order that Theodore in his passing visited Saint Agilbert Bishop of Pa|ris,Martyrolog. Gall. 11. Octob. with whom he consulted concerning the English affairs well known to that Bishop. From him he received many good admonitions and advices, together with his Nephew Eleutherius for his assistant, who was afterward Bishop of London. And by their labours the whole Island was at last made subiect to our Lord.
4. But the Authour was herein mistaken, when he sayes that Eleutherius Nephew to Saint Agilbert was Bishop of London: For it was the See of Winchester, a long time voyd by the deposition of the impious Bishop Wina, that he now received, and to which his Vncle refused to return, though earnestly invited thither by Kenewalch King of the West Saxons.Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. c. 241. For thus writes William of Malmsbury, Angilbert having been earnestly intreated by Messengers from the King to return, excused himself, for that he was now chaind to reside at Paris, the government of which Church was committed to him. Notwithstanding because he would at least in some measure comply with the Kings expectation, he sent thither his Nephew Leutherius who was received with great affe|ction by the people of that Diocese of Winchester, and consecrated Bishop thereof by the Arch-bishop Theodore: Which Church of the West Saxons he governed seaven years.
6.A. D. 669 Bed. l. 4. c.  But to return to Saint Beda's narra|tion touching the progresse and arrivall into Brittany of the New Arch-bishop Theodore. When certain Newes (saith he) came to King Egbert that the Arch-bishop whom they had

demanded from Pope Vitalian, was come into France,A. D. 669, he sent presently thither Redfrid his Principall Servant to conduct him: Who by per|mission of Ebroin Maire of the Kings house brought him to the Haven called Quentawic where the Bishop infirm and weary with his iour|ney, was compelled to make some stay. But assoon as he began to recover a little strength, he sailed thence into Brittany.
7. As for the Arch-bishops companion, the Abbot Adrian, he was detained in France by Ebroin, who suspected that he had some com|mission from the Emperour to the Kings of Brit|tany, to treat of matters which might be pre|judiciall to the Kingdom of France, the affaires whereof he managed. But when he became sa|tisfied that his suspicion was groundlesse, he dis|missed him and suffred him to follow the Arch-bishop. And immediatly after his arrivall Theo|dore gave him the government of the Monastery of S. Peters in Canterbury, where the Arch-bishops were usually buried: For at his departure from Rome the Pope had enioynd him to provide for the said Abbot some convenient residence in his Diocese, where Adrian, with his Monks at|tending him, might commodiously abide.
8. It was a little before the coming of the Arch-bishop that the forecited Martyr|dom of the two innocent Princes, Ethelred and Ethelbert, hapned, either by the com|mand, or, at least, connivence of King Egbert: which was a great stain to his me|mory, though otherwise a just and pious King. But how he endeavoured by perswa|sion of the Arch-bishop to redeem this fault by serious compunction and signall works of charity, we have already declared.


VII. CHA.VII. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Theodore's care of Religion, and learning in Brittany.

A. D. 669. ed. l. 4. c 2.1. THE Holy Arch-bishop Theodore pre|sently after his arrivall, saith S. Beda, made a progresse through the whole Island, and was gladly received and obediently submitted to by the inhabitants every where: among whom he spread abroad holy Instructions of Christian li|ving, as likewise the Canonicall rite of celebra|ting Easter: In all which labour he was accom|panied and assisted by the Abbot Adrian. He was likewise the first Arch-bishop to whom the whole English Nation voluntarily submitted. And in as much as both himself and the said Abbot were perfectly skilfull both in Divine and Secular litterature, they gathered a numerous Congregation of Disciples, into whose minds they instilled the waters of saving knowledge. Yea moreover they mingled with the Instructions of Christian Doctrin out of Holy Scriptures other Documents likewise of Poetry, Astronomy and Ecclesiasticall Computation. In proof whereof there remained alive to these times severall of then Disciples, who understood the Latin and Greek Tongues as perfectly as their Native language. Thus writes S. Beda.
2. And forasmuch as concerns the Greek tongue,Godwin in Catalog. in Theodor. the said Arch-bishop (saith B. God+win) erected a Schoole for the teaching of it in a village which from thence was called Greek|lade (but now corruptly, Cricklade:) The teachers whereof afterward repairing to Oxford, about twenty miles distant from thence, are supposed to have thereby layed the founda|tions of that most famous Vniversity. Not|withstanding Brian Twine the Antiquary of the said Vniversity will not allow this to have been the prime Originall thereof but earnestly contends that it was a long time before in the times of the Brittains founded by certain Grecian Doctours.
3. The said B. Godwin addes,Idm ibid. that the Arch-bishop and Abbott brought with them from Rome a plentifull store of most choice Books, both Greek and Latin, and among the rest a Homer so accuratly written in such beautifull letters, that it is scarce credible that at this day there should be extant any one Copy even among the most exquisite Prints, either more fair or more perfectly correct then it.
4. So great indeed was the benefitt which this Nation received from the dili|gence, zeale and liberality of these two eminent persons,Bed l. 4. c. 2. that Saint Beda with iust reason affirmed, That there had never been more happy times since the Saxons and En|glish first entred this Island: Such valiant, and withall Christianly pious Kings governed here, that they were a terrour to all bar|barous Nations. Likewise generally their Sub|jects desires were caried to heavenly and eter|nall ioyes, at this time more effectually preached unto them then any time before: And who soever were willing to be instructed in Sacred learning, had Maisters ready the teach them. Moreover they begun now through all to Chur|ches of the English to learn the Roman man|ner of singing in the Church, which before was only practised in Kent. And the first Master of Ecclesiasticall Musick in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, except Iacob heretofore men|tioned, was Eddi, sirnamed Steven, who was invited thither out of Kent by the most Venerable Prelat Wilfrid, who was the first Bishop of the English Nation which taught the Saxon Churches the Catholick manner of li|ving.



VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. Saint Theodore visites all Provin|ces.
3.4. c. He ends the Controversy about the Bishoprick of York between S. Wilfrid and Saint Ceadda, to the advantage of S. Wilfrid.
6. c. S. Ceadda made Bishop of the Mer|cians, at Lichfeild.

1. WHereas S. Beda, as hath been decla|red, testifies,A. D. 669. that the Holy Arch-bishop Theodore made a progresse through all the Provinces of Brittany to reform abuses, determine Controversies, and settle Order and Vniformity every where, in as much as an Vniversall Iurisdiction was committed to him by the Pope. We will here mention some particular Gests of his especially re|corded in our ancient Monuments.
2. In the first place then, saith S. Beda, the Arch-bishop Theodore coming to the Citty of Rhofi (Rochester,Bed. l. 4. c. 2.) which See since the death of the Bishop Damian, remaind Vacant, he there ordaind a man more versed in Ecclesiasticall mat|ters, and content with the former simplicity of living, then exercised in secular businesses: His name was Puta. He was most eminently skilld in the Roman manner of Singing in the Church, which he had learnt from the Disciples of Pope Gregory.
3. From thence he went Northward: and in the Kingdom of the Northumbers conclu|ded a long debate touching the Bishoprick of York, to which there were two pretenders, both venerable and Holy Bishops, S. Wilfrid and S. Ceadda. S. Wilfrid had been first Ele|cted thereto, and was sent by Alfrid King of the Deiri (or Yorkshire) into France to be consecrated by Agilbert Bishop of Paris. But his Father King Oswi, upon what Motive is not declared, appointed Saint Ceadda, then an Abbot among the Northumbers, to be Bishop of York, to which he was conse|crated by the impious and Sacrilegious Wina formerly Bishop of Winchester, and then of London. This controversy the Arch-bishop Theodore determined to the advantage of S. Wilfrid, who returned into Brittany a little before his arrivall,Id. ib. and in Kent, saith Saint Beda, ordained Preists and Deacons, untill the Arch bishop Theodore came to his See.
4. In this Controversy the Sanctity of Saint Ceadda did eminently shine forth, who rea|dily and humbly obeyed the Arch-bishops sentence, and willingly rendred both his See and Episcopall dignity to S. Wilfrid. This is thus related by the same S. Beda:Id. ibid. When the Arch-bishop, saith he, charged S. Ceadda that he had not been duly consecrated Bishop, he with an humble voyce answered,If you are sure that I have not entred into this Bishoprick aright, I willingly depart from the Office: for truly I ne|ver judged my self worthy of it, but it was simply out of Obedience that I, though unworthy thereof, undertook it, being thereto commanded.
The Arch-bishop hearing the humility of his answer, said, that it was not requisite he should quitt the Episcopall dignity: and therefore he again perfected his Consecration after the Catholick manner. Now what Errour had been com|mitted in his former Consecration is not de|clared by any of our Writers: For though his Ordainer, Wina, were indeed an unwortly Bi|shop, impious and Sacrilegious; and though he had been consecrated to a Church not va|cant; this might be a sufficient cause to oblige him to relinquish that See, but nei|ther of these could invalidate his Consecra|tion.
5. Now it hapned at the same time very commodiously that Iarumanus Bishop of the Mercians dying, King Wulfere requested the Arch+bishop to appoint a Bishop over his Province.Id. ib. The Arch-bishop would not ordain there a New Bi|shop, but desired King Oswi that Ceadda might be given them for their Bishop, who at that time lived quietly in his Monastery at Lestinghe. Thus S. Ceadda undertook the Bishoprick of the Nation of the Mercians and likewise of the Lindesfari, which he according to the examples of the ancient Fathers administred with great diligence and perfection of life. Thus writes the same Saint Beda. From whose words misunderstood Iohn Stow erroneously collects that S. Ceadda was Bishop both of the Mercians, and of Lin|desfarn also: whereas the Lindesfari in that passage are the inhabitants of Lincolnshire, among whom not long before the Christian Faith having been spread, they had a Bishop of their own, seated at Sidnacester, an an|cient Citty whereof at this day no traces re|main.
6. S. Ceadda now a second time Bishop, did not for all that relinquish his Monasticall manner of living, but according to the an|cient custome joynd it with the Episcopall. And for that purpose (saith S. Beda) King Wulfere gave unto him a possession of fifty fami|lies for building a Monastery in a place called Etbearn,Bed. l. 4. c. 3. that is, At the wood, in the Province of Lindissi (or Linconshire) where to this day the Observances of a Regular life instituted by him doe still remain. The Authour of Saint Ceadda's life in Capgrave calls this place Brawe, the situation whereof is now un|known.
7. But his Episcopall See was at Lichfeild: concerning which the same Authour thus writes,Id. ib. He had the See of his Bishoprick at a place called Licidfeld, where he also dyed and was bu|ried, and where his Successours have still remaind. Moreover he built for himself a mansion not far from the Church, whither he was wont to retire with seaven or eight Monkes that he might in

solitude attend to prayer and reading,A. D. 672. as oft as the solicitudes of his Episcopall Office would permitt.
8. The same King Wulfere finished likewise the Monastery begun by his Brother in the year of Grace six hundred fifty six, which he consecrated to S. Peter, commanding it to be called Peterborough, and enriched it with great possessions,Cden in Critan. appointing the first Abbot of the same in the year six hundrod sixty nine a very pious man (saith Camden) called Sexwulf, by whose perswasion principally it was built. And he addes, That the said Monastery flourished with great opinion of Sanctity the space of two hundred and fourteen years, till the most calamitous times when the Danes layd all places, especially Sacred, wast. For then the Monks were murdred, and the Monastery lay buried in its own rubbish, a hun|dred and nine years. This Sexwulf had former|ly lived an Eremiticall life in the Island called Thorney, where he built an Oratory, which by the liberality of King Edgar, became a Noble Monastery, in the year of Grace nine hun|dred sixty nine, as we shall then declare.
9. As touching the said Bishop Ceadda, he was industrious in preaching, assi|duous in prayer, unwearied in labours, and always conversant with God. And whereas, saith Saint Beda,Bed. l. 4. c. 3. it was the usuall custom of that most Reverend Bishop in preaching the Gospell through his Diocese for the most part to goe on foot from place to place, the Arch-bishop Theodore enioyned him that when he was to goe to any place a good way distant, he should ride: the good Bishop was very un|willing, so great was his aversion from ease in the work of God. Yet in the end the Arch-bishop even compelled him thereto, and with his own hands lifted him on horse back: For he saw that he was a very holy man, c.


IX. CHA.IX. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Holy and most happy death of S. Ceadda.

1. BEcause we will not interrupt the Nar|ration touching this Holy Bishop Ceadda, we will here adioyn the relation of his hap|py death shortly ensuing, suitable to his pious life, which is thus at large recorded by S. Beda:d. l. 4 c. 3.2. After he had governed the Church of the Mercians most gloriously the space of two years and a half, the time by divine dispensation ap|proached, concerning which Ecelesiastes writeth, There is a time to scatter, and a time to gather stones: For a destroying sicknes was sent from heaven by which many living stones of Gods Church were translated from earth to the heaven|ly building. And hereby not a few belonging to the Church of this most Reverend Prelate having been taken out of the world, the hour of his pas|sage likewise to our Lord drew near. It hapned then on a certain day that himself accompanied only with one Monk,A. D. 673. named Owin, abode in the forementioned Mansion: all the rest upon some occasion being returned to the Church. The said Owin was a Monk of great merit, who out of a pure intention for a heavenly reward had for|saken the world: and indeed he was in all re|spects a person esteemed by our Lord worthy to receive Divine revelations, and worthy also of beleife when he discovered them to any. He had formerly come into that Province from the Region of the East-Angles with Queen Edil|dride, being the cheif Officer of her family. Not long after his arrivall, the fervour of his Faith encreasing, he resolved to leave the world which resolution he exeuted diligently, insomuch as relinquishing all his possessions, and contenting himself with a simple habit, and taking in his hands onely an axe to cutt wood, he went to the Monastery of the same most Venerable Prelat, called Lestinghen: For he did not, as some have done, retire to a Monastery to live idlely there, but to labour diligently, as he gave good proof by his conversation: for the lesse proper he was to spend much time in Meditation, the more did he addict himself to manuall labour.
3. This man therefore having for his zeale and devotion been selected to abide with the Bishop in the said Mansion, commonly when the rest were busied within-dores in reading, he was abroad bu|sy about some externall work for the common be|nefit. Now on a certain day as he was thus employ|ed, while the rest of the Monks, as hath been said, were returned to the Church, and the Bishop in his Oratory reading or praying, he said that on a sud|den he heard most melodious voyces of many per|sons singing and reioycing, which descended from heaven to the earth. These voyces he heard at first as from the South-east quarter, which by little and little approached to him, till they came to the roof of the mansion where the Bishop was, into which they entred, and filled it all about. He therefore attending solicitously to this Musick, about an hour after he heard the same voyces  songs of Ioy with unexpressible sweetnes ascending from the top of the house by the same way to hea|ven again. After which remaining astonished a good space, and wondring what this should be, the Bishop opened the window of his Oratory, and ac|cording to his custom made a noyse with his hand, which was to give notice that if any were with|out, they should come to him.Hereupon the Monk hastily entred: to whom the Bishop said, Goe pre|sently to the Church, and bidd those seaven bre|thren to come immediatly hither, and come thou with them.
When they were all come, he first ad|monished them to observe Charity and peace both among themselves, and with all others: and like|wise diligently to follow the Instituts of Regular Discipline, which they had learnt both from his tongue and practise, or had found in the instru|ctions and actions of their precedent Fathers. Hereto he added, that the day of his death was near at hand:For, said he, that bles|sed and amiable Guest who was wont to visit our Brethren, did mee the grace to come

this day to mee,A. D. 666 and summoned mee to depart out of this world to our Lord. Therefore goe to the Church, and desire the rest of our Brethren to com|mend my departure to our Lord: and let them be mindfull to prevent also their own deaths, the hour of which is uncertain, with watchongs, pra|yers and good works.
4. After he had spoken these and other words to the same purpose, and that they having recei|ved his Benediction were returned full of sorrow, the Monk who had heard the celestiall Musick went to the Bishop: and prostrating himself to the ground before him, said, Venerable Father, may it be permitted mee to ask you a question? The Bishop answered. Ask freely whatsoever thou wilt. Then said he, I beseech you tell mee, What meant that ioyfull song which I heard sung by many with great ioy, who came from heaven to this Oratory, and after a while returned back to heaven again? The Bishop replyed, If thou hast indeed heard that Musick, and perceived the heavenly company which came hither, I command thee in the Name of our Lord, that thou acquaint none with it before my death. The truth is they were Angells and celestiall Spirits which came to call mee to receive those heavenly rewards which I always loved and desired: and they have promised mee to return seaven dayes hence, and conduct mee with them to heaven.
And indeed, thus it came to passe, as he had foretold. For pre|sently after a languishing infirmity came upon him which dayly encreased, and on the seaventh day, as had been promised him, after he had armd himself against death by receiving devoutly the Body and blood of our Lord, his soule was freed from the prison of his body, and, as we may piously beleive, accompanied by Angells to celestiall ioyes:Sup. l. Of whose glory S. Egbert was a witnes, as we have already shewed in his Gests re|lated by the same Authour.
Bed. vbi sup.5. It is no wonder if he entertained with ioy the day of his death, saith the same Authour, since through the whole course of his life his cheif soli|citude was to prepare himself for it, insomuch as when any great wind or thunder hapned, he would presently lay aside all other busines in hand and prostrating himself on his face, pour forth his soule to God in prayer. For, as he told his Disciples, the reason why God sends forth those voyces of terrour is, to imprint his fear in mens minds: and make them mindfull of those storms and tempests which shall be raised in the last dayes before the Generall Iudgment. This S. Beda relates from the testimony of a Religious Monk called Trum|bert his Master in Divine learning, who had been a Disciple of this Holy Bishop.
Idem ibid.6. Now S. Ceadda dyed on the sixth day before the Nones of March, and was first buried near the Church of our Blessed Lady: But afterwards a mag|nificent Church having been built to the honour of the Prince of the Apostles, his Sacred bones were translated thither. And in both places, for a proof of his Sanctity frequent miracles and cures were wrought.
Idem ibid.7. The place where he was buried, was covered with a woodden tomb, built in the form of a little house, having a window in the wall, through which such as in devotion came thither, were accustomed to putt in their hand, and take thence some part of the dust: Which they mingled with water, and gave to be tasted to sick men, or cattell also, by which their infirmities were presently taken away.
8. We may with more assurance relate these Miracles, because even the Lutheran Centuriators of Magdeburg acknowledge their beleif of them:Magdebur. cent. 7. f. 534. For thus they write, Ceadda the Brother of Ced succeeded Iarumannus in the Bishoprick of the Mercians. He received from King Wulfere his Episcopal See in a town of Lindissi, called Lichfeild, and governed the Chur|ches of the Midland-English and Lindesfarians. After his death he was renouned for Miracles, insomuch as a man who was frantick, and slept only at his tomb, was restored to health, and others afflicted with any manner of diseases, by tasting the dust of his monument, were perfectly cured.
9. His Memory was with great devotion celebrated in all succeeding ages, insomuch as the Cathedrall Church of his Bishoprick being raised with greater magnificence took its appellation from him. This came to passe in the dayes of King Edward the second,Godvvin. in Catal. in Gul. Lang+ton. at which time, saith B. Godwin, Walter Langton Bishop of that See of Lichfeild bestowed two thou|sand pounds to enrich the Chest which contained the Body of his Predecessour S. Ceadda, or Chad: and likewise encompassed the precincts of the Church with a wall and ditch: adding thereto two gates, one very magnificently built toward the west, and a lesser one to the East.
10. To conclude this Narration, we must not omitt one late memorable example of a wonderfull iudgment of God against the professed Enemies of his Saints. In the be|ginning of the late rebellious warr, a warr undertaken as much against Gods departed Saints,Lord Brook. as living Governours, one of the most zealous Leaders of a Sacrilegious faction con|ducting his Army to this Citty of Lichfeild, with an intention to break into the Inclosure of S. Ceadda's Church, fortified by a Royal par|ty, whilst compleatly armed he pulled up the visour of his helmet that he might better view how to place his Ordinance against the wall, was mortally wounded in the eye, being the only part of his body exposed to danger, by a bullet short at random: Thus he perished in the heat of his fury whilst he as|saulted the Church of S. Ceadda, and upon the very Feast day of S. Ceadda.
11. In the place of S. Ceadda the Arch-bi|shop Theodore ordained Bishop of that See, a good and modest man, saith S. Beda, named Win|frid, or Wilfrid: who was Deacon to his Predeces|sour, and at that time lived in the Monastery of Athburn. Of whom we shall speak more hereafter.



A. D. 670.
X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. The death of severall Saints: Of King Oswi: Of Abbot Boisilus: Of Oswin a Monk: of Diman and Adammannus.

A. D. 670. Bed. l. 4. c. 5.1. IN the six hundred and seaventieth year of our Lords Incarnation (saith S. Beda) which was the second year after the coming of Theodore into Brittany, Oswi King of the Northumbers in the fifty eighth year of his age fell sick of an infirmity of which he dyed. At the same time he was so affectionatly desirous to receive more perfect Instruction in Religion from the Aposto|lick See of Rome, that he was determined in case he had recovered of that disease, to goe thither, and end his days at the Sacred places of the Apostles: for which purpose he had desired the Holy Arch-bishop Wilfrid to be his guide in that journey, for which he designed him a great summe of money. He dyed the fifteenth day be|fore the Calends of March, and left his Son Egfrid heyr of the Kingdom. He was buried in the Monastery of Strenshalch, to which he had long before consecrated his daughter Edel|fleda from her first infancy,Vid. sup. l. as hath been declared.
2. That he dyed in general opinion of Sanctity,Martyr. Ag. 15. Febr. appears in that his Name is read among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the fiteenth of February. And William of Malms|bury recounts how his body together with the bodies of many other Saints was remo|ved three hundred years after his death: For thus he writes,Malmsbur. de Pontif. f. 271. At Streneshalt in the Quire of Religious Wirgins there, famous for being the Monument of many holy Bishops and glorious Princes, (it is now called Whitby) by the devout industry of certain persons, their sacred ashes al|most lost in oblivion were discovered to the light: and of late there were found and translated to a more honourable place the Bodies of severall Saints: as Bishop Trumwin, King Oswi and his daughter Elfleda, who was Abbesse of the same Monastery after S. Hilda.
3. Besides King Oswi, severall other En|glish Saints are recorded to have dyed the same year.Marty. Ang. 25. Ianuar. Among whom our Martyrologe mentions the Holy Abbot Boisilus, who go|verned the Monastery of Mailrose, and there gave the Habit and Tonsure to S. Cuthbert. He was famous for the gift of Prophecy, and after he had spent many years there as Monk, and afterward Abbot,Bed. in vit. S Cuthbert cap. 22. was at last called and conducted to heaven by Angells.S. Beda stiles him a man of sublime Vertues,  relates how S. Cuthbert was vont to say of him, I have known very many who have far excelled mee in purity of heart and sublimity of Prophe|ticall Grace. Among whom was the Venerable servant of Christ Boisilus, whose name is to be mentioned with all honour by mee, in as much as in his old age he gave mee, then a young man, my education in the Monastery of Mailrose: at which time he prophetically foretold all things which were to befall mee. And among all his pre|dictions there remains now onely one, which I de|sire may never be fulfilld.
This he spoke, because the said Servant of our Lord had declared to him that he should be exalted to the degree and Office of a Bishop: Which charge he trembled to under|goe, being much affected to a retired contempla|tive life. His successour in the government of the said Monastery was the same S. Cuthbert.
4 The same year likewise dyed a certain holy Monk in the Monastery of Lestinghen, called Oswin, a man eminent for his absti|nence and Prayer. He was descended from Brittish Ancestours, but spent his life among the Scotts and English: wfiich is an argument that the Brittains, Scotts and Saxons were united in the same Faith.
5 In the same Martyrologe are recorded also the names of S. Diman on the nine|teenth of Iuly,Martyr Ang 19. Iul. Ib. 2 Nov. and S. Adamannus Abbot of the Monastery of Hye on the second of No|vember, this same year. Whose gests I leave to the Scottish Writers.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHA.

1. Many pious Kings and Bishops.
2. King Kenwalch his Liberality to Gla|stonbury
3.4 Of Brithwald Abbot of Glaston|bury.

1. THE English-Saxon Church at this time flourished wonderfully under seve|rall Kings eminent in Sanctity,A. D. 670. and munisi|cent in advancing the service of God by building Churches and Monasteries: such were Egbert in Kent, Sebb at London, Kenwalch in the West, Wulfer among the Mercians, and Oswi among the Northumbrians. And at the same time the piety of these Kings was much ad|vanced by the zeale of many holy Bishops industrious in propagating the true Faith and Ecclesiasticall Discipline: Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Wilfrid in the Province of the Northumbers, Ceadda in that of the Mercians: To whom we may adde Putta Bi|shop of Rochester and Lentherius (or Eleuthe|therius Nephew of S. Agilbert Bishop of Pa|ris) who accompanied Theodore into Brittany, and at the desire of King Kenwalch was this year consecrated by the same Theodore, Bi|shop of the West-Saxons.
4. Among the fruits this year gathered out of this fertile ground we may reckon the Donation of King Kenwalch to the Monastery of Glastonbury mentioned in the Great Char|ter of King Ina dated the year of Grace sea|ven hundred twenty five, in which among others we read this passage: To the Ancient

Church seated in the place called Glasteie,A. D. 671. I grant out of my paternall possessions for the main|taining Regular Observance and use of the Monks,Ap. Vsser. f. 112. ten hydes of land at Brente, c. together with all the lands conferred by my Ancestors on the same Church, as King Kenwalch, who by the intercession of S. Theodore Arch-bishop, gave to the same Church Ferlinguere, Beokerie, Gode|neie, Martinsie, and Edresie. But this, though stiled a Donation, seems rather for the most part to have been a Restitution of Lands an|ciently given to that famous Monastery by former Brittish Princes.
3. At this time the Abbot of Glastonbury was Brithwald, who was the first of the Saxon race who governed that Monastery, for before this all the Abbots were Brittains. So writes William of Malmsbury in his Anti|quities of this place:Ap. Vsser. f. 110. There succeeded at Gla|stonbury, saith he, very many Abbots of the Brittish Nation, whose names, gests and me|mory have been oblitterated by antiquity. Yet that the Church it self was held in great ve|neration by the Nobles of the Brittains ap|pears by this, that many of their Bodies have been enterred there, c. But after that two hundred sixty seaven years from the time of Saint Patrick were run out, during the raign of Kenwalch the Son of Kinegilse, who was also called enwall, the first Abbot of the English Nation who governed that Monastery was Brithwald.
4. This Brithwald was Son to a Brother of the King of the Mercians: and according to the familiar devotion of that age renoun|ced all secular pretentions, and retired from the world to consecrate himsel to the service of God in solitude: to which he was so affected, that he again retired from that Monastery much frequented, to another more obscure, called Raculf or Reculver, although both the King and Bishop of the Diocese, saith the same Authour, did ear|nestly oppose it. But Almighty God for the good of his Church crossed his design,Id. ibid. for the New Monastery chosen for his retreat being seated near Canterbury, a person so illustrious for his birth, being son to a Brother of King Ethelred, and so famous for his religion and piety, could not long lye hid, but after the death of the Arch-bishop Theodore, was elected and even compelled to succeed him in that See. Of him we shall treat further in due place.


XII. CHAP.XII. CHA.

1. 2. c. Of the building of the Monaste|ry of Abindon by Cissa, and his Ne|phew HEANE.
6. Cylla the Sister of Heane builds a Mo|nastery of Virgins at Helnestow: Of her Black Crosse.

1. A Certain Authour called Iohn in his Golden History cited by the R F. Cle|ment Rayner in his Apostolate of the Benedi|ctins, affirms, that at this time the Monaste|ry of Abindon was built by a certain Saxon Prince, called Cissa. Which if it be true, as indeed it seems most probable, it will inva|lidate the authority of the Brittish Records which pretend that this Monastery was built and flourished exceedingly in the ancient times of the Brittains, and that there was a famous Schoole of learning, in which Con|stantin is sayd to have been taught in his younger yeares, as we have related in the occurrents of the year of Grace three hun|ered and nine
2. Concerning this famous Monastery we read in the History anciently written of it,Vid. Monast. 57. that when Hengist the Saxon perfidiously murdred at a Feast four hundred and sixty Noble Brittains, a son of one of the said Ne|blemen, named Aben, with much adoe esca+ping retired himself into a wood on  mountain nor far distant from Oxford South|ward, where he lived a long time among wild beasts sustained only with hearbes and rootes: and wanting water, he by hi Prayers obtained a spring, remaining to this day. And the people of the countrey obser|ving his Sanctity, frequently visited him for instruction in Christian Piety But he thirst|ing after solitude, privately went into Ireland, where he happily ended his dayes. The mountain was from him called Aben|dun: on which was built a Cell and a Chap|pell consecrated to the blessed Virgin Mary.
3. In such state the place continued till this time, in which a Monastery was built there by the liberality of the forementio|ned Cissa a Prince of the West-Saxons, under whose dominion was Wiltshire and a great part of Barkshire: And the occasion of that foundation was this: Cissa had a Nephew cal|led Heane, a man of great piety, who ha|ving heard from a certain Preacher a sermon on those words of our Saviour, That it is easier for a Camell to goe through the eye of a Needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, presently conceived a contempt of earthly riches, and a resolu|tion to aspire only to heavenly Beatitude.Thereupon coming to his Vncle Cissa he

begged of him a place for erecting a Mo|nasty: Which he willingly gave him, ma|king choice of this Mountain called Aben|dun.
4. There therefore Heane began to build: but with very ill successe: For whatsoever ws raised in the day fell down in the night: and this hapned successively very oft. At which Heane being much troubled, there came to him a certain Hermite who lived in a Wood called Comenor, and told him, saying Father Heane this last night I saw certain men with carts carying away the stones and timber from thi place: And I sayd to them, You doe very ill in taking away these materialls provided for the honour of God and our Blessed Lady. But they answerd mee. We know that very well: Therefore to morrow goe and tell Heane the Ab|bot that it is not Gods will he should proceed in this building: But let him goe to a town called Sevekesham, there he shall find the place mar|ked where he shall build. Heane went thither with the Hermite: and they found there near the Thames a large square Trench, made as on purpose to lay the Foundation.
5. There therefore the Monastery was built, and the name of Sevekesham changed into Abendon. The Habits of the Monks were black: but they wore no stamines. They had noods lined with Catts skins. They lived separated in Cells and to each Cell belonged an Oratory: but on Sundayes and Feasts they mett in the Church at Masse, and dined toge|ther: And then they used Silken Cowles. They abstained from flesh, except in great sicknes c. For the endowment o this Monaste|ry Cissa gave many Lordships, and Heane, the greatest part of his inheritnce.
6. Heane had also a Sister named Cylla, or Cyssa, who with the consent or her Vncle Cissa employed all her possessions in ere|cting a Monastery of Religious Virgins at a place called Henestow seated near the River Thames: so called because there a Chappell
had been built to the Honour of S. Helen
There a Congregation being assembled of many devout Virgins, she became their Ab|besse. And having obtained, or rather proba|bly found in the old Chappell, a small portion of one of the Nayles of our Lords Crosse she caused it to be inserted nto a large Crosse of Iron: with command that when she was dead it should be layd on her breast and buried with her: And out of Reverence there|to, she made her Moastery to be conse|crated to the honour o the Holy Crosse and of S. Helena. Concerning this Crosse called the Black Cross how it was afterwards found by S. Ethelwold,  held in great Veneration, we shall declare further in due place. This Monastery was afterward translated to Witte|ham: and warres following, the Religious Vir|gins were dispersed, and what became of them, is not known, for they never re|turned thither.


XIII. CHAP.A. D. 672.
XIII. CH.

1.2 c. Egfrid King of the Northumbers. His Victory over Wulfere King of the Mercians.
5. His Liberality to the Monastery of Rip|pon.
6 7. Two Miracles wrought by Saint Wil|frid.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred sea|venty one Egfrid succeeded his Father King Oswi in the Kingdom o the Northum|bers: for though his Brother Alefrid King of the Deiri was elder, yet he being then on some occasion absent in Ireland, Egfrid was admitted to the Throne, into the society whereof he piously received his Brother Elsuin.
2. He was in the beginning of his raign disquietted on both sides, on the North by the incursions of the Picts, and on the south by the Mercians: but by his valour and good conduct, assisted also by the Prayers of Saint Wilfrid to whom he was most munificent, he not only secured his Province from danger, but triumphed gloriously over his Ene|mies.
3. As touching the Picts,Malmsbur de Pont. f. l. 3. William of Malms|bury relates, how upon the death of King Oswi a Warlick Prince, they despising the unsetled state of his Son Egfrid made furious incursions into his kingdom: but the young King together with his Generall Berney mett them, and with a very small army defeated an innumerable multitude of Picts, insomuch as heaps of their dead bodies lying on the groand, made that which formerly was a plain become a hilly countrey, and the Ri|vers b multitudes of carkeises were inercepted in their course.
4. And presently after Wulfere King of the Mercians lead an army against the Northum|bers, enraged with the memory of his Father Penda, who had been slain by them. He came therefore with a confidence, at least to recover the former dammage, if nt to acquire a New Kingdom. But his fortune was unprosperous as his Fathers had been: onely whereas King Penda had lost his life in the Battail his Son Wolfer was compelled to a shamefull flight, which he survi|ved but a few dayes, and part of his Provinces became subject to the King of the Northumbers, to witt, the greatest part of Lincolnshire.
5. King Egfrid expressed his thankfullnes to God for these victories by liberall endow+ments of his Church. Particularly his bounty was extended to the Church and Monastery of Rippon founded by S. Wilfrid, on which he besto+wed large possessions, saith William of Malms|bury:Id ib.
And when the said Holy Bishop was to

consecrate that Church, he invited both King Egfrid and his Brother King Elswin to the Cere|mony, where they were entertained magnificently three days, and highly exalted for their piety and munificence. Which externall pompe and gladnes was encreased by a wonderfull miracle which God wrought by S. Wilfrid, in restoring a dead child to life. The manner whereof, be|cause from thence we may observe the agreement between the Brittish and Saxon Churches in Faith and Ecclesiasticall Discipline, particularly in their zeale and devotion to the Sacrament of Confirmation, of which the Brittains also were very desirous (as hath been declared) I will here set down in the words of the same Authour, with whom likewise Mathew of Westminster agrees in the relation.
Malmsb. de Pnt l 3. f 61. Wstmost. ad A.D. 78.6. When the Bishop entred into a village called Tidafrey (or according to Mathew of Westmin|ster, Tundanfre) there mett him a great multitude of Women, offring their children to be confirmed by him. Amongst them one woman mingled her self, cratiy carrying in her armes her dead child, pretending that he should be catechised, but in|wardly perswaded that by the Bishops Sanctity he should be restored to life. The holy Bishop there|fore uncovering the chids face to the end he might perform the due Rites, found that he was dead. Then the woman perceiving that her fraud did not succeed, betook her self to prayers, earnestly beseeching him for God and his holy Mothers sake, if he had any Faith or pitty to restore life to her child Saying this she cast her self at his feet, and would not be removed, thus offring an importu|nate violence toward him. All this while the Bi|shop continued doubtfull, whether he should seem rash in attempting the Miracle, or reject the tears and prayers of the disconsolate woman. But a charitable pitty at last gott the Victory: there|fore after he had with a low voyce repeated cer|tain devout passages out of the Psalms, he layd his right hand on the dead body, whereupon imme|diatly the soule was restored: for by gasping, moving his eye-lids and stirring his whole body, he gave proof that he was alive. The mother for ioy began to cry out, but was restraind by the Bishop. The child was called Ehlwald, who was afterward a Monk at Rippon, remaining there a Monument of the Bishops Sanctity.
Malmsbur. ib.7. The same Authour further relates another Miracle wrought by the same Bishop upon a Monk who falling from the topp of the Church whilst it was building at the costs of the same King Egbert, broke all his bones and tore a sunder almost all his members, and was restored to health by the prayers of the Holy Bishop and his Convent.
A. D. 672.8. It was in the year following that King Egfrid at last gave way to the importunate prayers of his Virgin Wife Saint Ediltrudis to retire into a Monastery at Coldingham under the government of S. Ebba, Aunt to King Egfrid, and Sister to S. Oswald and Oswi Kings of the Northumbers: as before hath been de|clared at large.


XIV. CHAP.A. D. 673.
XIV. CH.

1. Lothere succeedes his Brother Egbert in the Kingdom of Kent.
2. 3 c. A Nationall Synod assembled by Arch-bishop Theodore at Hertford. The Acts of the sayd Synod.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred seaventy three (saith S. Beda) Egbert King of Kent dyed in the ninth year of his raign,A. D. 673. Be l. 4. c 5. and though he left behind him two sons, Edric and Wigtred, yet whether it was by Egberts example who succeeded his Brother to the prejudice of his Nephews, or that the infancy of these two young Princes made them esteemd uncapable of governing, he was succeeded by his Brother Lothere, who raigned eleaven years and seaven monthes, and then was deprived both of his Kingdom and life by his Nephew Edric.
2. In the same year Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury,Idem ibid. having a pious intention to compose and introduce an uniformity in Faith and Discipline among all the Saxon Churches of Brittany, convoked a Synod of the Bishops of both Provinces. Such an Vni|versal authority in this Island had been either conferred, or confirmed to him by Pope Vitalian at the first entrance of the said Arch-bishop into Brittany, as appears by his letters dated to him in the year of Grace six hundred sixty nine, which Letters are recor|ded by William of Malmsbury,Malmsbur. de Pont l. 1. f. 209. and in them we read this passage: It hath seemd good to us to exhort thee and at this present to commend to thy wisedom and piety all the Churches situa|ted in the Isle of Brittany. Whatsoever Priviledges and Ordinances therefore have been established and ratified by our Predecessour Saint Gregory to Augustin his Legate (Sincello) or allowed by the Sacred use of the Archiepiscopall Pall, we grant unto thee for ever, c.
3. By vertue of this authority therefore was this Synod assembled by the Arch bishop Theodore: The place where it was celebrated is by the same S. Beda stiled Herudford, mista|kingly interpreted by B. Parker and B. Godwin to be Hereford in the Province of the Silures, and by others to have been Thetford among the Iceni.Camden in Hanford. Camden therefore in his Descri|ption of the Cattieuchlani rightly names the place of this Synod, Hertford, the true name whereof is Herudford, and it signifies the Red sord.
4. We will here from S. Beda sett down a Copy of the Acts of this Synod, compiled by the said Arch-bishop himself according to this tenour:Bed. l. 4. c. 5. In the Name of our Lord God and Saviour Iesus-Christ, the same Iesus Christ

raigning for ever and governing his Church, It was by us iudged fitt that wee should meet toge|ther according to the manner prescribed by the Venerable Canons, and treat touching matters necessary for the Church. Wee assembled there|fore together on the four and twentieth day of September, on the first Indiction, in a place called Herudford. The persons meeting were these: I Theodore appointed, though unworthy, by the See Apostolick Bishop of the Church of Canterbury: and my fellow Bishop and most Re|verend Brother Bisi, Bishop of the East-Angles: Likewise our Brother and fellow Bishop Wilfrid, Bishop of the Nation of the Northumbers, was by his Delegates assistent to us: There were perso|nally present also our Brethren and fellow Bi|shops, Putta Bishop of the Castle of the Cantua|rians called Rochester; Leutherius Bishop of the West-Saxons; and Winfrid Bishop of the Province of the Mercians. (Harpsfeild adds, that besides these Bishops,Hpsf. sac. 7. c. 3. there was present at this Synod Egfrid King of the Northumbers.)
5. When we were all mett together, and every one had taken his seat according to his order, I thus spoke to them;I beseech you my beloved Brethren, by the fear and love of our Redeemer that  may all unanimously advise and deter|mine sincerely to keep and observe all the De|crees and definitions touching our Holy Faith which have been made by the Holy and Orthodoxe Fathers.
These and severall other speeches regarding the conservation of Charity and Vnity of the Church, I prosecuted to them: and having concluded, I asked them one by one in order Whether they did consent that those things which had been Canonically decreed by the Fathers should be inviolably observed.Hereto all our Fellow-bishops answered saying, It pleases us all very well, that whatsoever has been defind by the Canons of the Holy Fathers should be chearfully and willingly observed by us all.
Hereupon I presently produced to them the same Book of Canons, in which I had especially noted in severall places ten Chapters, which I read unto them, because I conceived them very necessary for us, and I desired that those Chapters might with a more particular di|ligence and care be observed.
6. The first Chapter was, That we should all uniformly keep the Holy Feast of Easter on the Sunday following the fourteenth day of the first  Month (of March.) The Second, That No Bishop should usurp or invade the Diocese of ano|ther, but content himself with governing the  people entrusted to his Charge. The third, That it should not be lawfull for any Bishop to disquiet any way the Monasteries in his Diocese consecra|ted to God, nor violently take from them any  thing belonging to them. The fourth. That Monks should not be permitted to goe from Monastery to Monastery, except by dismission of their own Abbot: but remain in that Obedience which they promised as the time of their Conversion and  Profession. The fifth, That no Ecclesiasticall per|son shall leave his own Bishop and wander abroad, nor be entertaind by any other Bishop without the commendatory Letters of his own Prelat. But in case such on one shall be received by any, and shall refuse being summoned, to return, both he who receives him, and is so received, shall be lyable to Excommunication. The sixth, That Bishops and Preists travelling out of their own  precincts, be contented with such hospitality as shall be given them: and that it shall be unlaw|full for them to exercise any Sacerdotall Office, without the permission of the Bishop in whose Diocese they are known to be. The Seaventh, That a Synod shall be assembled twice every year. Notwithstanding because there may be divers impediments hereof, It was thought fitt by them all, that such a Synod should meet every year once the first day of August, at a place called Clofes|hooh. The Eighth, That no Bishop shall ambi|tiously  preferr himself before another: but that all take place according to the order and antiquity of their consecration. The Ninth Chapter con|taind a common debate, that since the number  of Christians was augmented, therefore also more Bishops should be ordained. But of this for the present we concluded nothing. The Tenth regar|ded Mariages, That no mariages should be allowd  but such as were according to the Canons: That incest should be strictly forbidden: That none should forsake his own wife, except for the cause of fornication, as the Gospell teacheth. And in case any one shall so reiect his own wife lawfully ioynd to him, such an one if he will shew himself a true Christian, must not ioyn himself to another: but remain so, or be reconciled to his own wife.
7. After wee had in common treated and de|find these Chapters, or Canons, it was thought good, to the end that no scandalous contention should heeafter arise, and to prevent the publi|shing false Transcripts of them, that they should be confirmd by every Bishops Subscription. And this Resolution of the Synod I dictated to the No|tary Titillus, who wrote it down. This was done in the Month and Indiction before mentiond. Who|soever therefore shall any wayes endeavour to in|fringe these our Definitions conformable to the Decrees of ancient Canons, confirmed by our una|nimous Subscriptions, Let such an one know that he is separated from our Communion and from the Exercise of all Sacerdotall Offices. May the divine Grace preserve us in safety living in the Vnity of Gods Holy Church.
8. These were the Acts of this Synod, as they are recorded by S. Beda who subioyns these words,Id. ib. This Synod was celebrated in the year six hundred seaventy three from our Lord Incarnation, in which year Egbert King of the Can|tuarians had dyed in the month of Iuly: to who his Brother Lothere succeeded in the kingdom which he held eleaven years and seaven Monthes.



XV. CHA.XV. CHAP.

1. 2. 3. The Province of the East-angles divided into two Dioceses, Dumwich and Elham.
4. 5 c. The Gests of S. Editha Virgin and Martyr.

1. WHereas in the ninth Canon of the forementioned Synod it had been treated, but not fully concluded, at least not putt in execution, that the number of Bi|shops and Episcopal Sees should be encreased, presently after by the care and authority of the Arch-bishop Theodore the Church of the East-angles hitherto governed by one Bishop, was divided into two Dioceses.
2. This is thus particularly related, together with the occasion of it by S. Beda: Bisi Bishop of the East-angles (saith he) who is said to have been present in the forementioned Synod,Id. ib. was the Successour of Boniface, of whom we spoke before. He was a man of great Sanctity and Religion. For Boniface dying after he had administred that Bi|shoprick seaventeen years, Bisi was by the Arch|bishop Theodore ordained Bishop in his place. Who though being yet alive, but by a greivous infirmi|ty rendred incapable to execute his Episcopall function, there were in his room elected and con|secrated two Bishops, Aecca and Beadwine: (the Episcopall See of Aecca being placed at Dumwich, and that of Beadwine at North-Elmham:) And from that time to this the said Province has been administred by two Bishops.
3. These were the two Prelats mentioned in the life of Ositha Queen and Martyr: Whose gests therefore are unduly referred to the year of Grace six hundred fifty three by Al|beric the Writer of her life; in which errour he is followd by Haraeus in his Martyrolo|ge, c.
4. S. Ositha was daughter of a Mercian Prince named Frithwald and of Wilteburga daughter of Penda King of the Mercians. She had her education in vertue and piety in a certain Monastery governed by the Holy Abbesse Mo|venna: Out of which she was afterward re|called by her parents, and notwithstanding she had in resolution of mind consecrated her Virginity to God, yet by their authority she became wise to Sighere Companion of S. Sebb in the Kingdom of the East-angles:Baron. ad A. D. 653. And following the example of S. Ediltrudis Queen of the Northumbers, she preferred the love of her heavenly Bridegroom before the Embra|ces of a King. With which devotion of hers her husband likewise piously complied, and moreover not only permitted her to conse|crate her self to our Lord,Haraeus in Martyrolog. 7. Octob. but bestowd on her a village situated near the Sea called Chic, where building a Monastery she enclosed her self: And after she had spent some time in the service of God, it hapned that a Troop of Danish Pirats lan+ded there. Who going out of their ships wasted and burnt the countrey there about, using all manner of cruelty against the Christian inhabitants. Then he who was the Captain of that impious band, having learne the condition and Religious Life of the Blessed Virgin S. Ositha, began by entreaties and presents to tempt her to Idolatry, adding with|all threats of scourging and other torments, if she refused to adore the Gods which he worshipped. But the Holy Virgin despising his flatteries, and not fearing his threats, made small account of the torments attending her. Whereupon the said Cap|ptain enraged at her constancy and scorn of his Idols, pronounced sentence of death against her commanding her to lay down her head to be cutt off. And in the same place where the Holy Vir|gin suffred Martyrdom a clear fountain broke forth, which cured severall kinds of diseases. Now her parents having heard of her death, earnestly desired, as some recompence for their losse, to enioy the comfort of burying with them her heaules body. Which being brought to them, they enterre it it a coffin of lead in the Church of Aylesbury, where many Miracles were wrought by her inter|cession. At length her Sacred Relicks  a Di|vine Vision were translated thence back again to the Church of Chic, which Maurice Bishop of London reposed in a precious coffer  at whic time the Bishop of Rochester then present was cu|red of a greivous infirmity.
5. Her memory is celebrated in our Mar|tyrologe on the seaventh of October,Mart. Ang. 7. Oct. 6. where al|so is mention how the said holy Virgin Ma|tyr took up her head after it was separated from her Body: Which the Authour of her Life in Capgrave thus more expressly relates: Assoon as her head was off,Casgrav. in S. Ositha. the body presently rose up, and taking up the head in the hands, by the conduct of Angells walked firmly the straight way to the Church of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul about a quarter of a mile distant from the place of her suffring: and when it was come there, it knocked at the dore with the bloody hands, as desiring it might be opened, and theron left marks of blood. Having done this it fell there down to the ground.
6. The Sanctity of Ositha (called by William of Malmsbury, Osgitha) has quite extinguished the name anciently belonging to the Village where she lived;Camden. in. Essex. For thus writes Camden, In the place where the River Coln enters into the Sea is seated the little Town called S. Osith's, the ancient Name wherof was Chic, which Name this Royal Virgin Ositha has abolished, Who living there in great Sanctity and devotion was slain by Danish Pirats, and therefore acknowledged by our Ancestors, a Saint and Martyr.



A. D. 674.
XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

1. 2. King Kenewalch dying, leaves the Kingdom to his wife Sexburga.
3. S. Egelwin Brother to King Kenewalch.
4 5. Sexburga retiring into a Monastery, Escuin succeeds in the Kingdom, with Kentuin. Their liberality to the Mona|stery of Malmsbury: as likewise of Leu|therius Bishop.
6. 7. Warr between Escuin and Wolfer King of the Mercians.
8. The death of Wolfere.

1. IN the year of Christ six hundred seaven|ty four hapned the death of Kenewalch King of the West-Saxons,A. D. 674. after a raign of thirty and one years. Who leaving no issue behind him, he bequeathed the administration of the Kingdom to his wise Sexburga, saith  liam of Malmsbury.Malmsbur. . Reg. l. 1. c. 2. And adds withall, That she wanted not spirit and courage to exercise so great a charge: insomuch as she gathered new for|ces, and kept the old in their duty: She governed her Subiects with clemency, and kept her ene|mies in awe with threats. In a word she beha|ved her self in all things so worthily, that no man could discerne any difference in her govern|ment from that it was in her husband time, but only that she was a woman. Notwithstanding her Rule was but short, for before she had fully spent a year, death-surprised her in the midst of her magnanimous designs.
2. This Character given her by William of Malmsbury is more proper  receiveable then that which Mathew of Westminster writes, That the Nobility of that Kingdom disdaining to be sub+iect to a womans government,Westminst.  A. D. 674. expelled her out of the Province. Other Historians say, That out of a desire of entring into a more holy and strict life she voluntarily quitted the Royalty,Spd. Heligs head and for devotions sake entred into a Monastery. But they doe wrongfully ascribe to her the founding of a Monastery in the Isle of Shepey, where she is sayd to have taken the Habit of Religion, and afterward to have succeded S. Edrifride in the Abbey of Ely: For these things belong to another Sexburga daughter of Anna King of the East-angles, of whom wee treated be|fore.
3. Though K Kenwalch had no sons yet he had a Brother eminent for Sanctity, named Egelwin, concerning whom William of Malmsbury thus writes,Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 2. f. 155. The Monks of Adeling exalt to the skies the praises of their Patron S. Egelwin, the effects of whose Sanctity they perceive by many benefits which they receive by his intercession. The consta~t fame is that he was Brother of K. Kenewalch,  that he was more illustrious for his Sanctity then emine~cy of descent. He was all his life afflicted with sicknes, yet that hindred not at all his service and deotion to God He ended his life most happily, and after his death readily assisted the necessities of all that reclamed his help and intercession.A. D. 675.
4. After Sexburga's death,Bed l 4 c. 12. A. D. 675. saith S. Beda, two Princes of that nation took on them the govern|ment, and held it divided between them the space of about ten years: These were Escuin and Kent|win, both of them of the Royal family: Kentwin was Brother (Huntingdon says he was son) to King Kenwalch; and Escuin was descended in the fourth degree from Cerduic.Huntingd. l 2 Some Writers affirm that they did not ioyntly raign: But that Escuin first managed the government: and after two years dying left it to Kentwin, who raigned after him nine years.
5. They were both of them Catholick de|vout Princes, as appears by the magnificent Structure of the Monastery of Malmsbury, built this year at their charges by the procure|ment of S. Aldelm, who had now been nine years a Monk and four years Abbot of the same.Malmsbur. d. Reg l. 1. c. 2. It was at first, as hath bee~ said, poorly built by a certain Scott named Maydulf, by profession a Monk, and by erudition a Philosopher (from whom the place took its name:) But till this time the revenues of it were so scant, that the Monks had great difficulty to provide themselves necessary sustenance, saith William a Monk of the same place. But now that by the sugge|stion of S. Aldelm those two Princes endowd it with possessions,Id. ib. and adornd it with buil|dings, the affairs and reputation of that Mona|stery encreased wonderfully: from all quarters Re|ligious men flocked thither to S. Aldelm, some of them desiring from him instructions in a de|vout Life, others in the knowledge of learning.
5. Moreover Leutherius Bishop of the West-Saxons contributed his care to the esta|blishing of this Monastery,d. ib. as appears by a Charter of his extant in William of Malmsbury, in which upon the Petition of the Abbot of this Diocese he grants the said place to the Monks there living, to be entirely possessed by them. Which argues that heretofore they enioyd it only by courtesy. This Charter is dated the eighth day before the Calends of September, in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred seaventy five, at a place neer the River Bladon: Where saith Camden,Camdn in Wiltshre. in ancient times Dumwalio Mal|mutius King of the Brittains built a handsom town, and called it Caer-Bladon: which having been destroyed in the Saxon warrs, they built out of the rubbish of it a Castle, which in their tongue they named Ingelborn; a mile distant from which the Saxon Princes had a Palace called Caer-Dur|burg, now Broken-bridge. The said place kept the name of Ingelborn till Maidulf the Scottish Monk retired thither, from whom it took the name of Madulfs-burg, and contractedly Malmsbury: some Writers call it Meldun. Among the Disci|ples of Maidulf the most famous was Aldelm, who succeeded him, and by the help of the Bishop Eleutherius, to whom the Seat belonged, built there a very fair Monastery, of which himself was Abbot: and from him some Writers have calld the place Aldelms-birig: but that Name was quickly obliterated: though his Memory be conti|nued

there by a much frequented Faire yearly kept on his Feast.
Malmsbu. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.6 The said West-Saxon Kings, Escuin and Kentwin, as they were in their Faith Orthodoxe, and in their Charity magnifice~t, so were they likewise in defence of their Kingdom cou|rageous: For saith the same Authour, Escuin in a battell gave a great overthrow to the Mer|cians, and Kentwin in another to the Brittains. The Controversy which Escuin had with
Wulfere King of the Mercians was touching the limits of their kingdoms, to decide which they were forced to come to a com|bat, in which notwithstanding, Huntingdon rather ascribes the victory to Wulfere. How|ever certain it is that neither of these two Kings survived their Victory or defeat many days: for Wulfere dyed the same year, and Escuin in the following.
Wgom ad . l. 675. Spelm. f. 193. amden. in Ocvan.7. The place where this battell was fought is by Florentius called Bindanheafl: and in a Manuscript cited by Sir Henry Spel|man, Bedanead: Probably it was the same Town in Devonshire which is now called
Bediford, of some esteem, saith, Camden, for the numerousnes of its inhabitants, and a stone|bridge of arched work.
8. The foresaid Florentius mentioning the death of Wulfere (called by some Authours
Fulgere) gives him this Elogy,Wigorn. ubi sup. In the year of Christ six hundred seaventy five dyed Wulfere King of the Mercians, after he had raigned seaventeen years. He was the first King of that Province who embraced the Christian Faith, and received the Sacrament of Regeneration. He utterly rooted out of his whole Kingdom the Pa|gan Worship of Devills, commanding the name of Christ to be preached every where. He built many Churches,Bed. in Epist. c. At his death, saith Saint Beda, he left his Brother Edilred, or Ethelred, his Successour in his Kingdom.


XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of S Wereburga daughter to King Wolfere: her Gests, Miracles, death, and uncorruption of her body.

1. THE Memory of King Wulfere recei|ved a great luster from the wonder|full Sanctity of his daughter Saint Wereburga,A. D. 675.
born unto him,Id. ibid. saith the same Authour, by his Queen Ermengilda who was the daughter of Er|combert King of Kent and his Queen S. Sexbur|ga, daughter of Anna King of the East-Angles, and Sister to the glorious Virgin and Queen Saint Ethelreda.
2. S. Wereburga from her infancy was by her pious Mother Ermenilda educated in the fear and love of God, and in a contempt of worldly vanities: so that from her tender years she entertained a desire to consecratt her whole life to our Lord in a state of Reli|gion and Virginity. Her great beauty and en|dowments of Nature rendred her desireable to others: but the greater beauty of her mind enriched with Divine Grace disposed her to reserve her affections for him only who was beautifull beyond the Sons of men. Du|ring her Fathers life she was not permitted to aspire to the Espousals of her heavenly Bride|groom. But assoon as he was dead, she, ac|companied with her Mother Erminilda, be|took her self to the lately founded Mona|stery of Ely, where she undertook a Reli|gious Profession.
3. This is thus more expressly related by Harpsfeild:Harpsf. sae. 7. c. 23. Saint Wereburga (saith he) being de|scended from most Noble Parents would not be affianced to any but the most Noble Bride|groom, and therefore gave up her imma|culate body and chast soule to the spirituall embraces of our Lord. These glorious Espousalls, to which the Church and heavenly Angells were witnesses, were publickly celebrated in the Mona|stery of Religious Virgins at Ely, of which her Mothers Sister the illustrious S. Ethelreda was Abbesse: there this devout Virgin received the Sacred Veyle of Religion. And from that time her only diligence and solicitude was employed in avoyding all things that might displease the eyes of her Heavenly Bridegroom, for whose love she despised gold, iewells, rich attire and all other vanities admired by the world All her thoughts were busied in this one thing, how she might excell her Religious Sisters in observing silence, absti|nence, watching, devout reading and Prayers. Which holy design having compassed, insomuch as she was as far exalted above them in these and all other Vertues, as in the Noblenes of her de|scent, yet the thought so meanly of her self, and was so free from arrogance and pride, that she shewd her self always ready and willing to obey them all, and chearfully underwent the vilest Of|fices: among which a charitable care of the poor and needy, to whom she was a pious and tender Mother, took the principall place. In a word, through the whole course of her life her conver|sation was such as shewd, that though according to humane condition her body moved on the earth, yet her mind was always fix'd in heaven.
4. How long this Holy Virgin lived in the Monastery of Ely under the government of S, Ediltrudis does not distinctly appear. Certain it is that her death is unduly in our Martyro|loge referd to this present year: for from our most ancient authentick Records it is unque|stionable that she survived her Mother S. Er|minilda, who became Abbesse of the same Monastery after S. Sexburga, who succeeded S. Ediltrudis dying the year of Grace six hun|dred seauenty nine. However in as much as her Gests are not interwoven with the general History, we will here adioyn the remainder of her Acts recorded by Mathew of Westminster, Florentius, c.
5. Her Brother Ethelred, who succeeded his Father Wolfere in the kingdom of the Mer|cians, admiring his Sisters Sanctity, and un|willing that his Province should be deprived

of so illustrious a light, recalled her from Ely into her native countrey, where she with difficulty was persuaded to accept the government of three Monasteries of Religious Virgins, Trickingham, since called Trent in Staffordshire,Ap. Capgrav. in . Were|borga. Wedun and Hamburg in Northamp|onshire: which she governed with such meek|nes, that she seemd rather their servant, then Mi|stresse, directing them more by her example then command.
6. And no wonder she should find obe|dience from her devout Daughters, when as even irrationall and wild creatures became subiect to her command, as if by her San|ctity she had recovered that empire which man enioyd in his primitive Innocence. I should forbeare relating an illustrious mi|racle to this purpose touching her banishing from her territory great flocks of Wild-geese for their importunity and wastfull devou|ing her corn and other fruits, were it not that I find it related by ancient credible Au|thours, and not concealed also by Prote|stants.
7. Camden makes mention of it as done at Wedun,Malmsbur. de Ptis. l. 4. Ap. Capgrav. 1. Were|burgd. thogh other Writers affirm that it hapned at Chester, where she is said to have lived severall years. The manner of it was as followeth: There was near the walls of the Town a farm belonging to the Monastery, the corn wherof was much wasted by flocks of Wild-geese, which the Steward of the place endea|voured, but in in vane, to chase away: Of which incommodity he made complaint to the Holy Vir|gin.Whereupon she commanded him, saying, Goe our ways and shutt them all up in a house. He won|dring at so strange a command, thought the Saint spoke those words in east.
But when she renewd the same iniunction constantly and in a serious man|ner, he returned among the corn, where seeing great numbers of such fowle devouring the grain, he with a loud voyce commanded them in his Mi|stresses name to follow him. Hereupon immediatly they all in one drove followd him, and were shutt up together in a house. Now it hapned that a certain servant privatly stole one of the said birds, which he hidd, with intention to eat it. The next morning early the Holy Virgin went to the house, where after she had in a chiding manner repre|hended the birds for usurping that which belon|ged not to them, she commanded them to flye away and not return. Immediatly the whole army of them took wing; but being sensible of the in|iury done them, they flew not away, but hovering over the Holy Virgins head, with wonderfull noyse made complaint of their losse. She hearing their importunat clamours, understood by inspiration the cause therof: and after search made, the offen|der confessed his theft: Whereupon she commanded the bird to be restored to her companions: after which they all with one consent flew away, so as not any bird of that kind was afterward seen in that territory.
8. Thus writes the Authour of the Virgins Life in Capgrave, more simply and credibly then William of Malmsbury, who affirms that the stoln bird was killd, and again restored to life by the Saint. As for Camden, succinctly mentioning this miracle, he covertly insi|nuates his unwillinge~s to beleive it: for thus he writes,Camd. in Northamp. The Miracles of Wereburga in driving away Wild-geese are ambitiously related by cre|dulous Writers: Implying that he had not faith enough to assent thereto. Notwithstanding recounting the very like Miracle formerly by S. Hilda he is far from professing any di|strust of it,Id. ib. p. 585. alia's. 645. For, saith he, those Wild-geese whensoe|ver they fly over the territory anciently belonging to S. Hilda, doe suddenly fall to the ground, to the great admiration of beholders. This I should have forborn to relate, had I not received it from the testimonies of very many persons of good credit. And this is ascribed to the Sanctity of S. Hilda. So that it seems the beleif of such Writers is an act,Harpsf. saec 7. .c. 36. not of reason, but of will or humour. Now the said territory saith Harpsfeild, con|tains the circuit of about twelve miles.
9. Wee will now passe to the death of the Holy Virgin. Assoon as she perceived that Almighty God calld her to receive the re|ward of her piety,Ap. Capgrav. in . Wer|burg. she gave a strict command to her Religious Sisters, that in what place soever she departed this life, her body should presently be caried to the Monastery of Hanbury, and there buried: Which Monastery is situated in the Province of Cambridge, neer the Isle of Ely. So that it seems her desire was to rest where she had learnt the first rudiments of her Sanctity. But notwithstanding her com|mand, the devout Virgins of Trickingham, where she dyed on the third day before the Nones of February, out of excessive affection and reverence to their beloved Mother ne|glected her command, and not only refused to deliver the sacred treasure to the inhabi|tants of Hanbury, who iustly demanded it, but by all ways endeavoured to secure their own possession of it. But in vain: for no hu|man care or force could resist the Holy Virgins Will. The foresaid Authour in Capgrave thus relates the matter full of wonder:Id. ib. The body of S. Werburga, saith he, was caried to the Church of Trickingham, where it was most diligently kept, the dores of the Church being carefully barred, and a watch moreover sett upon it. But one night a deep sleep suddenly seised on those which watch|ed: and at the same time great multitudes of the inhabitants of Hambury coming on them, all the dores of the Monastery became opened, the locks and barre without any viole~ce offred, falling to the ground. Whereupon they tooke away the body, not any one resisting, and with great ioy ca|ried it to Hanbury, where it was honourably bu|ried. In which place sick persons recover health, sight is restored to the blind, hearing to the dumb, the leaprous are cleansed, and persons oppressed with severall other diseases, doe there praise God for their recovery.
10. Nine years after her Sacred Body had been thus removed to Hanbury (or Eanbirig) it was found entire and untainted, as a cer|tain proofe of the purity and integrity of

her soule, and so it remaind the space of fifty years, till the time when the Pagan Danes with horrible cruelty wasted most of the Provinces of Brittany: For then it was removed to Chester, anciently called Civitas Legionum. There a certain Count named Leofric a little before the Norman Conquest founded a Monastery of Religious Virgins, which was afterward en|larged by Hugo Lupus Earle of Chester in the year of Grace one thousand ninety two, and dedicated to the honour of Saint Were|burga: For the setling and ordering of which Monastery Saint Anselm, afterward Arch-bishop of Canterbury: was first invited into England.Martyrolog. Angl. 3. Febr. The Commemoration of this Holy Virgin is in our Martyrologe instituted on the third of February.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests, Miracles and death of S. Milburga.

A. D. 676. Baron. hc.1. AT this time the Saxon Churches in Brittany flourished like the Paradise of our Lord, saith Baronius: For they were plen|tifully adorned with Lillies of pure Virginity, with violets of Religious Monks, not so con|spicuous, because growing in more humble places. They abounded likewise with most Holy Bishops: Among which Saint Erconwald was most illu|strious for his Sanctity. He might have ad|ded Saint Theodore in Kent, Saint Leutherius among the West-Saxons, and Saint Wilfrid among the Northumbers. And to these he might have adioyned severall pious Prin|ces, as Sebb King of the East-angles, and Ethelred of the Mercians, both which laying aside their Crown and Purple took on them the humble Habits of Monks, as shal be shewed here after, and have deser|ved a place among Saints in our Martyrologe.
2. Among the Lillies which adorned this Paradise none were in this age more illu|strious then the three daughters of Mer|wald who this year began to raign over the Mercians together with his Brother Ethel|red; Their names were Saint Milburga the eldest, Saint Mildreda the second, and Saint Milgitha (or as some Authours call her, Saint Milwida) the youngest. These three were born to him by Saint Ermen|burga, or Saint Domneva, daughter to Ead|bald King of Kent, and Sister to the two forementioned Martyrs Saint Ethelred and
Saint Ethelbert. She was appointed Ab|besse of the Monastery of Menstrey in the Isle of Thanet, built by King Egbert in expia|tion for the murder of those two innocent Princes, as hath been declared.
3. The life of her eldest daughter Saint Milburga, hath been diligently written by severall Authours.A. D. 676 Harps saec 7. c. 23. We will here content our selves with transcribing what Harps|feild relates concerning her, as followeth: There concurred, to the affording a prerogative of honour to Saint Milburga among other Holy Virgins, and particularly the children of King Merwald, not only the splendour of a Royall descent from the Kings of Kent and Mercia, but her Primogeniture also. But these priviledges, though, admired in the world, were so far from exalting her mind, that prevented with Divine Love, by which she aspired to God only and ce|lestiall things, she generously despised them, fixing all her thoughts and desires in this one design, how she might remove all such impedi|ments hindring her from consecrating her whole life to Divine Meditations and Contempla|tion. For the effecting of which glorious design she made a ioyfull enchange of splendid Palaces for a Monastery, of Royall Purple for sack-cloath, of a Princely Diadem for a Religious veyle, and of all pretensions to the highest Earthly Espou|salls, for Christ her heavenly Bridegroom.
4. She therefore founded a Monastery of Re|ligious Virgins at Wenlock a town in Shropshire, over whom she was consecrated Abbesse by Theo|dore Arch-bishop of Canterbury. This Mona|stery was afterward endowd with ample possessions by her Father and Vncle, Merwald and Wolfere Kings of the Mercians, and adorned with great Priviledges and many precious Relicks of Saints. So that the said place represented a New Pa|radise, considering the heavenly Society living there of Virgins wholly employed in divine things, especially of Saint Milburga a worthy Mother of so holy an Offspring, among whom there was a devout emulation and contention in promoting the Zealous care of Humility, Chastity, and all other offices of Piety.
5. Milburga having thas made a wonderfull progresse in all kinds of vertues, and desiring no|thing but her heavenly Spouse, and his Divine presence, when her age and strength began to de|cline, her beloved Saviour called her to him, after she had been purified with dayly feavers. In her last Sicknes therefore she called together her holy Community, which she commended in her prayers to God, and desired them after her death to make choice of a pious and fitting Supe|riour. She exhorted them likewise to Vnity and Purenes of heart, oft repeasting, Blessed are the pea|ceable for they shall be called the children of God, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God Having added other like admonitio~s,  religiously armed her self against Death by the Holy Sacra|ments of the Church, she departed happily on the seaventh day before the Calends of March to her eternall Bridegroom, to raign for ever with him for whose love she despised all things on the earth. And for a testimony of her present happines, God was pleased after many ages to discover her Sa|cred Body to the knowledge and veneration of pious Christians, in the year of Grace eleaven hun|dred and one, during the raign of King Henry the first.
6. Concerning the invention of her

Body William of Malmsbury thus writes, Saint Milburga rests at Wenlock:Malnib. de Reg. In ancient times her memory was celebrated by the inha|bitants, but after the coming in of the Normans by reason that the place of her Sepulcher was unknown, she became forgotten but of late a Convent of Cluny-Monks having been establi|shed there whilst they were busy in erecting the fabrick of a New Church, a certain child running earnestly over the pavement, the vault of her Sepulcher broke under him, by which means the Body of the Holy Virgin was discovered. Which being taken up, a most odo|riferous vapour, as of a most precious Balsam, perfumed the whole Church: And such a World of Miracles were wrought by her inter|cession, that Wonderfull multitudes flockd thi|ther, both rich and poore, insomuch as there was scarce room in the open feilds to receive them, so strong a faith they had to find remedy there for their maladies. Neither did they fayle of their expectation, for none de|parted away without a cure, or at least a mitigation of their diseses. And particularly the Kings-Evill; incurable by Physicians, was through the merits of the Holy Virgin, healed perfectly in severall persons.
7. Hence it came to passe that the fame of her Sanctity could not be confined within the bounds of Brittany: For in the Roman Martyrologe her Memory is ce|lebrated among the Saints on the three and twentieth of February,artyr. Rom. 3 Febr. where she is stiled the daughter of the King of the Mercians, to witt, of Merwald Brother of Ethelbert, and his companion in the Rule.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of Saint Mildreda, and Saint Milgitha Sisters to Saint Milburga
9. And of their Brother Saint Me|resin.

A. D. 67.1. WE will next adioyn to Saint Mil|burga her equally Holy Sister Saint Mildreda, who in her tender infancy was by her Mother Saint Ermenburga sent into France, to be educated and instructed in the Monastery of Cala (now called Chelles) nea Paris, that so Divine Love might first take possession o her soule. There, as we read in the Legend of her Life in Capgrave,p. Capgrav.  S. Mildred
she excelled all the other Virgins her companions in humility and other vertues.
2. During her younger years, her beauty and other Graces rendred her the Oblect of the impure desires of severall persons, which she constantly and courageously resisted, passing untouched through the flames of lustfull tentations. Whence some Writers of following ages, from an unwary mi|stake, have related that she was cast into a fiery furnace, because whilst she live there in a secular Habit, she utterly re|fused the Mariage of a person of great Qua|lity: and by Divine assistance was preser|ved from burning But neither William of Malmsbury, nor any of our Ancient Records mention this Miracle: Therefore we wil|lingly abstain from adorning that illu|strious Virgin with borrowed and false or suspected colours.
3. Assoon as King Egbert had finished the Monastery in the Isle of Thanet for expiation of the Murder of the two forementioned Princes, Saint Mildreda was recalled out of France; and by Saint Theodore Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury consecrated Abbesse there over seaventy Religious Virgins:Ibid. among whom she behaved her self rather as a servant then a Mistresse; desiring more to be loved then feared by them: and by continuall watching, fasting and prayers spent her life in the service of God.
4. After a like rehearsall of her vertuesHarpsf. saec. 7. c. 10.
Harpsfeild addes, That she having severa years with great Sanctity administred the Office of Abbesse, at last by sicknes was confined to her bed: when causing all her Religious Virgin to be assembled, she gave them many Instructions full of piety, above all earnestly exhorting them to conserve among themselves mutuall charity and Humility. After which she happily depar|ted to our Lord on the third day before the Ide of Iuly: and was both durng her life and after her death powerfull in Miracles.
5. Her Body was with great honour en|terred in the said Monastery of Menstrey: where it reposed near four hundred years, illustrious by the Veneration of pious Chri|stians, and the glory of frequent Miracles. From thence about the year of Grace one thousand and thirty it was translated to Can|terbury, Alstan being Abbot there as shall be declared Concerning which Translation William of Malmsbury thus writes,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 2. c. 1. In following time the Sacred Body of Saint Mildred was tran|slated to the Monastery of Saint Augustin in Canterbury; where it is with great devotion ve|nerated by the Monks, and for the fame of her piety and sweetnes, answerable to her Name, honoured by all. And although all the corners of the said Monastery are full of Saint Bodies, eminent for their Sanctity and Merits, insomuch as any one of them might suffise to give a luster to the whole Kingdom, yet the Relicks of none are with more affectionate honour venerated, then hers. She is present to all that love her, and ready to hear and fullfill the requests of every one, c. At London likewise there remains to this day a Church dedicated to her ho|nour.
6.Mir. in Fast. Belg. 13. Iulij. Moreover her Memory is celebrated in the Belgick Provinces. For as Aubert Miraeus testifies, part of her Relicks was transported

to Daventry, and reposed there in the Ca|thedral Church. Mention is also made of the same Relicks in the Gallican Martyrologe,Martyrolog. Galli 1. Iulij. on the thirteenth of Iuly, in these words. At Daventry in Belgium is the Veneration of the Relicks of S. Mildreda an English Virgin, consecrated to God in the Monastery of Chelles in the Territory of Paris, which are reposed in the Cathedral Church of S. Lebuin, together with the Bodies of the same Saint Lebuin, and also of S. Marcellinus. Her departure out of the world have given luster to this day. Saint Mildreda was conveniently associated to these two Saints, Lebuin and Marcellinus, for her agree|ment with them both in her faith and countrey: For they were English-Saxons like|wise, who together with Saint Willebrord preached the Faith to the inhabitants of Friseland and Geldres: of whom we shal treat hereafter.
7. The determinate year of the death of these two Holy Virgins Saint Milburga, and Saint Mildreda, is uncertain: Cer|tain only it is that it is wrongfully ascri|bed by some Writers to the year of Grace six hundred sixty four. For since the same Authours affirm that they were con|secrated by Saint Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who came not into Brittany till after that year, it is evident that in their computation there is an Antichro|nism.
8. We may therefore more commo|diously ascribe it to this year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred seaventy six: In which year on the six and twentieth of February, our Martyrologe commemo|rates the Deposition of their youngest Si|ster Saint Milgitha (or, Saint Milwida.) Concerning whom a very shhort account is given by our ancient Authours: For of her wee read only that she en|tred into the Monastery of Estrey, built by the Penitent King Egbert in Kent, where she so well imitated the Sanctity of her Si|sters, that she likewise deserved a place in the Catalogue of our Saints.
6. From these we must not separate a young Brother of theirs, called Merein:Westmon  A. D. 676. Wigorn. A. D. 675. Con|cerning whom Mathew of Westminster and Florentius testify this only, that he was a child of eminent Sanctity.


XX. CHAP.XX. CHA.

1. 2. c. The death and Miracles of Saint Ethelburga daughter of Anna King of the East angles.
5. 6 Of S. Thoritgitha.
7. Of S. Hildelida.

1. TO the same year is referred likewise the death of Saint Ethelburga daughter to Anna the pious King of the East-angles, and Sister to Saint Erconwald. She was, as hath been said, Abbesse of the Monastery of Berking, founded by her Brother.
Marty g Angl. 10 ct. . l. 45.9.2. Concerning her death, hapning the fifth day before the Ides of October, thus writes Saint Beda: When Edilburga the pro Mother of that devo Congregation was to be taken out of the world, a wonderfull vision ap|peared to one of the Religious Sisters named Theorethid, who had lived many years in the Monastery, serving our ord with all humility and sincerity, and had been an assistant to the Holy Abbesse in promoting the observance of Regular Disciplin, her charge being to instruct and correct the younger Sisters. Moreover to the end that her spirituall strength might be perfe|cted by infirmity, as the Apostle saith, she was suddenly assaulted by a most sharp disease, and for the space of nine years greivously tormen|ted with it. This hapned to her by the mer|cifull Providence of her Saviour, to the end that by this furnace of divine tribulation what|soever defects or impurities through ignorance or negligence had insinuated themselves into her soule, might be cleansed away and con|sumed.
3. Now on a certain night towards the dawn of the morning, this Religious Virgin upon some occasion going out of her chamber, saw ma|nifestly, as it were, a human body more bright then the Sun, enwrapped in linnen, which being transported out of the Dormitory of the Religious Virgins, was caried up to heaven. And whilst she observed diligently by what force the said body should be raised upwards, she saw that it was so lifted up by certain ropes, more resplendent then gold, by which it was drawn higher and higher, till at last the heavens opening, it was received in, after which she could see it no longer.
4. Considering this Vision, she did not at all doubt, but that it imported that some one of that devout Congregation should short|ly dye, whose soule by good works formerly done, should as by certains cords be raised up to heaven. And indeed so it fell out: For a few days after Saint Edilburga the devout Mother of the said Congregation was freed from the prison of her body who had

lead her life in such perfection that none who knew her could doubt, but when she left this world the entrance into her heavenly countrey would be opened to her.
5. S. Ethelburga was buried in the same Monastery, and after her death likewise was not wanting to procure comforts and bles|sings to her Religious Sisters. For as the same S. Beda relates,Ide Ibid. There was in the same Monastery a Devout Virgin of Noble descent, but more en|nobled by her Piety called Thorithgida who for many years had been so utterly deprived of the use of her limbs, that she could not stirr any one of them. She being informed that the Body of the Venerable Abbesse was caried to the Church, where it was exposed some time before the buriall, desired she might be transported thither, and placed leaning toward it in the posture of one that prayes. This being done, she addressed her peti|tion to her, as if she had been alive, beseeching her to obtain from her mercifull Creatour that she might at length be freed from her so tedious and bitter torments. And within a short time her prayers, were heard, for the twelfth day after, she was delivered from her corruptible body, and made an exchange of her temporall afflictions for eter|nall happines, and rest.
6. We will hereto from the same Authour add another Testimonial of the same Holy Virgins Sanctity, hapning three years after in her Monastery of Barking.Ide Ibid. When the foremen|tioned Hand-mayd of our Lord Thorithgd had con|tinued yet three years in the body after the de|cease of her Mistresse, she was so wholly consumed with her foresaid infirmity, that there remaind scarce any flesh to cover her bones. And at last when the time of her dissolution approached, she lost all use and motion not only of her limbs, but her tongue also.In this state after she had continued three days and as many nights, she was on a sudden revived with a spiritual vision, insomuch as she opened both her eyes and lipps also, and looking up stedfastly to heaven, she began thus to speak to a person, who, it seems, appeared to her, Your presence is most wellcom to mee.
Having said this, she held her peace a little while, as expecting the answer of the said person.And again with some shew of passion, she added, If this may not be, yet I beseech you let not the space in the mean time be long. Then remaining silent awhile, she conclu|ded, If this decree can by no means be altered, yet I pray you let the delay not be beyond this fol|lowing night.Having spoken this, she was askd by her companions assisting her, who it was with whom she talkd? With my most dear Mother Edilburga, said she.
From whence they under|stood that the Saint was come to signify to her that the ower of her departure was at hand: For according to her request, after one day and night had passed, she was freed from the chain both of her infirmity and body, and was rewarded with eternal ioyes. No wonder therefore that this devout Virgin Thorithgitha is pla|ced among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the three and twentieth of February,Martyrolog. Angl 3. Febr.
in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy eight.A. D. 677.
7. There succeeded her in the government of the Monastery of Barking,Idem ib. c. 10. saith Saint Beda, the devout servant of our Lord Saint Hildelida, who continued many years Abbesse thereof (no lesse then four and twenty) and shewed great diligence, and zeale in maintaining Regular observance and providing all things necessary for her Community. This is the same Saint Hil|delida to whom Saint Aldelm, fourteen years after this, inscribed his Book entitled of Virginity, and between whom passed severall Letters yet extant: Of whom we shall treat further hereafter.


XXI. CAAP.XXI. CH.

1. The death of Escuin King of the West-Saxons.
2. Of Hedda Bishop of the West-Saxons Successour to S. Leutherius.
3. 4. c. The Rule of S Benedict intro|duced into Glastonbury: when, into other Monasteries, c.

1. EScuin King of the West-Saxons after a short raign of two years dying, Ken|tuin remained sole King of those Provinces. He is by Alcuin named Entuin.A. D. 677.
2. In the beginning of his raign, Leuthe|rius Bishop of the West-Saxons dying, the said King called out of his Monastery a Religious man named Hedda, who according to Saint Beda's testimony,Bed l 5 c. 19 was a good and iust man, and worthily exercised the Episcopal charge in dire|cting and teaching his flock, being enabled thereto rather by the love of piety engrafted in his heart, then by study or learning. Which Character see|ming to import that he was but meanly fur|nished with litterature, does not satisfy Wil|liam of Malmsbury,Mlmsb. de Pont. l. 2. f 241. who professes that he had seen severall Epistles of his which argued the Writer not to have been destitute of learning, as likewise severall Treatises of S. Aldelm directed to him abounding with eloqnce and profound knowledge. He having been a Monk and Abbot administred the said Bishoprick the space of thir|ty years and more: and his Sanctity was testified by many Miracles, c. He was consecrated Bishop in the Citty of London, saith S. Beda, by Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury.
3. Concerning this Holy Bishop, and particularly his solicitude to advance Reli|gious Observance,A Vsser in mod. f. 112. we read this passage qou|ted out of the great Table of Glastonbury by B. Vsher: Bishop Hedda his body to this day reposes under a stone-Pyramid heretofore cu|riously engraven in the upper Church-yard of the Monks. He obtained of King Cantwin to the Old Church a liberty royal in the Isle of Gla|stonbury,

as likewise a free power to the Monks there serving God, of electing and constituting over themselves an Abbot, according to the Rule of S. Benedict.
4. Inas King of the West-Saxons in his great Charter of Priviledges granted to the same Monastery in the year of Grace seaven hundred twenty five, makes mention of this Indult,Antiq. Glast. confirming all former Dona|tions given by his Predecessours or others to that Monastery: particularly that of King Ken|walch, who by the intercession of Theodore Arch|bishop of Canterbury bestowed on it these lands, Ferlingmere, Beokeri, Godney, Martinesey, Edre|sey; likewise of King Kentwin who gave Glastin|gie, and was wont to call the said Monastery the Mother of Saints, ordaining that it should enjoy an immunity from all both Secular and Eccle|siasticall duties, and added withall this Privi|ledge, That the Monks living there should have the power to elect and constitute to themselves a Superiour according to the Rule of S. Benedict: Also of Bishop Hedda, who with the allowance and approbation of Cedwalla, though a Pagan under his own hand, gave Lantocai: of Baldred who gave Pennard containing six hydes of land, of Athelard who gaue Pohelt containing sixty hydes: all whose Donations I doe approve and confirm, c.
5. Here is the first mention of S. Bene|dicts Rule received in the Monastery of Gla|stonbury. How long before this time it had been there embraced, or whether it now entred by the procuring of Bishop Hedda, does not appear. But certain it is that those Writers are mistaken who affirm that before S Dunstan's government of that Monastery the Monks thereof were not professed Disci|ples of S. Benedict. After this time the said Rule and Profession by little and little took place in most other Monasteries, as in the Norin-parts by the diligence of S. Wilfrid, and of S. Benedict, sirnamed Biscop: Yea the Brit|tains also, and Scotts who had received their Religious Instituts from the Irish, began to disuse their ancient Rites, and esteemed it piety to conform themselves to the Rule of S. Benedict. But as for the Monasteries of Canterbury and the whole Province of Kent there is not the least mark afforded in an|cient Story that the Institut of S. Benedict was introduced among them after their coming into Brittany: on the contrary they were Kentish Monks, who were employd in sett|ling the said Institut among the Northum|bers. So that it is demonstrably evident that the Prime Apostles of the Christian Faith among the Saxons professed and brought in the same Rule.
6. Now this Priviledge at this time given to the Monks of Glastonbury of electing their own Abbott, argues that in former ages the constituting of Abbots belonged, not to the Monks, but to the Bishop or the Prince: from whose power and Iurisdiction the Monks could not exempt themselves, without their free devesting themselves of it: which we see here done by King Kentwin and Bishop Hedda: concerning whom we shall speak more hereafter.
7. As for King Kentuin the Memory of his Munificence to the Monastery of Glaston|bury was there gratefully conserved, for this Elogy we read of him in the great Table of that Monastery,Antiq. Glast. ap. Malmsb. In the same place reposes the body of King Ctwin, under a stone-Pyramid in the Church-yard of the Monks. He was the first of the English Kings which granted to the Isle of Glastonbury an Exemption from all Regal Ser|vice: as the Brittish Kings before him had of old time confirmed.
8. To this time is referred the erecting or rather restoring of the prime Church in the Isle of Ely, which was first consecrated to the honour of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, but afterward entitled to S. Ediltrudis (or Ethelreda:) Concerning which Church we read this testimony of B. Godwin:Godvvin. in Catal. Episc. Eens. Ethelbert (saith he) King of Kent by the advice of S. Au|gustin had seaventy years before this time built a Church in that place, to witt, in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and seaven. Which Church through neglect for want of repa|ration falling to ruine, was rebuilt in a more ma|gnificent manner in the year six hundred seaventy seaven by S. Ediltrudis. This she did by the counsel of Wilfrid Arch-bishop of York: but her Brother Aldulfus (or Alnufus) King of the East-Angles furnished the Charges of the work. This Aldul|fus was the Successour of Edilwald in that Kingdom: and if, according to Speed, he was the Son of Ethelherd Brother of Anna, he was not Brother, but cousin german to S. Ediltrudis.


XXII. CHAP.XXII. C.

1.2. c. Kent miserably wasted: Putta Bi|shop of Rochester quitts his See in whose place Quichelm succeeds.

1. AT this time there was a great desola|tion in the Churches and kingdom of Kent, wherby the labours of Saint Theodore were much encreased. Which desolation was caused by a furious invasion of that kingdom the year before by Edilred King of the Mercians. What the provocation or mo|tive of this warr was is not mentioned by ancient Writers: but the effects of it were terrible.
2. S. Beda thus breifly describes it:Bed. l. 4 c. 12. In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred sea|venty six Edilred King of the Mercians brought a furious army into Kent, and layd the whole countrey wast, yea without all regard of Piety or the fear of God profaned and demolished also Churches and Monasteries. Particularly the Gtty

Rhofi (or Rochester) was utterly consumed in hat common calamity. Of that Citty Putta was he Bishop, though absent at the time of its destruction. Lothair was now King of Kent, who fearing the violence and courage of Ed|red, saith Huntingdon,Huntingd. l. 2. made no resistance at all, but auoyded his fight. So that Edil|red passed freely through the whole Province, destroyed the Citty of Rochester, and carted back with him innumerable Spoyles.
3. As for Putta Bishop of Rochester, being a man that loved quietnes and so|litude, he,Bed. vbi sup. according to Saint Beda's re|lation, seing his Church utterly spoyled and wasted, retired to Sexulphus Bishop of the Mer|cians: from whom having received the pos|session of a Church and a small peice of ground adioyning, he there ended his life in peace. He did not at all employ his solicitude about the restoring of his Bishoprick, being one whose industry was little exercised in worldly affaires. Therefore he contented himself in serving God after a poor manner in the fore|said Church: and some times when he was entreated, he would goe to other places for the instruction of Ecclesiasticall persons in the (Roman) manner of singing the Church ser|vice.
Id. ibid.4. The See of Rochester being thus de|prived of a Pastour, the Arch-bishop Theo|dore in the place of Putta consecrated Qui|thelm Bishop of that Citty: and when he also shortly after quitted his Bishoprick by reason of its extreme poverty, the said Arch-bishop substituted in his room another Bishop called Gebmund.


XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2. The death of Vina the Simoniacall Bishop of London.
3 4. c. S. Erconwald succeeds in that See.

1 DVring this confusion in Kent, the Kingdom of the adioyning East-Saxons enioyd a profound peace under the government of Sebb and Sigher two pious Kings. Particularly King Sebb em|ployed all his care in advancing Piety among his Subjects, in promoting the af|faires of the Church, and in encoura|ging devout persons to renounce th world, and consecrate themselves to God in a Monasticall Profession. To which state of life himself also earnestly aspired, being desirous to abandon his Regall au|thority, and to change his purple for a poor Religious Habit, but was hindred by the obstinacy of his Queen, who re|fused to consent to a separation, and to imitate her husbands piety: and without her complyance the Ecclesiasticall Canon rendred him incapable of executing his pious design. Many years he spent in per|swading her to her own and his happi+nes, and at lost by devout importunity expugned her resistance, as shall shortly be shewed.
2. In the mean time a great part of his solicitude was employed in settling a wor|thy Prelut in London, the Metropolis of his Kingdom. We have declared before how Wina the Sacrilegious Bishop of the West-Saxons, having for his crimes been expelled out of that Province, with a summ of money Simoniacally procured from Vul|fere King of the Mercians to be violently introduced into that See in the year of Grace six hundred sixty six: which he for the space of nine years unworthily ad|ministred. After whose death King Sebb expressed a zealous care to repair the prejudice and harm done to that Province by so impious a Prelat. For which pur|pose he earnestly sought out a Successour as eminent for piety and integrity as the other was for his crimes.
3. At that time there lived not any one in that Kingdom in so high esteem of all men for vertue and Religion, as Erconwald. He was as hath been declared, the Son of Anna King of the East-angles (not of Offa, as Capgrave, and from him Harpsfeild mistakes:) and from his tender years con|ceived a distast and contempt of secular designs and pleasures: Insomuch as he re|linquished his Native Province, and reti|red among the East-Saxons, where he em|ployed his plentifull patrimony in works of piety. We have already declared how he founded two Monasteries in that King|dom: one for himself at Chertsey in Surrey, near the River Thames: and another for his Sister Edilburga in Essex, in a village called Barking.
4 This in all regards so eminent an Abbot, Erconwald, was made choice of by King Sebbe to administer the vacant See of London. to which he was consecrated by Saint Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury, according to this relation of Saint Beda:Bed. l. 4 c. 6. At that time, saith he (to witt, in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred sea|venty five) Sebbe and Sighere Kings of the East-Saxons constituted Earconwald Bishop in the Citty of Londen: whose life and conver|sation, both whilst he was Bishop, and before, is reported to have been full of Sanctity, as the Miracles to this day wrought by his in|tercession doe demonstrate: For the horse litter in which during his sicknes he was wont to be caried, and which is preserved by his Dis|ciples, does still continue to cure many persons afflicted with feavers and other infirmities. Neither doth it work this effect only upon such as are placed under it, or leane against it, but likewise chipps sliced from it, and

caried to the sick, doe restore them to health.
Godvvin in in Catal. Episc. Londin.5. We will adioyn hereto the testimony even of B. Godwin likewise: Erconwald, saith he, a man eminent for learning and Sanctity, bestowed his whole Patrimony in erecting and endowing Monasteries. One he founded for himself at Chertsey: and another for Religious Virgins at Barking, over which he appointed his Sister Edilburga Abbesse. He employed wast summs of money in the structure of the Church dedi|cated to S. Paul, the revenews whereof he much encreased, and obtained from the Princes of that age great Priviledges thereto. He addsi, That his Body was layd in a Coffin of great price and buried in the East part of S. Pauls Church, above the high Altar, where it con|tinued till about fourscore years agoe, at which time it disappeared. Concerning this Holy Bishop occasion will offer it self to say more hereafter.




THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. A debate between Saint Wilfrid and Saint Theodore: raised by the co|vetous Queen of the Northumbers: Saint Wilfrids Appeal, and banish|ment.

1. _IN the year of Grace six hun|dred seaventy eight Pope Do|nus dying,A. D. 678. Pope Agathon suc|ceeded him in the Chair Aposto|lick, whom we shall have occasion frequent|ly to mention by reason of a great contro|versy this year begun in Brittany between the two Supreme Prelats of this Island, S. Wil|frid Arch-bishop of York, and S. Theodore of Canterbury, which lasted many years, some|times composed by the said Popes authority, and again breaking forth, to the great di|sturbance of the peace of our Saxon Churches, though it pleased the Divine goodnes by oc|casion thereof to enlarge his Church by the happy cnversion of severall Nations both within and out of Brittany.
2. A breif account of this dissention, foresignified by a prodigious Comet appea|ring the same year,Bed. l. 3. c. 12. it thus recorded by S. Beda, In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred seaventy eight (saith he) which was the eighth year of the raign of Egfrid King of the Northumbers, there appeared in the month of August a Comet or blazing star, which for three months together arose every morning, represen|ting a great pillar of wonderfull light. The same year a dissention arising between the said King Egfrid and the most Reverend Prelat Wilfrid, the Holy Arch-bishop was driven from his See, and in his place were substituted two Bishops to govern the Nation of the Northumbers, to witt Bosa who administred the Episcopall Office in the more Sou|thern parts of the Deiri, or Yorkshire, c. and Eata in the Nation of the Bernicians, or Nor|thumberland, c. The former had his Episcopall See at York, the other in the Church of Hagul|stad (Hexham) or Lindesfarn. Both of them were taken out of a Convent of Monks, and thence promoted to the Episcopall degree. And together with these a third person named Eadhed was or|dained Bishop over the Province of the Lindes|fars, (or Lincolnshire) which a short time be|fore King Egfrid, having defeated Wulfere King of the Mercians, had gott the possession of. This Eadhed, was the first peculiar Bishop of the said Province:Fasti Savil ad hunc an|num. (the prime Seat of his Bishoprick was Sidnacester, a place whose memory is now worn out by age: Yet some esteem it to be the same that is now called Gainsborow, or at least situated near it: from whence in after times the See was translated to Dor|chester, and last of all to Lincoln, where it still remains.)
A. D. 678.5. Thus writes S. Beda of S. Wilfrids ex|pulsion, and of a new distinction and in|stitution of Episcopall Sees. Saint Ceadda before he was translated to Lichfeild, had been the only Prelat of the whole Kingdom of the Northumbers, governing both the Churches of York and Lindesfarn. He by the sentence of Arch-bishop Theodore, surrendred that whole Province to Saint Wilfrid. Now Saint Wifrid by the displeasure and Violence of King Egfrid being expelled, in his place Bosa
administers the See of York, and Eata that of the Province of the Bernicians, who is reckoned the fifth Bishop of Lindesfarn, and first of Hagulstad.
4. The Institution of these New Bishopricks was ordered in vertue of the ninth Canon of the fore-mentioned Synod of Hertford assembled by Arch-bishop Theodore five years before this, where it was ordained, that the number of Christians encreasing, Bishopricks likewise should be multiplied. From hence issued the first spark of dissension this year between the two Holy Arch-bishops, S. Wilfrid and S. Theodore, which afteward was raised to a great flame. The progresse of which dissension we will consequently relate from William of Malmsbury: which indeed took its first originall from the Court of King Egfrid, and the malicious envy of his new Queen Ermenburga: For it has been fatall to the Brittish, Saxon and Norman Churches of this Island, that gene|rally disorders and Schisms have been be|gun by woemen.
5. As long as the glorious Virgin Saint Ediltrudis enioyd the Title of Queen and Consort to King Egfrid,Malmsbu. de Pontif. l. 3. all things succee|ded happily to the Kingdom and Church of the Northumbers, and Saint Wilfrid by the great esteem and reverence which his pie|ty and zeale had obtained, was well enabled to promote the affairs of the Church. But assoon as the said Holy Virgin by Saint Wil|frids assistance had gained her husbands consent to exchange a temporal for a ce|lestiall mariage, and to retire into a Re|ligious Solitude enriched with poverty and a want of all sensuall contentments, there more freely to enioy the Spirituall em|bracements of her heavenly Bridegroom: King Egbert received into her place a Se|cond Consort, Ermenburga, a Lady of a disposition much different from the for|mer, and particularly tainted with the vices usually enough attending that Sex, Covetousnes and Envy.
6. By the piety of the former King Oswi and severall of the Nobility, so wonderfull an accession of possessions and riches had been made to the tender growing Chur|ches of the Northumbers under the care of Saint Wilfrid, that the Sacred Vessels per|taining to Gods Altars were many of them of pure gold, and not any of a lower met|tall then Silver: and the Vestments and other ornaments, of a suitable magnifi|ce~ce. This splendour dazeled the eyes of the New Queen, who with a malignant aspect began to look upon the Holy Arch-bishop, by whose zeale such riches had been con|secrated to Gods service.
7. This Envy, corroding thus the Queens heart, she endeavoured to impart to her husband, whose eares she incessantly fil|led with malicious suggestions against the Holy Prelat, insomuch as by little and little his affection and respect to him dimini|shing, at length his Love was turned into hatred, and he began to persecute him by whose prayers he had formerly obtained so many great Victories.
8. Notwithstanding though this credu|lous King hearkned too willingly to his wives malicious suggestions, yet he would not assume to himself a power to dispose of Ecclesiasticall revenews, or to deprive the Holy Bishop of that wealth with which his Predecessour and others had entrusted him. Therefore he consulted Saint Theo|dore Arch-bishop of Canterbury, suggesting to him that Saint Wilfrid did abound with an immense superfluity of wealth, which might be sufficient for the maintenance of many Bishopricks, of which so large a Pro|vince did stand in need.
9. By so fair a pretence of extending piety, the King drew the Arch-bishop S. Theodore into his faction: who without any delay, and without consulting Saint Wilfrid, presently introduced into his Pro|vince three New Bishops, pretending a ground of iustice, that three Bishops might suffi|ciently be maintained by those revenews, which being in one mans disposall, nou|rished in him arrogance and pride; and moreover the Province being so vast, and the number of Christians so multiplied, it was necessary that the care of them should be committed to many Governours. These allegations may indeed appeare rationall and just: But there was no shew of ju|stice in despoyling a worthy Bishop of all the possessions which by his industry he had procured to the Church, and without demanding his consent, imparting them to others. This injustice on Saint Theo|dore's part was much aggravated, in that he was sayd to be induced to so hasty and violent proceedings against Saint Wil|frid, by Gifts sent him from the King and Queen.
10. That the Arch-bishop of Canterbury should assume to himself such a power and iurisdiction over so great a Province not in an ordinary way subject to him, we need not wonder: seeing, as hath been declared, that Power was conferred on him, not only by the Pope, but by vertue of the Late Nationall Synod of Hertford, which ordained an encrease of the number of Bishopricks. Notwithstanding the manner

of exercising this extraordinary jurisdi|ction was unexcusable: and Saint Theodore himself a little before his death was sen|sible of the injury done by him, ac|knowledging his fault, and desiring par|don of it.
11. S. Wilfrid understanding well enough that this violence and oppression was brought upon him by the Kings command, repaired to him, and complained of the injury done him, alledging that the Ec|clesiasticall Laws forbade any deminution or change to be made in any Episcopall See, before permission was given to the Bishop
to alledge and defend his own rights. That Kings were the Patrons and Defenders of the Patrimony of Christ, and not dissipatours thereof. If any fault or demerit could be imputed to him, he desired his accusers might be produced, and space allowd him for his defence. All the answer that the Holy Bishop could obtain hereto from King Egbert was this, We lay no crime to your charge: but what we have ordained touching your Bishoprick we will see ratified.
12. S. Wilfrid, perceiving that a Legall and Canonicall debate of this matter was refu|sed him, replyed to the King with a con|stancy beseeming a worthy Prelat in main|taining the Rights of his Church:I see, said he, that Your Majesty has been wrought upon to my prejudice by certain factious and mali|gnant persons about you, I appeale therefore from them to the See Apostolick.
13. This conference passed between King Egbert and S. Wilfrid in a full assembly of Nobility and other attendants. The Cour|tiers
therefore assoon as they heard the Holy Bishop mentioning an Appeal, broke forth into open laughter and derision of him. But he presently repressed their ir|reverent Scorn with this sad denuncia|tion and prophecy,Vnhappy men, you laugh now to see the Churches ruind: but on this very day the next year you shall with teares bewayl your own ruine.
Having said this, he departed from the Kings presence, and pre|sently after forsook both his See and the Kingdom of the Northumbers, retiring into the next Kingdom of the Mercians.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2 c. S. Wilfrid passes through the Mer|cian Kingdom.
3. He is by tempests cast among the Fri|sons: whom he converts to the Faith.
4.5 c. His enemies seek to murder him, by the means of Ebroin: He comes safe to Rome.

1. SAint Wilfrid being thus expelled his See, took his iourney towards Rome through the Kingdom of the Mercians, where by King Ethelred he was honourably received. The said King at that time had fi|nished the Monastery of Medeshamsted, af|terwards called Peterborow, which had been begun by his Predecessours, King Peada and King Wolfer. And he took this opportunity of our Holy Bishops voyage to Rome, to send by him a request to Pope Agathon, that he would by Apostolick authority confirm the Liberties, Priviledges and Exemptions of that Monastery, which by Kingly authority had been granted. Mention is made of this Re|quest in an Ancient Manuscript of the said Monastery of Peterbortw in Sir Henry Spelmans Councils. And what Answer Pope Agathon gave to it shall be declared two years hence at Saint Wilfrids return from Rome, where he gaind his cause.
2. S. Wilfrid made no stay in the Kingdom of the Mercians,Bed. l 5. c. 20. but continuing his iour|ney to the Sea, assoon as he took ship, saith S. Beda, he was by a South-west wind driven to the Countrey of the Frisons, where he was ho|nourably received by that barbarous Pagan Na|tion and their King Adalgise, to whom he prea|ched Christ, and having instructed many thou|sands of them in the Word of Truth, he washed away the stains of their sins with the saving wa|ter of Baptisme. Thus he was the first Preacher of the Gospell in that Nation: and that Doctrin which he taught, was afterward with great devo|tion perfectly planted among them by the most Reverend Bishop S. Willebrord. In this Apostoli|call employment Saint Wilfrid happily spent the Winter succeeding among that new converted people: and the spring following resumed his iourney towards Rome.
3. Herein, as Baronius well observes, the mercifull Providence of God did manifestly shine forth,Baron. A. D. 678. in permitting a most holy Bishop to be violently thrust from his See, to the end he might derive the fresh springs of the Gospell to a Nation ready to dye with thirst: insomuch as with regard to this his Apo|postolick Office, those Propheticall words of Scri|pture may be applied to him, Who are those

which flye abroad like clowds, c? For he by a blast of wind was caried into a dry and barren land, which he presently watred and rendred fruitfull by heavenly showrs pou|red upon it,
4. Whilst S. Wilfrid busied himself in re|ducing to the purity of Christian Faith the Nation of the Frisons from their filthy Ido|latry,Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 3. the Devill to interrupt that good work, or to be revenged on the worker, kindled again in the minds of his Adversa|ries among the Northumbers that envy and malice, which seemd to have been asswaged by his exile: insomuch as they became en|raged to hear that the Holy Bishop persecuted by them should be made an instrument of good to Srangers. Hereupon by messages and gifts they solicited the Franks to pro|cure the murder of the Apostolick Prelat.
5. There lived still in greatest power among the Franks, Ebroin, Maire of the Kings Palace, who, as hath been declared, had already embrued his hands in the blood of Dalphinus Bishop of Lyons,Sup. l. and severall other Prelats of the French Church. Him did the malicious Northumbers hire to this execra|ble murder: Who immediatly by promises, gifts and menaces solicited Adalgise King of the Frisons to be the Executioner. But this barbarous, half-pagan Prince did so utterly ab|horr this unchristian proposall, that he threw the Letters of Ebroin into the fire, after he had read them in the hearing of Saint Wilfrid who was then feasted by him, and whilst they were burning he added these words, So may he be burned, who for cove|tousnes of gold, would dissolve the band of freindship once agreed upon.
6. Thus by the watchfull Providence of God did the Holy Bishop escape the snares layd against his life: and when the Spring had mitigated the feircenes of the aire,A. D. 679. and opened the wayes for travelling, Saint Wilfrid renewed his iourney towards Rome, and,Malmsbu. ib. as William of Malmsbury relates, pas|sing through the Kingdom of the Franks inha|biting beyond the Rhene, came to the King of that Nation called Dagobert: Who entertained him with all kindnes and respect, calling to mind how when he himself had formerly by a faction of his Nobles been driven out of his Kingdom into Ireland, at his return this Holy Bishop had lodged him freindly, and moreover furnished him with horses and attendants to his own countrey. To expresse his gratitude therefore this King not only with extreme be|nignity received Saint Wilfrid, but with most earnest prayers solicited him to accept the Bi|shoprick of Strasbourg, and fixe his habita|tion in his countrey. This kind offer the Holy Bishop thought not convenient then to accept, but deferred his resolution till his return from Rome: Whereupon he was, though unwillingly, dismissed by the King, and being accompanied with his Bishop Deodatus, prosecuted his iourney.
7. Thus writes the said Historian.A. D. 679. But what he relates of Dagoberts expulsion into Ireland. ought to be applied to Theodoric King of the Franks who lived at this time, and being reiected by his Subjects, might have been thus hospitably entertained by S. Wilfrid. Whereas King Dagobert was dead severall years before this.
8. Saint Wilfrid being thus dismissed with recommendations,Id. ib. passing through Champaigne diverted out of the straight way to visit Berthaire Prince of that Province. This Prince had from the Holy Bishops enemies been informed of the cause of his journey, and moreover invited by promises to procure some mischeif to him. Where|upon at his first coming he received him with an arrogant frowning countenance: but assoon as he had been acquainted with a true rela|tion of the cause, his displeasure was mitigated, insomuch as he did not only abstain from doing him any hurt, but by his recommendation and assistance brought the controversy to a good end: Withall professing that he was induced hereto by the humanity of the King of the Hunns, in whose Court he had formerly lived during his banishment, who though he was a Pagan, yet could by no offers be corrupted to doe the least harm to him to whom he had once promised security.
9. The like courtesy and Civility did Saint Wilfrid find from all Princes through whose Courts and Provinces he passed: in|somuch as at last he arrived safely at Rome, where he found Pope Agathon busily em|ployed in repressing the Heresy of the Mo|nothelites, who taught that our Saviour though subsisting in two Natures, yet had but one Will. This Heresy had at that time greivously in|fected the Eastern Churches, for the extir|pation whereof, and preventing the sprea|ding of it in the West, that Holy Pope had at this time assembled a Synod at Rome: to which S. Wilfrid was invited, where like|wise his cause was determined: But before we relate the successe thereof, it will be expedient to declare how in his absence almighty God justified his innocence by in|flicting a sharp judgment on his Enemies and persecutours at home.



III. CHA.III. CHAP.

1 2. c. Saint Wilfrids Prophecy full|filled.
Winfrid Bishop of Lichfeild expelled.

1. THAT Propheticall denunciation, by which Saint Wilfrid, being derided by the Courtiers of King Egfrid for his Ap|peale to Pope Agathon, oretold them, That their laughter should precisely within the space of a year be turned into greivous lamentation,Malmsb. l. 3 was exactly fulfilld the next yeare in which he remaind at Rome. For not long after his departure Ethelred King of the Mer|cians, Brother of Wolfere, being desirous to avenge the iniuries of his brother su|stained from King Egfrid, who had over|come him in battell, and possessed him|self of the Province of the Lndesfars (or Lincolnshire) he denounced war against the said Egfrid: Who swelling with pride for his former victory, courageously mett him with an army, not doubting of like successe against him.
ed. l. 4. c. 1.2. The two armies mett, saith Saint Beda, near the River Trent, where coming to a decisive battell, the Mercians utterly de|feated the army of the Northumbers, and among a multitude of others there was slain, Ewin, the Brother of Egfrid, a young man bout eighteen years old, tenderly loved both by the Northumbers and Mercians: for his Sister, named Ostrids, was wife to King Ethered. And it hapned that on the very day, a twelf-month after Saint Wilfrid had suffred the orementioned iniury, the dead body of that hopefull young Prince was brought to York, which caused a generall and long continued mourning both to the Citty and Province.
3. If this battell was fought on the South side of Trent in Nottingham-shire where re|mains a village called Edwinstow, it is most probable that place took its name rather from this Prince, who by William of Malms|bury is called Edwin, then from the Holy King and Martyr Saint Edwin, who by Saint Beda's testimony was slain at a place called Heath|feild in Yorkshire.
4. By this victory King Ethelred recove|red that portion of his Kingdom called the Province of the Lindesfari, which Egfrid had formerly won from his brother Wolfere. But this one defeat not concluding the war, to the continnance of which both these Kings made great preparations:Idem Ibid. S. Theodore Arch|bishop of Canterbury, trusting in the Divine assistance, interposed himself between them, and by many zealous exhortations pacified their minds, so as that flame was quite ex|tinguished, insomuch as no other satisfa|ction was given to King Egfrid, for the death of his Brother, but only a summ of money. And the peace concluded between the two Nations continued inviolate for many years.
5. King Ethelred having thus repaired the breaches formerly made in his Kingdom,Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 3. ex|pelled out of his Province Winfrid Bishop of Lichfeild and Successour to the Holy Bishop Ceadda, for that he had favoured the party of King Egfrid. The exiled Bishop therefore passing over the Sea, was driven on the shore of France: where he fell in to the hands of Theodoick King, and Ebroin cheif Commander of the Franks, to whom, as hat been sayd, a Message had been sent to apprehend the Holy Bishop Wilfrid. These therefore by a mistake of the name of Win|frid for Wilfrid, slew the said Bishops atten|dants, and suffred him, after he had been pilla|ged of all things, to goe his way: So dearly did he pay for the affinity of his Name to Saint Wil|frid. Thus writes William of Malmsbury: In whose narration this difficulty appears, that Theodorick King of the Franks is decla|red a persecutour of Saint Wilfrid, who a little before is said to have entertaind him with all kindnes. But the same excuse is here to be made for him, which heretofore was made for Saint Bathildis Queen Regent of France, to whom some Writers impute the murder of the Holy Bishop Dalphinus; not that she was guilty of it, but because it was done during her Regency, by the cruelty of Ebroin, who had the whole power of the kingdom in his hands.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHA.

1.2 c. A wonderfull Miracle, shewing the efficacy of the Holy Sacrifice of the Masse.

1. IT would be a fault in this place to omitt a wonderfull accident which befell in the late bttell where the young Prince Elwin was slain, by which Almighty God was pleased to declare the efficacy of his servants Prayers, especially during the solemne Sacrifice of his Church. The fact is upon good testimony related by S. Beda in the manner following:2. Among others,Bid. l. 4. c. 22 saith he, there was in the said battell one of the Princes soldiers, na|med Imma, slain (at least in opinion.) This soldier all that day and the night following lay among the other dead bodies, as if he had been slain: but at last his Spirit returning he sate up, and as well as he could, bound up the wounds he had received. Then resting himself awhile, he raised himself on his feet, and began to walk away with an intention to find out, if possible,

some freinds, who might take care of him. As he was going away, he was mett with and taken by some of the enemies, the Mercians, and brought to their Captain, a principall Officer of King Ethelred, who examined him what he was. The poore man was a fraid to acknowledge himself a soldier, therefore he answered that he was a poore country-man, who had a wife, and was come in this expedition with severall others of the like quality, to bring provision to the Army. Vpon this answer the Officer commanded that care should be taken of his wounds, and when they began to be almost cured, he made him every night to be putt in chains, to prevent his running away.
3. But no chains could hold him: for after they were gone which had putt the chains upon him, they presently fell off. And the cause of this wonder was this. He had a Brother na|med Tunna, a Preist and Abbot of a Mona|stery in a certain town which at this day from his name is called Tunnacestir. This Abbot having heard that his brother was slain in the late battell, came himself to search for his body: and having found another in all regards very like to his, he caried it to his Monastery, and there buried it honourably. Moreover he took care that severall Masses should be said for the pardon of his sins: and by vertue of those Masses it came so passe that no bands could hold him, but they presently fell loose from him.
4. In the mean time the Officer whose Pri|soner he was, began to ask him, How it came to passe that he could not be bound? Whether he had about him certain Charms, which as some think, have a power to untye all bands?His answer was, that he was utterly ignorant of such unlawfull arts: But, said he, I have a Brother in mine own countrey, and I am assu|red that he thinking I am slain, says frequent Masses for mee: so that if I were now in the other world, I doubt not but my soule by his inter|cession and prayers, would be absolved from all pains.
5. After he had continued a good space a Pri|soner to the said Officer, those who guarded him observed by his countenance, gesture and speeches that he was no countrey-peasant, but a person of quality. Thereupon the Officer calling him aside privatly, enquired more diligently who he was: withall promising him that if he would simply declare his condition, he would not use him any thing the worse.He then plainly ma|nifested to him that he was a servant of the King of the Northumbers. Whereupon the Officer replied, I did assure my self by the manner of thy speech that thou wert not of a base condition. And now thou deservest to dye, in revenge of all my brethren and kinsmen who have been slain in the battell: but because I will not break my promise I will not kill thee.
6. Assoon therefore as he had recovered health and strength the Officer sold him to a certain man at London called Freson. But neither could he be bound by his New Master: for after try all of se|verall sorts of bands and chaines, they became all unloosed. When he therefore who had bought him perceived that he could not be restained by fetters, he gave him permission to redeem him|self, if he could. For commonly after nine of the clock in the morning the usuall time of Masses, his bands were untyed. Vpon this offer the Pri|soner was suffred to depart, having first given his promise by oath that he would either send the money agreed on for his ransome, or return and yeild himself a prisoner again. He went therefore from London into Kent to King Lothere Nephew to the famous Queen Ethelreda by her Sister, who likewise had formerly been a servant to the sayd Queen: and from him the Prisoner re|ceived the money appointed for his ransome, which according to promise he sent to his Master.
7. Being thus free, after some time he re|turned to his Countrey, and coming to his Bro|ther the Abbott, he related to him particu|larly all the accidents, both good and bad, which had befalln him: and then perceived that his chains for the most part had been loo|sed precisely at the howers in which Masses had been celebrated for him: and moreover that many other commodities and comforts had be|falln him from heaven, in his dangers, by his Brothers prayers and the Oblation of the saving Sacrifice.
8. Very many persons being informed from the foresaid person of these particulars, have been much kindled in their Faith and devotion to pray, give almes and Offer holy Sacrifices for the deliverance of their freinds who were depar|ted this life. For hereby they perceived that that saving Oblation was of wonderfull vertue for the redemption both of soule and body. This relation I my self received from severall persons who had heard it from the man himself to whom these things befell: And therefore I thought it expedient, having been clearly convinced of the truth of it, to insert it as undoubtedly certain in this my History. Thus writes S. Beda. After this disgression, wee will return to Saint Wilfrid at Rome.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHA.

i.2. c. Saint Wilfrids cause heard and determined in a Roman Synod, to his advantage.

1. WEE have already declared how Saint Wilfrid arriving at Rome found Pope Agathon in great solicitude concer|ning the faith of all Churches, upon occa|sion of the Heresy of the Monothelites much spread in the East. For which purpose among other Provinces, he sent likewise into Brittany, where he commanded a Sy|nod to be assembled, to the end he might explore whether the Faith of the Saxon Church there were sound and uniform with other Catholick Churches, or in any point cor|rupted.
2. The person sent by him for this pur|pose, saith S. Beda, was a Venerable Preist cal|led Iohn Arch-Cantor of the Church of S. Peter, and Abbot of the Monastery of S. Martin, who this year arrived in Brittany (being conducted by the most Reverend Abbot Biscop, by sirname Bene|dict) His busines was to invite the Arch-bi|sho Theodore to come himself, or at least to depute another in his name to the Rome Sy|nod to be assembled for repressing the fore|said Hiresy. This appears by the said Popes Letters written the next year to the Empe|rours of Constantinople, Heraclius, and Tibe|rius: in which this passage is extant: Our hope was, saith he, to have ioynd to this our Assem|bly our Fellow-bishop Theodore,. Bernn. . D. 680. a learned Philo|sopher and Arch-bishop of the great island of Brit|tany, together with other Bishops abiding in those parts: and for that reason we hitherto deferred this Council. Which expression as it argues a wonderfull merit and esteem in which this holy Arch-bishop was held in that age: so it disproves manifestly the assertion of Sir H. Spelman, who thence collects that S. Theo|dore was called to the Council held at Constan|tinople, whereas it is evident that it was the Roman Synod assembled the year following to which he was invited.
Malmsb de Pt. l. 3.3. In the mean time S. Wilfrid being ar|rived at Rome, saith William of Malmsbury, he found the whole Citty in a solicitous expectation of him. For his coming was prevented by a Mes|senger sent from S Theodore Arch-bishop of Can|terbury, whose name was Kenewald, a Monk of a modest and Religious comportment, who brought with him in Writing severall Articles of accusa|tion against S. Wilfrid, conceived in very rude and bitter expressions. S Hilda the famous Ab|besse likewise sent Messengers on purpose to ag|gravate the charge against him. This seemd a matter of so great consequence to the holy Pope Agathon, that for determining it he presently assembled a Council of fifty Bishops and Abbots in the Great Church of our Saviour, which had its sirname from the founder of it, the Emperour Constantin. Before this Council was S. Wilfrid summond, accused, defended, and in the end absolved. The whole proceeding of this Council in the cause of this holy Bishop, which was the only busines debated in it, cannot be better related then we find in th authentick Copy of it preserved by William of Malmsbury, and also extant in a Manuscript produced by Sir. H. Spelman among his Councils of Brit|tany:Spelm. Concil. . 1. p. 158. The Form whereof is as followeth:4. In the Name of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Chr. In the twelfth year of the raign of our most pious and glorious Emperour Constantin the elder, and his Brethren our new made Emperours Heraclius and Tiberius, in the seaventh Indiction, in the month of October, Agathon the most blessed Pope of the Ca|tholick Church presiding: the most holy Gospels being sett before in the Church of Saviour named from Constantin, and together sitting with him these holy and learned Bishops as Assessours in the present cause, Crescens Bishop of Vinon, Phoberius Andreas of Ostia, Iuvenal of Albano.
5. Agathon the most Holy and Blessed Bishop of the Catholick Church and Apostolick Citty said thus to the Bishops sitting with him:I doe not beleive that your Holy Fraternities are ignorant of the cause moving mee to call you to this Assembly: For my desire is that your Reverences would ioyn with mee in hearing and treating of a Debate lately risen in the Church of the Brittish Isle, where through Gods Grace the mul|titude of true Beleivers is encreased. A relation of which Controversy hath been brought to us as well by information of persons thence arrived here, as by Writings.
6. Then Andrew the most Keverend Bishop of Ostia, and Iohn of Porto said,The ordering of all Churches dependeth on the authority of your Apostolick Sanctity, who sustain the place of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter. But moreover we, by your command, have read unto our fellow-Bi|shops sitting here with us, the severall Writings which Messengers directed hither from Brittany presented to your Holines: as well those which cer|tain Messengers a good while since brought from the most Reverend Arch-bishop there, together with the informations of others against a certain Bishop who (as they say) is privily slipped away, as also those which were presented by the Devout Bishop Wilfrid, Bishop of the Holy Church of York, who having been cast out of his See by the forenamed Holy Arch-bishop, is come hither. In all which Writings, though many questions be in|serted, yet we doe not find that by any Ecclesiasti|call Canons he ha's been convicted of any crimes, and consequently he was not canonically and le|gally eected: Neither doe his accusers here pre|sent charge him wih any naughty acts meriting a degradation: On the contrary it appears to us that notwithstanding his uniust suffrings he hath born himself modestly, abstaining from all se|ditious contentions. All that he hath done is, that being driven out of his See, the said ve|nerable Bishop Wilfrid made known his cause to his fellow-bishps, and it come for iustice to this See Apostolick.
7. Agathon the most holy and blessed Bishop of the Catholick Church, and of the Aposto|lick Citty of Rome said to his Brethren sitting with him,Let Wilfrid the Venerable Bishop f the Holy Church of York, who, I am informed, attends at the dores of our Secretary, be here admitted, and bring with him the Petition which he is sayd to have compiled The holy Bishop Wilfrid being entred into the Venerable Secretary, said, I beseech your Holines, be pleased to command that my Petition may be openly read. The most holy Bishop Agathon said, Let the Petition of Venerable Wilfrid be re|ceived and publickly read. And Iohn the No|taery received and read it to the holy and Aposto|lick Council, in tenour following:
8. I Wilfrid an humble and unworthy Bi|shop have at last by Gods assistance brought my steps to this supreme residence of Apostolick dig|nity, as to a strong tower of safety, from whence doth proceed the regulation according to Sacred

Canons to all the Churches of Christ: and there|fore I doe assure my self that your Venerable Pa|ternities, both by my suggestion in writing and likewise by the discourse which at my first coming I made to your Holines, have been sufficiently in|formed that certain persons have violently and unjustly invaded my Bishoprick, without convi|cting mee of any fault, and in an Assembly in which were present Theodore the most Holy Arch|bishop of Canterbury and other Bishops, they have endeavoured to usurpe my See which I had ad|ministred the space of more then ten years: and in my Diocese three Bishops have been promoted, though their promotion be contrary to the Ca|nons. Now upon what Motive or provocation the most holy Arch-bishop Theodore by his authority without my consent should ordain three Bishops in my See, out of reverence to his person, who was sent thither from this Apostolick Chair, I am unwil|ling to examine. Notwithstanding if it shall ap|pear that against the Rule of Ecclesiasticall Ca|nons being driven from my ancient See without any offence committed which is so severely puni|shable by the sad Canons, I have for all that been free from all factious tumultuousnes, and quietly departed away, after I had protested my innocence and the illegall proceedings against mee before the Bishops of the said Province, I doe here submitt my self to your Apostolicall iudgment. If your Sentence shall be that I remain deprived, I doe with all willingnes and humble devotion embrace it. But if you shall think fitt that I be restored to my Bishoprick, this one thing I shall only begg of this Apostolick See, that the foresaid invaders may be expelled from the Dioceses, which I though unworthy have so many years governed. Yet if you, shall iudge expedient that more Prelats be or|dained in the said Province of which I have been the sole Bishop, I beseech you to take order that such may be promoted there as may be persons with whom I may quietly and peaceably ioyn in the administration of it.
9. (This Petition being read) Agathon the most holy and blessed Bishop of the Holy Catholick Church and Apostolick Citty of Rome, said, It is no small satisfaction to this Assem|bly that in this Petition the Holy Bishop Wil|frid hath manifested to us, that though he hath been unduly cast out of his See, yet he never made any obstinate resistance by Secular power, but with all humility begged the assi|stance of Blessed Saint Peter Prince of the A|postles, withall professing his readines to submit to what soever Sentence the same Blessed Apostle, from whom we receive our authority, shall pro|nounce by my mouth,
10. The Sacred Synod there residing among other decrees unanimously consented to this,Wee doe ordain and Decree that the Holy Bi|shop Wilfrid be restored to the Bishoprick which he lately possessed: And that the Arch-bi|shop shall ordain for his Coadjutours such per|sons as himself shall, with the consent of a Sy|nod to be assembled there, make choice of: and as for those persons, who in his absence have ille|gally intruded into his Bishoprick, let them be utterly expelled from thence.A. D. 680. And who soever shall refuse to receive this our Decree, let them be interdicted.
11. Saint Wilfrid being thus absolved and reestablished by Apostolick authority, with the unanimous consent of the Roman Synod, did not presently return: but made his abode at Rome till the year follow|ing, in which another more frequent Synod was assembled in the cause of the Monothelites, of which Synod he appeared a principall member, sitting there not as an Appellant, but as sustaining the place of the Clergy of Brittany and Ireland.
12. During the time of this his absence hapned the blessed death of his most be|loved Disciple the glorious Virgin Saint Ethelreda, or Ediltrudis, twice a wife and always a Virgin: Of whom wee have al|ready by anticipation largely enough treated in the foregoing Narration of the Story of her Gests, death, buriall and in|corruption: to which wee referre the Reader. We will onely adde the Prayer, which the ancient English Church recited on the ninth of the Calends of Iuly, being the day of her Deposition: O God, who doest encrease our ioy by the yearly Solemnity of thy Virgin S. Ethelreda, Grant in mercy that wee may be as|sisted by her merits, with the examples of whose Chastity wee are enlightned, through our Lord, c. Another Prayer, to the same effect was in the Church Office on the day of her Tran|slation on the three and twentieth of Iune.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1. S. Wilfrid declares the Faith of the Saxon Church in a Roman Synod.
2. He obtains a Confirmation of the Privi|ledges of the Monastery of Medesham|sted, or Peterborow.

1. THE year following the same Pope Agathon,A. D. 60. Bed. l. 5. c. 10. saith Saint Beda, having assembled a Synod at Rome of one hundred twenty five Bishops (all whose names are found subscribed to the Synodall Letters in the fourth Action of the Sixth Councill) against the Monothelites, who taught that there was onely one Will and operation in our Sa|viour, commanded Saint Wilfrid to be called to the same Synod, and there to declare open|ly his own Faith, as likewise the Faith of the Province and Island from whence he came. Which he having done, and thereby appro|ved himself and his countrey-men to be Or|thodox Catholicks: it seemed good to the Coun|cil that among other things that also should be inserted in the Synodall Gests: which was performed in this form: Wilfrid the devout Bishop of York, having appealed

to the See Apostolick in a particular cause of his own, by whose authority he was absolved from all accusations both certain and uncertain, and after|wards called and admitted to this Synod of one hundred twenty five Bishops: Where in the name of all the Churches in the Northern parts of Brit|tany and in the Isles of Ireland, inhabited by English, Brittains, as likewise the Nations of Scotts and Picts, he made open profession of the true, Catholick Faith, confirming it moreover by his subscription.
2. The other Acts of this Synod not per|taining to our present History we will omitt. After this Saint Wilfrid according to the Commission given him by Ethelred King of the Mercians, obtaind from the See Apostolick and Roman Synod a Confirmation of the Priviledges and Exemptions granted by the said King to the Monastery of Medeshamsted (or Peterbo|row,) which he had lately finished. There is extant in Sir. H. Spelmans Brittish Councils a Copy of a Breif of Pope Agathon to the same effect,Spelm. Concil. l. 1. fed. 164. which he translated out of the Saxon language into Latin: In which notwithstan|ding there is one passage whereby the said Pope constituts the Abbots successively of the said Monastery, Legats of the Apostolick See in Brittany, which seems repugnant to the custom and practise of that and following ages, which always acknowledged that Title to be the ornament and honour of the See of Canterbury.


VI. CHA.VI. CHAP.

1.2 c. A Synod at Hatfeild in Brittany touching the Faith against Eutyches: S Theodore's Synodall Letters, c. The Subscriptions, c.
8.9 10. Iohn a Roman Abbot present there: His vertues: In his return he dyes in France.

1. WHilst these things were agitated at Rome, the Roman Abbot Iohn Arch-Cantour or the Church there of S. Peter, being now in Brittany and commissioned to ex|plore the Faith of the English Churches, and give an account thereof to the See Apostolick, diligently executed his commission. By his suggestion no doubt it was that this same year,Bed. l. 4. c. 7. as Saint Beda testifies, the Holy Arch-bishop Theodore being informed that the Faith of the Church of Constantinople was much distur|bed by the Heresy of Eutyches, and desirous to pre|serve the English Churches, committed to his care, free from that contagion, he assembled a Synod of Venerable Bishops and very many learned men, in which he diligently inquired what the Beleif of each person was: after which enquiry he found amongst them an unanimous agreement in the Orthodoxe Catholick Faith.
Id. in Epi|ton.1. This Synod, saith he, was held in a place cal|led Heatfeild. But there being severall places in Brittany of the same name, he leaves it un|certain in what Province it was. Most proba|ble it is that it was the same which at this day is called Bishops-hatfeild in Hertfordshire so called rather from this Synod there held. then, as Camden would, because it belongs to the iurisdiction of the Bishop of Ely.
3. The Synodall Letters dictated by S. Theo|dore Archrbishop of Canterbury who presided therein,Id. l. 4. c. 17. were according to the same S. Beda of the tenour following: In the name of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ: In the tenth year of the Raign of our most Religious Lord Egfrid King of the Northumbers, on the fifteenth day before the Calends of October, and the eighth In|diction: and in the sixth year of the raign of Edil|red King of the Mercians: in the seaventeenth year of the raign of Adulfus King of the East-an|gles, and in the seaventh year of the Raign of Lo|thair King of Kent, Theodore by the Grace of God Arch-bishop of the Isle of Brittany and Citty of Canterbury presiding, and the rest of the Bishops of the Isle of Brittany sitting with him, the most Holy Gospells being honourably placed among them, in a town according to the Saxon tongue named Hedtfeild: Wee there after common ad|vice have unanimously declared the true and Or|thodox Faith, according as our Lord Iesus Christ incarnate delivered to his Disciples who saw him and heard his words, and as is contained in the Symbol of the Holy Fathers, and generally all Saints, Vniversall Synods, and particular Ortho|dox Churches have delivered. Wee following these faithfull Guides, according to their doctrine di|vinely inspired, doe unanimously beleive and pro|fesse according to the Holy Fathers, in truth and propriety of speech confessing the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the Trinity consubstantiall in Vnity, and Vnity in Trinity, that is, One God in three Subsistences or Persons Consubstantiall, of equall glory and honour,4. And after many other speeches added to the like effect, which pertain to the Confession of the Orthodox Faith, this Holy Synod hath to its com+mon Letters added this Profession, Wee receive the five Holy Vniversall Synods of the Blessed Fathers, that is, of the three hundred and eighteen Bishops assembled at Nicaea against the impious Heretick Arius and his Dogmes: and of the hundred and fifty Bishops assembled at Constantinople against the madnes of Macedonius and Eudoxius, and their Errours: and of the two hundred Bishops mett at Ephesas against the impious Nestorius and his dogmes: and of the six hundred and thirty Bi|shops assembled at Chalcedon against Eutyches and Nestorius and their Dogmes: and again they were assembled in the fifth Council at Con+stantinople, in the time of Iustinian the younger against Theodorus, Theodoret, and the Epistles of Ibas, and their dogmes against Cyrill. Likewise in the Synod held at Rome in the time of Blessed Pope Martin, in the eighth Indiction, and ninth year of the Religious Emperour Constantin. Wee receive all these, and glorify our Lord Iesus Christ as the said Holy Fathers glorified him, neither adding any thing, nor diminishing from their Decisions

Wee with heart and tongue anathematize those whom they have anathematized, and we receive those whom they have received, glorifying God the Father without beginning, and his Only be|gotten before all ages, and the Holy Spirit un|expressibly proceeding from the Father and the Son, as the forementioned Holy Apostles, Prophets and Doctours have taught. And hereto we all subscribe, who together with the Arch-bishop Theodore have declared the Catholick Faith.
5. Such was the tenour of the Synodall Letters of this Council at Hatfeild: but the names of the Bishops subscribing, for bre|vities sake, were omitted by S. Beda. Yet in the forementioned Saxon Manuscript produ|ced by Sir. H. Spelman and translated into Latin we read that the Apostolick Breif tou|ching the Priviledges of the Monastery of Medeshamsted, or Peterborough, was read publickly in the said Synod, and approved there: Witnesses whereof by the Authour cited are there mentioned.
Spelm Conc. l. 1. f. 164.6. Moreover King Ethelred in the foresaid Synod said, I doe immoveably ratify and confirm whatsoever gifts my Brethren Penda and Welfere, and my Sisters Kyneburgh and Kineswith have given and by will conferred on S. Peter and this Abbot. And my will is that in the Anniver|sary dayes of their deposition they be commemo|rated for the good of their soules and mine. And this day I my self give to S. Peter and his Church of Medeshamsted the lands here under named with their appurtenances, to wit, Bredune, Hrepingas, Cedenac, c. These lands I give to S. Peter with the same liberty as I my self now possesse them: forbidding my Successours in any thing to prejudice this my Gift. And if any shall doe con|trary hereto, the Anathema of the Pope and all other Bishops fall upon him. Of these things all here present are Witnesses. I Ethelred doe confirm these things with the sign of the Crosse of Christ.  I Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury am Witnes of this Writing of Meleshamsted: and I excommuni|cate all who so ever shall violate any thing of it: and give my benediction to all who observe it.  I Wilfrid Arch-bishop of York am witnes, and con|firm the same with an Anathema. . I Saxulf formerly Abbot and now Bishop doe in mine own name and of all my Successours inflict an Ana|thema against all infringers of this. . I Ostritha Queen to King Ethelred, confirm this. . I Adrian legat decree the same. . I Putta Bi|shop of Rochester have written this. . I Wald|here Bishop of London doe ratify this. . I Cuth|bal Abbot doe so confirm it, that whosoever shall violate it, may he bear the malediction of all Bishops and of Christians in the world. Amen.
7. If this Writing be indeed authentick, we are to suppose that all the subscriptions were not made at once, but successively: for certain it is that S Wilfrid was absent during the Session of this Council: and therefore sub|scribed it after this return. Again at this time Saint Erconwald, and not Waldhere, was Bi|shop of London, to whom Waldhere succeeded four years after this, and then might proba|bly subscribe. Lastly Putta here named Bishop of Rochester had resigned his See severall years before this, and at this time lived under Sexulf Bishop among the Mercians: So that either we must affirm that he conserved the Prerogative of his Title, notwithstanding his Resignation: or that it was another Bishop of the same name, and perhaps the same who is said by Bishop Godwin to have been the first Bishop of Hereford.
8. Besides the Bishops of Brittany there was present in the said Synod of Hatfeild the fore|mentioned Iohn Arch-chantour of B. Peters, and Abbot of the Monastery of S. Martin, saith S. Beda: and he likewise confirmed the Decrees of Catholick Faith. When he came into Brittany he brought with him the Synodicall Acts of a Coun|cil not long before this celebrated at Rome by Pope Martin and one hundred and five Bishops, against those who taught that there was only one Will and operation in Christ: A Copy of which Synodicall Acts he caused to be transcribed and left in the Monastery of the Venerable Abbot Be|nedict Biscop: and caried back with him towards Rome a Transcript of the Decrees of the Synod of Hatfeild.
9. Among other benefits which the Chur|ches in Brittany received from this Venerable Roman Abbot Iohn, this is reckoned by the same Authour, that he taught the Monks of the foresaid Monastery (of Giruy) governed by S. Be|nedict the Roman Order and Rite of singing, lea|ving them likewise Rules for the same. He also committed to writing the Order of celebrating all Feasts through the year: all which were till S. Bedes compiling his History observed in that Monastery, and transcribed by many other adiacent Con|vents. And very many Religious men from al|most all the Monasteries of the Province, who had any skill in singing flocked to him to better their skill.
10. The same Holy Abbot returning towards Rome, a little while after he had passed the Sea was surprised by an infirmity, of which he dyed. And his body was by his freinds caried to Tours and there honourably buried: This was done out of love and respect to S. Martin: in as much as he had been Abbot of a Monastery dedicated to the same Saint at Rome. And in his way from Rome to Brittany passing by Tours he had been with great kindnes entertained in the Church of S. Martin there, and earnestly requested by the Monks to take the same place in his way at his re|turn. Moreover he had from thence received assi|stants in his iourney and labours. Now though he dyed in his return, notwithstanding the Exem|plar of the Catholick Orthodox Faith of the En|glish Church was caried to Rome, and ioyfully read by the Pope and all others there.



VII. CH.VII. CHAP.

1.2. c. King Egfrid despises the Popes Decrees for the restitution of Saint Wil|frid.
4.5. c. S Wilfrid emprisoned: and mira|culously defended by God.
9.10. c. Queen Ermenburga punished by Divine power.

1. SAint Wilfrid having been thus absol|ved at Rome, returned the year fol|lowing into Brittany, where he found grea|ter tempests attending him then he had left at Sea: for the Letters from Rome testiying his innocence were so far from qualifying the fury of King Egfrid against him that they ra|ther more incensed it. The progresse of his succeeding suffrings is thus related by William of Malmsbury:Malmb. d . l. 3.   4.2. S. Wilfrid, saith he, in his return having by Gods protection escaped all dangers by the way, came safe to his own countrey Where with much difficulty having obtained accesse to the presence of King Egfrid, he presented to him Pope Aga|thons Letters Sealed. These Letters the King, at|tended by the Bishops of his own faction, enemies to S Wilfrid, commanded to be read: After which he was so far from shewing any Reverence to the See Apostolick, that he delivered him up to a certain Officer of his, a man of well known cruelty, to be cast into an obscure Prison, having first despoyled him of all things, and dispersed his at|tendants into severall places: For he gave credit lightly to those who affirmed that those Decrees were obtained by bribes at Rome, where they said money could procure any thing.
3. Hence wee may collect that King Egfrid did not move any controversy or doubt of the Popes Lawfull authority to determine this controversy, which was sufficiently ac|knowledged by the Bishops Adversary S. Theo|dore, who made no protestation against his Appeale, but sent a Religious man to charge S. Wilfrid at Rome. But this pretence King Egfrid gave of his disobedience to the Pope's and Roman Synods Sentence, that it was un|duly procured, or that the true state of the Co~troversy had not been aright represented at Rome, or some other like excuse, which is never wanting to those who are resolved not to submitt to justice and authority.
Id. ib.4. The same Authour thus further pro|ceeds in his Narration: The Holy Prelat, saith he, with a spirit unmoved and an unalte|red countenance suffred this violence, and with holy admonitions exhorted his freinds, whose suf|frings he compassionted, to expect a happy end of these calamities from the Divine goodnes. As for the Officer to whom he had been committed, though he was to all others of a barbarous and savage comportment, yet to him he shewd himself, gentle and mild, neither did he afflict him with any torment or other vexation, but only this that he shutt him up in darknes: for he durst no. altogether neglect or resist the Kings orders. But Divine Iustice would not permitt this holy Pre|lat, who was the Light of Brittany, to be unwor|thily oppressed with darknes. For a Light from heaven darted into the obscurity of the prison supplied the Suns absence, creating a bright day there, from whence the worlds light had been excluded; and the beames of this heavenly light shining through the chinks of the prison, terri|fied the Keepers, and compelled them to fly and acquaint their Master with the wonder. He was much astonished at the hearing of it, but such was his fear of King Egfrid, that he durst not expresse any further kindnes to his prisoner.
5. But a terrible disease suddenly hapning to his wife forced him to overcome his fear for a most greivous impostume after terrible torments at last burst in her body, the wound wherof was so wide and gaping, that the sight thereof horribly affrighted her husband: and presently after, sh was tormented by the Devill possessing her, by which she became bloodles,  dumb, and a cold stiffnes seised on all her members as if she had been dying Vpon which the husband in great hast running to the Holy Bishop, and casting himself at his feet, with earnest prayers obtained pardon from him. In so much as without any delay he went, and making his prayers over her, and casting Holy Water into her gaping throat, her disease and tor|ments presently ceased, and perfect health retur|ned.
6. King Egfrid was forthwith acquainted with all these things by a message from his Officer, who with much greif beseeched him that he would not sacrifice him to the Devill by making him any longer guilty of cruelty to the holy and innocent Bishop. But nothing could alter or molli|fy the Kings rigour: therefore he commanded that he should be taken from the custody of Offrith (so was the said Officer called) as being a faint-hearted coward, and delivered to another na|med Tumber, a Sergeant of a far more fell and savage disposition.
7. But as the Kings cruelty encreased, so like|wise did Almighty God more miraculously de|clare his goodnes to his servant. For when this new aylour commanded him to be layd in chains, the chains applied by his servants to the Holy Bi|shops limbs, were found either so streit that his leggs would not enter, or so large that they took no hold: and if at any time they proved fitt, hey were no sooner putt about his limbs, but they presently fell off. At last thereore the laylours obstinate malice was forced to yeild to the Divine power, and the Holy Bishop suffred no other incommodity, but only a confinement.
8. As for King Egfrid the report of these things wrought no good effect upon him, yea when any one mentioned them, he could not abstain from casting reviling scoffs against the Saint. Yet fre|quent Messengers passed between him and the

Bishop, with commands that he should acknowledg the invalidity of the Roman Decrees, and that they were illegally extorted with bribes: This if he would yeild to, then perhaps by the Kings indul|gence he might recover the things taken from him, and a part of his Bishoprick: But if he refused, he might thank himself for his losses, as being the only cause of the present quarrell and variance. But such threatnings as these had small effect on the holy Bishops mind: on the contrary he protested to the King that to save his own life he would not doe any thing that might cast an infamy or disparagement on the authority of the See Apo|stolick.
9. But how does Queen Ermenburga behave her self all this while, she who was the first cause of all this mischeif, and continually fomented it? She passed her whole time, days and nights, in banquets, and entertainments: and whither soever she went she caried with her, either on her neck or in her chariot, as in triumph, (Chrismarium) the precious Box of Sacred Oyles (or as we read in Capgrave, a costly Reliquary) which had been violently extorted from the holy Bishop: This she were, not out of a sence of piety or devotion, but to testify her envy and pride in enioying the spoyles of her enemy.
Id. ib.10. But this her ioy did not last long: For as the same Authour in pursuance of the story relates, On a certain night in which she lodged with the Holy Abbesse Ebba, her husbands Aunt, by Gods permission the Devill entred into her, which put her besides her senses, insomuch as she began to be outrageous and frantick in her talk. The Abbesse being awaked with the noyse she made, arose and in great hast ran to her, asking her mildly what she ayled. The Queen answered her nothing to the purpose, for by the extremity she was in, her speech was taken from her. But the good Abbesse having been informed ly others of the true cause, earnestly solicited the King her Nephew that the Holy Bishops Reliquary might be restored, and himself, according to the Popes sentence, re-invested in his rights. This she told him was to be done if he would have his Queen restored to her health. But if through animosity he would not yeild so far, at least let restitution be made of the things wrongfully extorted from the Holy Prelat, and permission given him to quitt the countrey. To this the King yeilded: and presently the Queen recovered her senses and health: and after the death of her husband, the forsook the world, and undertook a Religious Pro|fession, shewing great sorrow and remorse for the iniuries done to the Holy Bishop.
11. Hence we may be informed of the true cause of S. Wilfrids suffrings and ba|nishment. The pretence was piety in com|mitting the care of so large a Province and the revenews of it to severall persons, as being too exorbitant for one: but under this pretence was shrowded the envy and ava|rice of Queen Ermenburga, who earnestly thirsted after Church goods, and by this di|vision expected a good share in those sa|cred spoyles. Therefore the partiality of the Centuriators of Magdeburg is evident, who against the testimony of all Antiquity af|firm,Magdeburg. Cent. 7. f. 529. that Wilfrid was therefore driven into ba|nishment, because he had perswaded Ethelreda the former wife of King Egfrid to forsake her husband, and under pretence of a vow to retire into a Monastery, as Bale sheweth. Whereas in all the debates of S. Wilfrids cause in his own countrey, at Rome, and in severall Synods both before and after this, not any scruple was moved about S. Ethelreda. But it concernd such Writers as these to invent any fictions for iustifying the sacrilegious mariage of Luther. But who can suffer himself to be per|swaded that Queen Ermenburga, who is stiled by William of Malmsbury the cause and nou|risher of this long debate, should fill all Europe with the noyse of this Controversy, in which if proof had been made that S. Ethelreda had done ill in retiring from the world, and S. Wilfrid in advising her thereto, it would have followed that Ermenburga was no lawfull Queen, but an Adulteresse.


VIII. CAAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. The Death of S. Hilda: one of S. Wil|frids adversaries.
3. The death of S. Ermenburga, Mother to S. Milburga, c.
4. S. Erection of two New Bishopricks, at Worcester and Hereford: A succession of the Bishops in Hereford.

1. IT is an usefull admonition which Wil|liam of Malmsbury affords us from this debate between S. Wilfrid and his adversa|ries:Malmsb. Sup. For, says he, we may thence observe the mi|serable condition in which human nature is in|volved, when as those persons which by Antiqui|ty are celebrated for eminent Saints, and were such indeed, as Theodore, Brithwald, Iohn, Bosa, as likewise the famous Abbesse Hilda should ioyn themselves with those impious persons, who with an irreconciliable hatred persecuted a Bishop of such eminent Sanctity as was S. Wilfrid.
2. As for the glorious Abbesse S. Hilda,Sup l. 16. c. 21. of whom we have already treated, this same year of S. Wilfrids banishment she received the reward of so many heavenly works per|formed by her on earth. And we can not doubt but that this fault of persecuting S. Wilfrid, proceeding from misinformation of others, and not premeditated malice in her own heart, was expiated by her former merits for thirty three years together, and a sharp sicknes which continued sixe years before her death, all which time she ceased not from praising God for her suffrings, and dayly instructing the innocent flock com|mitted to her charge. What testimonies at

and after her death God was pleased to shew of her Sanctity, hath been already declared from S. Beda.
5. The same year likewise dyed S. Ermen|burga Mother of the glorious Virgin S. Mil|burga, S. Mildreda and S. Milgitha, as like|wise of the Saint-like child Merefin. Concer|ning whom Harpsfeild thus writes,Harpsf. saec. 7. c. 10. Ermen|burga though she had for her husband Mervald son of Penda King of the Mercians, who was yet alive, yet so inflamed a desire she had to a solita|ry Religious life, that she never ceased her im|portunity, till she had procured her husbands consent. Having thus obtained her wish, she re|turned into Kent to her Brother Egbert, to whom she discovered her pious purpose, desiring his assistance for the execution of it. Whereupon he built for her at Estrey a town of Kent a Monastery consecrated to the young Princes Martyrs, Saint Ethelbert and S. Ethelbritht. There she passed the remainder of her life with seaventy other Virgins consecrated to God, in wonderfull Sancti|ty. Her name is recited among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the nineteenth of No|vember.Martyrolog. . 15. Novemb.
4. At this time Saint Theodore encreased the Number of Bishopricks, erecting the Sees of Worcester and Hereford: Of the former he consecrated Boselus, and of the other Putta Bishop: concerning whom, as likewise his Successours for many years, little more being recorded but their Names: because we iudge it not expedient to make frequent breaches in this History only to insert Names, wee will here breifly give a Catalogue of those which sate at Hereford: for the Bishops of Worcester have left considerable monu|ments of their Gests and vertues.
5. To Putta therefore Bishop of Hereford after he had administred that Province eleaven years, succeeded Tirtell: Whose Successour after twelve years was Torther: who con|tinued in that Bishoprick fifteen years, and either deserting it voluntarily or by death, the next was Walstod in the year of Grace seaven hundred and eighteen: To whom after seaventeen years succeeded Cuthbert. Now concerning Walstod the only thing me|morable in him was that he began the fa|brick of a Crosse very costly and magnificent, but dyed before he could finish it, which care he left to his Successour, who engraved in it certain Latin verses importing the same, which are recorded by Bishop Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of that Diocese: whereto I referr the curious Reader.


IX. CHAP.A. D. 681.
IX. CHA.

1.2. c. S. Wilfrid is forced to leave the West Saxons: And converts the South-Saxons.
8. He teaches the people a remedy against the famine.
9. He erects an Episcopall See and Mona|stery at Shepey
11. Of Eappa the Abbot there.

1. SAint Wilfrid being thus banished his Na|tive soyl,A. D. 681 saith William of Malmsbury, took his iourney towards the Kingdom of the West-Saxons, where he was kindly entertaind by a certain Noble man called Berethwald: But within a few dayes he was forced to quit that Refuge. For Ethelred King of the Mercians, whose subiect that Noble man was, (being like|wise his Brothers Son) with threatning com|manded him that he should not retain the Bi|shop so much as one day longer. This was done in compliance with Egfrid King of the Northum|bers, whose Sister Osdritha (to comfort them for the losse of their Brother Elwin) was given in mariage to the said King Ethelred, by whom a peace was concluded between the New husband and Brother. S. Wilfrid therefore during this short abode with Berethwald, having built there a small Monastery, was forced to leave the Monks and to fly for refuge to the Pagan South-Saxons, since he could find no security among Chri|stians.
2. The King of these South-Saxons was named Edilwalch, who having been informed of the causes of this holy Bishops banishment, ith great readines and affection offred him his assistance, resolutly and firmly engaging himself that no entreaties of his enemies should induce him to betray him, nor any offers of money to expell him the countrey. S. Wilfrid therefore being thus confident of his protection, began to preach the Christian Faith first to the King and Queen, and afterward to the inhabitants of that Province. Neither were his perswasions unsuccessfull, for in a very short time the King was baptized by him, by whose example almost all his subiects were ani|mated to embrace the Christian Faith. Thus writes William of Malmsbury.
3 But as touching the baptizing of King Edilwalch,Sup. l. 17. c. 4. we have already related from S. Beda, that he was baptized twenty years before this by the perswasion of Wolfere late King of the Mercians: although indeed very few of his Subiects could then be induced to imitate him: who yet now by the preaching of S. Wilfrid were perswaded to cast off their Pagan Idolatry. The manner of this Conver|sion is thus declared by S. Beda:4. The Holy Bishop Wilfrid,Bed l. 3. c. 3 saith he, having

been driven from his See by Egfrid King of the Northumbers,Bed. l. 3. . 13. was forced to wander through ma|ny Provinces: he went to Rome and after retur|ned into Brittany. And although by reason of he hostile enmity of the said King he could not be admitted to his Diocese, yet none could hinder him from his Ministery of preaching the Faith. For having been forced for refuge to turn aside into the Province of the South-Saxons, lying between the Kingdoms of Kent and the West-Sa|xons, and containing land for about seaven thou|sand families, which Province at that time was wholly addicted to heathenish Superstitions, he preached there the Christian Faith, and having converted many, he administred to them the Sa|crament of Baptism.
5. As for the King of that Nation Edilwalch, he had some years before been baptized in the presence and by the suggestion of Wolfhere King of the Mercians, by whom at his coming out of the Font he was received as his Son, and in sign of such adoption he bestowed on him two Provinces, to wit, the Isle of Wight, and the little Province of the Meanvari.
6. But the whole Province of the South-Sa|xons remained ignorant of God and his holy Faith. Now there was there a certain Scot|ish Monk, his Name was Dicul, who had built a very small Monastery in a place called Bo|sanham, compassed with the Sea and woods, where lived five or six Monks who served our Lord, li|ving in an humble and poore manner. But not any of the inhabitants of that countrey gave any ear to their preaching, and much lesse emulated their profession.
7. But when the Holy Bishop Wilfrid preached the Gospell among them, he not only delivered them from eternall damnation, but likewise from a present temporall calamity ready to de|stroy them. For the space of three years before his coming into that Province no rain at all had falln: by means of which a most greivous famine ame among the people, destroying great num|bers of them. For the report is, that many times forty or fifty men together half consumed with hunger would goe to some precipice hanging over the Sea, and holding their hands together cast themselves down into the water, or upon the ocks. But on the very day in which that Nation received Baptism there sell a seasonable and plen|tifull rain, by which the earth flourished again, and the feilds with a pleasant verdure brought forth fruits of all kinds in great plenty. Thus abandoning their Idolatry, the hearts and flesh of all the inhabitants exalted in the living God, perceiving that he was indeed the only true God, who in mercy had enriched them with goods of all kinds, both for their soules and bo|dies.
8 The same Authour in another place relates how Saint Wilfrid taught the people another remedy against the famine.Idem ibid. For, says he, the Sea and rivers in that countrey abounded with fish: but the inhabitants had no skill at all in fishing, except only for Eeles. But by his command a great number of such Netts as were used for Eeles being gathered together, they cast them into the Sea, and by Gods providence took of severall sorts of fishes to the number of three hundred. Which being divided into three parts, one hundred was given to the poore, anothe to those which laboured, and the third he reserved for the use of him and his attendants. By such benefits as these he gott a cordiall affection of them all, by which means they were the more easily in|duced to expect heavenly blessings promised them in his Sermons, since by his assistance they had already obtained temporall.
9 Great numbers therefore having been converted, the next care was to appoint a Mansion for Saint Wilfrid and his compa|nions. This care was not wanting, for as the same Authour says,Id. ib. At that time King Edil|walch gave to the most Reverend Bishop a posses|sion of eighty seaven families, for the entertain|ment of himself and those who would not forsake him in his banishment. The place was called Seo|lesea, or the Island of Seales. It was encompassed by the Sea on all sides except toward the West, where the entrance into it is in breadth about a bow-shoot. Asson as the Holy Bishop had the possession of this place, he founded there a Mo|nasery, placing therein for the most part uch as he had brought with him, whom he instituted in a Regular conversation: and this Monastery is to this day governed by such as have succeeded him. For he remained in those parts the space of five years, that is, to the death of King Egfrid, and worthily exercised his Episcopall Office both by word and deed. And whereas the King, to|gether with the said land, had bestowed on him all the goods and persons upon it, he instructed them all in the Christian Faith and purified them with the Sacrament of Baptism: among whom were men and mayd-serants two hundred and fifty, all which were not only by baptism rescued from the slavery of the Devill, but had likewise be|stowed on them a freedom from human servi|tude.
10. Severall Bishops anciently have had their Episcopall See in this Half-Island, and were called Bishops of Selsey: but none suc|ceeded S. Wilfrid there, till the year of Grace seaven hundred and eleaven. Afterward about the year one thousand and seaventy the Episcopall See, was translated thence to Cissancester now called Chichester, where it re+mains to this day.Camden in Sussex. As for the ancient small Cit|ty in which those Bishops resided, there remains only the cakeyse of it, which in high tides is quite covered with the Sea, but at low water is open and conspicuous, saith Camden.
11. Over the Monks in this new founded Monastery S. Wilfrid appointed Abbot a devout Preist named Eappa, of whom we have alrea|dy treated And a little after hapned a terrible plague which swept away great numbers both of Religious persons there, and in the countrey about.Bed. l 4. c. 14. By occasion of which the Monks appointed a solemn Fast three days together, with prayers and Sacrifices for the asswaging of it. And on the second day

of the said Fas hapned that Miracle which we mention'd fore at the Death of the Holy King  Martyr S. Osald: how a young child in the said Monastery lying alone sick of the infection, whilst the Monks were at Prayers in the Church, there appeared to him the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, bidding him not to be afraid of death, for the same day he should be caried by them into heaven: but he was to expect till the Masses were fi|nished, after which he should receive the precious body and blood of our Lord for his Viaticum. They commanded him likewise that he should call for the Preist and Abbot Eappa, to whom he should declare that God had heard and accepted their prayers, and excepting the young child himself, not any one of the Monastery or possessions adioyning should dye of that sicknes. And that this mercy to them was obtained by the inter|cession of the glorious King and Martyr Saint Oswald who the very same day had been slain by Infidels. This the child declared accor|dingly to the Preist Eappa: and the event confirmed the truth, for he dyed the same day, and not any one after him: all that were sick recovered, and the infection ceased.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. Three Bishopricks among the Nor|thumbers.
3.4 c. Trumwin ordained Bishop of the Picts: and afterward expelled.

1. WEE will leave S. Wilfrid among the South-Saxons awhile, busy in his Apostolick employment among his new Con+verts: and return to take a view what passed in the mean time in the Northern parts of Brittany. We have already declared how S. Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury partly in compliance with King Egfrids passion against S. Wilfrid, and partly in conformity to a Canon of the Council of Hertford, divided the single Diocese of the Northumbers into two that of York and another of the more Northern Provinces, the Episcopall See where|of was placed indifferently at Lindesfarn and Hagulstad This was done in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy eight. And two years after, he again added a third Bishoprick in the same Province. For wheras Eata had been consecrated Bishop both of Lindesfarn and Hagulstad, he then divided that Diocese, leaving that of Lindesfarn to Eata, and ordai|ning Tumbert, or Cumbert, over that of Ha|gulstad, now called Hexham.
2. He instituted likewise at the same time a New Bishoprick among the Viccians, or in|habitants of Worcester-shire consecrating Boselus their first Bishop: For he who had been formerly designed thereto, named Tatfrith,Godv in Episc. Wigorn a man of great courage and learning, and of an excellent iudgment (saith S Beda quote by B. Godwin) had immaturely been snatch away by death before he could be consecrated.
3. At this time the Nation of the Pict though they had embraced the Christia Faith many years before, yet by reason o the great vicissitudes hapning among them, wanted a Bishop. In the year six hundred forty two they were subdued by King Oswald and made tributary. After the death of the next King, Oswi, and in the first year of the raign of Egfrid, the same Picts (saith William of Malmsbury) contemning the infancy of this young King,Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 3. f. 261. withdrew themselves from his obedience, and boldly invaded his Kingdom under the conduct of a Noble man named Berney: The young King courageously mett them, and with an army much inferiour in number, destroyed an innumerable multitude of Picts, insomuch as the feilds were covered, and rivers choaked up with their carkeyses. This hapned in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred seaventy one.
4. Now King Egfrid who notwithstanding his uniust rage against S. Wilfrid, was yet zealous enough to protect and enlarge the Church, admonished S. Theodore Arch-bishop o Canter|bury, to whom the generall care of the Eccle|siasticall state of Brittany was committed, that the said Nation, though professed Christia~s, was distitute of a common Pastour to admini|ster to them spirituall nourishment. Here up|on S. Theodore ordained Trumwin Bishop,Bed. l. 4. c. 12
whom in the year of Grace six hundred eighty one he sent into the Province of the Picts, at that time subiect to the Empire of the English, saith S. Beda.
5. It does not appear in any ancient Records, whether any peculiar place was assigned him for his Episcopall See: Most likely it is that he had no fixed habitation, for in a Synod a little while after his consecration at which he was present, he subscribed in this form, I Trum|wine Bishop of the Picts have subscribed hereto.
6. This good Bishop, though he continued alive till the year of Grace seaven hundred, yet administred that Bishoprick but a short while. For four years after this the Nation of the Picts rebelled against King Egfrid, and coming to a battell obtained a great victory against him and slew him. After which Vi|ctory, they entirely freed themselves from the dominion of the English, whom they drove out of their countrey, killing all those which fell into their hands. Now among those which by flight escaped their fury, saith S. Beda,Bed. l. 4. c. 26.
one was the most reverend man of God Trumwine, who lately had received the Office and dignity of Bishop among them: He together with all the Reli|gious persons and others living in the Monastery of Abercurwig, newly founded by him, departed out of that countrey. His escape was the lesse difficult, because the said Monastery was seated near the li|mits of both the Nations of the English and Picts Assoon as he was come into a place of security, he sent away the Monks attending him, commending the~ to severall Abbots his freinds. As for himselfe he chose for his mansion the famous Monastery of

streanshalck,A. D. 682. where there was a Congregation both of men and woemen consecrated to God. There, attended with a few of his Brethren, he spent many years in a strict Monasticall Conver|sation, to the benefit not only of himself, but many others. At that time the Royal Virgin Elfleda was Abbesse of the said Monastery, toge|ther with her Mother Eanfleda. And by the co|ming of the Holy Bishop thither the said devout Abbesse received much comfort and assistance in the regulating her Religious subjects.
Sup. l. 16. c.7. This Holy Abbesse Elfleda, or Edelfleda, was the daughter of Oswi formerly King of the Northumbers, and consecrated by him to God in the year of Grace six hundred fifty five, when she was but a year old, so full|filling a vow which he made to God when he was to fight a battell against Penda the cruell King of the Mercians. She had all her life been educated in piety by the Holy Ab|besse Hilda: and after her death succeeded in the government, of the Monastery of Streans|halck. Among her Subjects and Disciples none deserved better to have her memory recorded then her Mother Eanfleda, who after the death of her husband Oswi retired into the same Monastery, willingly submitting her self to be instructed in Monastick Observance, and governed by her own daughter. Con|cerning whom occasion will be given to speak further.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2.3. Two Monasteries of S Peter and S. Paul built by King Egbert among the Northumbers.
4.5 c The Gests of S. Benedict Bisop: of S. Ceolfrid, and S. Easterwin, Abbots there.

A D. 682.1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty two Pope Agathon dyed: after which the See remained vacant the space of nine|teen months, for what cause it is uncertain. His name is read recorded among the Saints for his zealous and prudent administration of Gods Church and many acts of Vertue and piety.
Florent lc.2. The same year, saith Florentius, Egfrid King of the Northumbers for the redemption of his soule gave again to the Holy Abbot Bene|dict, sirnamed Biscop, a possession of forty families. Vpon which land the said Abbot built another Monastery in a place called Giruum, which he de|dicated to S Paul the Apostle (as the other had been to Saint Peter:) and sent thither two and twenty Monks, appointing over them Abbot Ceolfrid, who was in all things his ready and cou|rageous assistant.
3. It wilbe convenient and seasonable in this place to treat somewhat largely of the foundation of the two Monasteries of S. Peter and S. Paul by the liberality of King Egfrid and care of S. Benedict Biscop: Likewise of the Abbots governing them and other oc|currents, related by Saint da, who was a Monk in one of them in the first age of their foundation, and besides severall particulars regarding them, sprinckled in his generall Ecclesiasticall History, has compiled a Treatise expressly on this Subject, which has been late|ly rescued from the dust and darknes and published by the learned Antiquary, Sir Iames Ware.
4. In which Treatise we read how [S. Be|nedict Biscop born of a Noble family,Bed. Hist. Ab|batum Wre|mouth. and a household servant of Oswi King of the Nor|thumbers, from whom he received a possessio~ of land competent to his degree, notwith|standing at the age of five and twenty years despised worldly preferments, and aspiring only to celestiall honours forsook his coun|trey and kinred for Christ, and travelled to Rome out of a devotion to visit  religious+ly venerate the Monuments of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. At the same time Alcfrid son of the said King Oswi moved with the same devotion, accompanied him in that voyage, but was recalled by his Father. Yet this hindred not S. Benedict from pro|ceeding in his iourney, which he dispatched with great diligence, and arrived at Rome in the dayes of Pope Vitalian.
5. The short time of his abode there, which was not many months, he employed in per|fecting himself in the knowledge of Divine things, of which he had tasted some sweetnes before. After that he departed to the famous Island Lerin, where he adioyned himself to a Congregation of Monks, received the Ecclesiasti|call Tonsure, and with great diligence obser|ved Monasticall Disciplin, to which he obliged himself by Vow. After he had spent two years in the Exercises of Mortification and Devotion, the zealous affection which he bore to Saint Peter incited him to return to Rome, sancti|fied with his Body: Which voyage he per|formed by Sea in a Merchants ship.
6. This his return to Rome hapned at the time when Egbert King of Kent, as hath been declared, desirous to have an Arch-bishop of Canterbury acquainted with the Saxon tongue, who might without an Interpreter imbue his Subjects with Divine Mysteries, sent thither a devout and learned Saxon Preist elected to that dignity, named Wighard, to be by Pope Vitalian ordained Bishop. But this good man, with all his attendants, presently after their arrivall at Rome dyed of the Pestilence. After which the said Pope to the end King Egberts Message and request should not be wholly ineffectuall, among his Preists made choice of S. Theodore whom he consecrated Arch-bishop of Canterbury, assigning him a collegue and Counsellour, the holy and prudent Abbot Adrian. And knowing S. Benedict Biscop to be an industrious, noble and religious person, he enioynd him for a higher and more com|mon good to interrupt his pilgrimage un|dertaken for Christ, and to attend the said

Arch-bishop in his iourney to Brittany, in the quality of a guide and interpreter.
7. Being thus arrived in Brittany, S. Theo|dore committed to him the government of the Monastery dedicated to S. Peter at Canter|bury: Which charge assoon as Adrian arri|ved, he resigned to him: And after about two years abode there resumed a third iour|ney to Rome, which he prosperously perfor|med, and shortly after returned furnished with a plentifull Library of sacred Books of all kinds, some of which he bought with his money, and some were given him by the liberality of freinds, both at Rome and Vienna in France.
8. Assoon as he was landed in Brittany his intention was to repair to Coynwalh (or Ken|walch) King of the West-Saxons, with whom he had formerly contracted freindship, and received many kindnesses. But being in|formed that he at the same time was taken away by an untimely death, he went into his own native countrey, and presented him|self to Egfrid King of the Northumbers: To whom he related particularly all the occur|rents of his Voyages, how many sacred vo|lumes, and what plenty of holy Relicks of the Blessed Apostles and Martyrs of Christ he had brought into Brittany out of forrein coun|treys. He did not conceale likewise from him the ardent desire he had to a Religious Profession, and what knowledge he had gott at Rome and elsewhere of Ecclesiasticall and Monasticall Discipline.
9. By such discourses he found so much favour and kindnes with the King, that he presently bestowd upon him of his own possessions as much land as might maintain seaventy families: commanding him to build theron a Monastery to be dedicated to the honour of S. Peter the Supreme Pastour of the Church. This was done, and the Mo|nastery seated at the mouth of the River Wire (Vedra) on the northside of the River, in the six hundred seaventy fourth year of our Lords Incarnation, the second Indiction, and fourth year of the raign of King Egfrid.
10 Scarce a year was passed after the Mo|nastery was built, but S. Benedict went over Sea into France, from whence be brought with him Masons, to erect a Church of Stone according to the Roman fashion, which he always most affected. And so great was his diligence, out of the love he bore to Saint Peter, to whose honour it was built, that within the compasse of a year after the foun|dations were layd, it was entirely perfected, insomuch as Solemne Masses were sung there. Moreover when the building was almost fi|nished he sent Messengers into France, who brought back with them glasiers to make windows for the Church and upper galleries. This was an art formerly unknown in Brit|tany, and was taught the Brittains at this time, being very commodious for lamps and other vessells usefull in the Church. In a word whatsoever was convenient for the service of the Altar and adorning of the Church, both vessels and Vestments, which could not be found in Brittany, he took or|der should be brought out of forrein coun|treys.
11. And because he could not be furni|shed with all things out of France, he un|dertook a fourth iourney to Rome, from whence he came loaded with abundance of spirituall wares as Books, Relicks, Images, c. Besides that he obtained o Pope Agathon to send with him the fore-mentioned Iohn Ab|bot of S. Martins and Arch-Cantour of S. Pe|ters Church in Rome, to be a Master of Church-Musick and singing in his Monastery accor|ding to the Roman manner: Which Office the said Iohn diligently performed, not only in that, but many other Churches in Brittany. Lastly the devout Abbot Benedict brought with him from Rome another, which was no mean, present, to wit, a Beif of Pope Aga|thon by which the said Monastery was made free and exempted from all outward usur|pations and oppressions: Which Priviledge was dmanded by the advice and desire of King Egfrid.
12. The said King being well satisfied and delighted with the zeale and industry of S. Benedict, and perceiving that his former Gift had been well and proffitably employd, he added a second Gift of a possession of forty families, on which by command of the said King Egfrid he built another Monastery on the opposite side of the same River, which he consecrated to the honour of S. Paul the Apostle, sending thither seaventeen Monks under the government of Ceolfrid a Preist their Abbot. Now a speciall care S. Benedict had in the constitution of these two Mona|steries of S. Peter and Saint Paul, the former seated at Wiremouth, and the other at Girwy (now called Iarrow) that they were linked together in peace and unity, as if they were but one body, being governed by the same Rule and Institut.
13. As for this Ceolfrid, he had been a companion and assistant in all things to S. Benedict from the first foundation of the for|mer Monastery: He had also attended him in his last iourney to Rome, which he wil|lingly undertook both out of devotion, and also a desire to encrease his knowledge in sa|cred and Ecclesiasticall matters. Vpon occa|sion of which iourney Saint Benedict made choice of a certain Preist and Monk of the Monastery of S. Peter, called Easterwin, whom he constituted Abbot of the said Monaste|ry, to the end he might assist him in the la|bour of its government, which by reason of his frequent iourneys and absence, he could not sustain alone. Neither ought it to seem absurd that two Abbots at the same time should ioyntly govern one Mo|nastery: For Ecclesiasticall History informs us that Saint Peter constituted two Bishops a

Rome, under himself, the necessity of affairs so requiring at that time: And the great Patriark S. Benedict himself, as the Blessed Pope S. Gregory writes of him, appointed over his Disciples twelve Abbots subordinate to him|self, without any prejudice to Charity, yea to the augmentation of it.]


XII. CHA.XII. CHAP.

1.2. The Gests of the holy Abbot Easterwin: his death.

1. BEcause we will not interrupt this narration touching the foundation of those two Monasteries of S. Peter and Saint Paul, with the discipline and government of them for severall years under the dire|ction of S. Benedict and other Abbots subor|dinate to him, we will proceed in setting down a summary of the Treatise of S. Beda touching that argument, in which is con|tained an abstract of the lives and actions of the said Abbots, beginning with him who dyed first, which was the Venerable Abbot Easterwin.
Bed. ib.[2. He was born of a Noble extraction, but was far from making that an argument of pride and contempt of others, as some doe: but as became a true servant of God, he used it as a motive to aspire to true Nobi|lity of soule, consisting in Piety and humi|lity. He was cousin germain to his Abbot S. Benedict, but in both of their minds there was such a contempt of worldly respects or priviledges, that neither did Easterwin at his first admission into the Monastery expect any preeminence in consideration of his birth, nor any priviledge or favour for his propin|quity to the Abbot, who likewise for his part did not at all consider these relations: but he lived in the Monastery in an equall state with the meanest.
3. Add hereto, that whereas he had been an Officer in the Court of King Egfrid, assoon as he had quitted secular employments, and undertaken a spirituall warfare onely, he continued always like the rest of his poor brethren, humble and obedient, and not only willingly but ioyfully, would he win|now or thrash corn, milk the ewes or hey|fers, and labour in the bake-house, garden or kitchen, and any other painfull or mean services of the Monastery.
4. Yea after he had unwillingly under|taken the degree and Office of Abbot, he re|mained in the same mind he was before towards all, according to the Wise mans admo|nition, saying, They have made thee a Ruler, be not lifted up, but be amongst them as one of them, mild, affable and kind to all. Whensoe|ver upon occasion he was obliged to exer|cise Regular Discipline or correction towards any of his brethren, after a fault committed, he so behaved himself, as rather to prevent any future recidivation, then to expresse an|ger for what was past, neither did he shw a countenance clouded with any passion. Whensoever the necessity of busines called him abroad, which often hapned, if he found any of his brethren at labour, he would presently ioyne himself with them, either holding the plough, or turning the van to winnow, or hammering iron and the like: For in his youth he was robustious and fitt for any labour. He had a sweet and winning speech, a cheerfull heart, a liberall hand, and well conditioned aspect. Whilst he was Abbot he contented himself with the same dyet he used before, and as the rest of his Community used, he lay in the same Common Dormitory, insomuch as when the disease of which he dyed seised on him, so that, as he perceived by certain signs, it would prove mortall, he continued two dayes re|sting in the Dormitory: For the five remai|ning dayes before his death he made him|self to be removed to a more retired lodging in the Monastery: And one of those dayes co|ming abroad into the aire, he sent for all his Brethren, and with great compassion and kindnes gave to each of them the kisse of peace, they all the while weeping  beway|ling the departure of so good and great a Father and Pastour.
5. He dyed the night before the Nones of March, whilst the Monks were exer|cised in singing Martins. He was four and twenty years old when he first entred the Monastery, in which he lived twelve years: seaven of which were spent in his Preistly duty, and four in governing the Convent: after which leaving his earthly corruptible body, he went to receive his reward in the heavenly kingdom.] Having premised this short account of the life of the Venerable Abbot Easterwin, we will return to the order of our Narration.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. c. The Gests, sicknes and death of the Holy Abbots S. Sigfrid, and Saint Benedict Biscop.

[1. SAint Benedict having constituted the said Easterwin Abbot of the Mona|stery of S. Peter,Bed. ib. and Ceolfrid of that of Saint Paul, he not long after undertook his fourth voyage to Rome: and as formerly, he returnd enriched with innumerable gifts proper for the Church, as Sacred Books, and abundance of holy Images: In which was described the whole life of our Saviour in so many severall

peices as they suffised to encompasse the whole Church of our Lady, built in the greater Monastery. And our Church of S. Paul likewise was adorned with pictures containing such histories in the Old and New Testament as had a co~formity each to the other. For example, there were placed opposite to one another the Image of Isaac carrying wood with which he was to be burnt in sacrifice; and over against it our Lord in like manner car|rying his Crosse: Again to the Serpent exalted by Moyses in the wildernes there answered the Image of our Lord exalted on his Crosse. Besides these he brought with him two Mantles all of pure silk of inestimable work, for which he had in exchange from King Aldfrid and his Counsellours (for before his return King Egfrid was slain) a possession of three families, lying Southward to the Mouth of the River Wire.
2. But to qualify the ioy of the good suc|cesse of his voyage, he found his Monastery in a sad condition, by reason of the death of the Venerable Abbot Easterwin and a great number of the Monks under his charge which had been taken out of the world by a pesti|lence raging through all that countrey. Yet this greif was attended with some consola|tion, for as much as in the place of Easterwin, by an Election made by the Religious Monks there, with whom also was ioyned the Reve|rend Abbot Ceolfrid, there was substituted a Successour in the charge of Abbot, Sigfrid a Deacon, a man of equall gravity and meeknes with his Predecessour. He was sufficiently learned in the Scriptures, adorned with all vertues, and of wonderfull abstinence: But as his mind was enriched with all Graces, his body was much depressed with sicknes, for he was tormented with an incurable disease of the lungs.
3. And not long after, the Venerable Ab|bot Benedict also began to be afflicted with a tedious sicknes. For God in his mercifull Providence, to the end he might prove the solidity of their piety by patience, cast them both upon their beds, that after their infir|mities had been cured by death, he might eternally refresh them in the quiet repose of Light and peace. For, as we said, Sigfrid after he had been vexed with a tedious and irksom pain in his lungs and entralls, was brought to his end. And Benedict for three years space languishing with a Palsey, was reduced to that extremity, that all the lower members of his body were deprived of mo|tion and life, and the upper parts, without which life could not consist, were reserved free for the exercise of his patience. Now during the time of their sicknes, both these Holy Abbots ceased not to give thanks to their Creatour, continually attending to the Praises of God,, and charitable admonitions to their Brethren.
4. Particularly S. Benedict did frequently and earnestly exhort his Monks to a con|stant Stability in the Observance of the Rul which he had given them. For, said he, You must not think that the Constitutions which you have received from mee, were inventions of mine own brain. But having in my frequent voyages passed through no fewer then seaventeen-well or|dred Monasteries, I informed my self in all their Laws and Orders, and selecting the best among them, those I have recommended to you Moreo|ver he enioyned them to have a speciall care that the most noble and well furnished Li|brary which he had brought from Rome, and which was so necessary for the instruction of the Church, should not through negligence be spoyld or dissipated.
5. But one speciall Injunction he often and earnestly renewd to them, which was, That in the Election of an Abbot no regard at all should be had by any of them to kinred, but only to integrity of life and ability of rea|ching. For (said he) I prosesse unto you that I would much rather chuse that this place in which I have founded this Monastery, if such were the will of God, should be reduced to a barren wil|dernes, then that mine own Brother, who, we know, does not walk in the wayes of Piety, should succeed mee in the charge of Abbot. And there|fore, my Brethren, be yee in a speciall manner wary not to seek in my place a Father either among strangers, or for propinquity of blood to any of you: But according as is contained in the Rule of the Great (Patriark and) Abbot S. Be|nedict, as likewise in the particular Decrees of this Monastery, when you meet together in the common Assembly of your Congrega|tion for the Election of an Abbot, let him be proposed to the Bishop to receive his Bene|diction, whom you shall unanimously chuse as most apt for that charge, both with re|gard to his vertue and learning.
6. The same Venerable Abbot Benedict like|wise to qualify the tediousnes of long nights, which by reason of his infirmity he was forced to passe without sleep, was accustomed to send for one of the Monks to read to him some portion of Scripture suita|ble to his present state, as the Story of the patience of Iob, or such like, by meditating on which his mind might be more vigo|rously affected to the love and desire of hea|venly things. And because he was utterly unable to rise out of his bed to the Quire, and withall found great difficulty to raise his voyce and frame his tongue to the usuall course of Psalmody, he out of a prudent de|votion would every Ecclesiasticall hower send for some of his Monks, and whilst they, di|vided as it were into two quires, chanted the Psalms proper for the Hower, by day or night, he, as well as he could, would ioyn his voyce with theirs: and so by their assi|stance he would perform the divine Office, which alone he could not doe.
7. These two Venerable Abbots being thus oppressed with sicknes, one day had a desire to meet together, that they might see one

the other, and consult together touching the common good of the Monasteries, which they were become unable any longer in their own persons to govern. But so ex|treme was their weaknes, that Abbot Sigfrid was carried in a Coffin to the Chamber where S. Benedict lay on his bed: and both of them being placed close to one another with their heads on the same pillow, yet their weaknes was such that without the help of others attending on them, they were unable to ioyn their lips together to give and take their last kisse of charity: which was a sad spectacle to the assistants, who helped them to perform this last Office.
8. At that time Holy Abbot Benedict by the advice of Sigfrid and consent of all the Monks of both Monasteries sent for Ceolfrid, a man of nearer propinquity to his vertues, then blood, whom he had formerly consti|tuted Abbot of the Monastery of S. Paul, and proposed him to be Abbot of both the Mo|nasteries: whereto all the Religious men pre|sent willingly consented, as judging it most proffitable to the common good and the preservation of peace and concord that one Spirituall Father should have the care and direction of those two neighbouring Mo|nasteries.
9. After these things were thus ordered, within two months the Venerable and de|vout Abbot Sigfrid, having passed through the fire and water of many tribulations, was conveyed to the refreshment of eternall peace. And four months after his death S. Benedict also, the great conquerour of all vertues, was brought to his last end. That whole night the Religious Monks spent in watching and modulating Divine Psalms, so comforting themselves in the losse of so beloved and reverenced a Father. Severall of them continued in the chamber where the devout Abbot lay expecting his delive|rance from mortality. All that night they employed in reading some parts of the Go|spell for his comfort, and in prayers: and, his last hower approaching, they gave him for his Viaticum the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord. And thus that holy soule, after it had been purified in the furnace of many tribulations, took her flight freely to eternall glory, precisely in the point of time when the Monks reciting the whole Psalter, were come to this Psalm, Domine, quis similis erit tibi, c. the scope of which Psalm im|ports that notwithstanding the malice and violence of our spirituall enemies conti|nually watchfull to destroy us, yet by Gods help every faithfull soule shall triumph over them, and mock at their eternall con|fusion. So that it may seem that by Divine Providence this Psalm was recited the same moment when that happy soule left her mortall body, to shew that no Enemy should have power to hinder her passage to eter|nall felicity.
10. His death hapned in the sixteenth year after he had founded the Monastery of Saint Peter,A. D. 683. which he governed eight years alone, and the eight years following with the assistance of Easterwin, Sigfrid and Ceol|frid, the first of whom continued Abbot four years, the second three, and the third one. He dyed on the day before the Ides of Ianuary, and was buried in the Church of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter,Ma. Angl 1. Ianu. to the end that after his death his Body might not be far divided from the Altar and Relicks of him, to whom whilst he lived in the flesh he bore a devout affection, and who was to open unto him the gates of the celestiall kingdom.]
11. Thus far have we continued the Hi|story of the two ancient and famous Monaste|ries of S. Peter and S. Paul at Wiremouth and Girwy, together with the Gests and death of the first Abbots, S. Benedict, Easterwin and Sigfrid: which though they hapned beyond the present time of this History, yet I thought fitt not to interrupt S. Beda's Narration, or divide each occurrent assigning it to its pro|per year, to the prejudice of the Readers me|mory. As for the Gests of the remaining Abbot Ceolfrid, to whose care our famous and learned Historian S. Beda was committed,Vid. infra l. 12. c. 1. we will treat of them hereafter in due place.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. CH.

1.2. c The Gests of Saint Ebba, Abbesse of Coldingham.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty three S. Ebba Abbesse of the Monastery of Coldingham,A. D. 683. a Virgin of eminent Sanctity, re|ceived the eternall Reward of her Piety. She was daughter of Ethelfrid King of the Northumbers, and consecrated to God in per|petuall Virginity by Finan formerly Bishop of Lindesfarn.Ap. Capga. in vit. S. Ebba. This was done, saith the Authour of her life, in an age when persons of high birth esteemed their Nobility to consist principally in the humble service of our Lord, and that those were most highly exalted, who with greatest sub|mission undertook the Crosse of Christ. At that time innumerable Congregations both of men and woemen were sprinkled through the whole Island, severally embracing the spirituall warfare of our Lord. Yea somewhere in the same place persons of both Sexes, men and Virgins, under the government of one spirituall Father, or one Spirituall Mother, armed with the sword of the Spirit, did exercise the combats of Chastity, against the Powers of darknes, enemies thereto. The Institut and practise of these was imitated by S. Ebba, who for the love she bore to the Son of God, even in the flower of her youth contemned whatsoever was great or desireable in the world.

She preferred the service of our Lord before secu|lar Noblity, spirituall Poverty before riches, and voluntary objection before honours For though descended from Royall parents, yet by Faith she overcame the world, by vertues, beauty, and by spirituall Graces, her own Sexe.
2. At the beginning of her Conversion she by the assistance of her Brother King Oswi, built a Monastery near the banks of the Ri|ver Derwent in the Bishoprick of Durham,Camden. in  where now is situated a small Village called Ebb|chester, so named, saith Camden, from the Vir|gin Ebba, born of the family of the ancient Kings of the Northumbers, who about the year of our Lord six hundred and thirty was so illustrious for her sanctity, that by the Roman Church she was Canonized among Saints, and very many Churches in this Island were dedicated to her name, which are vulgarly called S. Tabbs. This Monastery flourish'd till the time of the Danes, whose fury, as many others did, it selt.
3. S. Ebba did not long continue in her own Monastery, before she was invited to the government of the Monastery of Colding|ham seated in a place called by Saint Beda the Citty of Colud:Cagav. in it. S. Ebba. There, saith the Authour of her life, she had the charge of a Congrega|tion of men and woemen which had Cells, though divided, yet contigious to one ano|ther, who all united in one holy Profession, with great ioy and comfort lived under her direction: for by an admirable prudence she shewd her self to the Virgins a carefull Mother by the power and efficacy of her admonitions, and to the men as it were a Father,Sp. l. . . 6. by her constancy of mind. That famous Virgin S. Ethelreda (or, Ediltru|dis) as hath been said, was a Disciple of this holy Abbesse Ebba, submitting her self to the rudi|ments of so great a Mistresse, but afterwards be|came the glory of the Monastery of consecrated Virgins at Ely. And the Blessed Bishop Cuthbert, though from his infancy he avoyded the conversa|tion of woemen, like the pestilence, yet he fre|quently came to discourse with S. Ebba, and would some-times for instruction of the devout Virgins her subjects, make some dayes abode in that Mo|nastery.
Capgr. ib.4. At last, as we read in her life, this holy Virgin Ebba, full of all vertues and good works departed this life to her heavenly spouse on the eighth day before the Calends of September, in the six hundred eighty and third year of our Lords Incarnation, which was four years before the death of the said Holy Bishop S. Cuthbert. And her body was with great honour buried in her own Monastery. Her memory is worthily celebrated among the Saints in our English Martyrologe on the five and twentieth of August,Marty. Angl. 5. August. where her death is consigned to about the year of Grace six hundred eighty four.


XV. CHAP.XV. CHA.

1.2. c. The burning of the Monastery of Coldingham: and the cause of it foretold by an Angell.

1. IT will not be impertinent in this place to adioyn to the Gests of the Holy Ab|besse Ebba the relation of a wonderfull cala|mity which through Gods just judgment be|fell her Monastery a few years after her death, and a warning whereof she herself had in her life-time. The cause of which calamity was the relaxation of Discipline in the said Monastery, proceeding from the vitious dis|position of human Nature, not restrained by the vigilance and severity of Superiours. The whole matter is at large sett down by S. Beda in the tenour following:
[2. In those dayes,B d. l. 4. c. 25 saith he, the Monaste|ry of Virgins in the Citty of Colud, (or Col|dingham) through a faulty negligence was consumed with flames. Which misfortune notwithstanding was indeed to be ascribed to the malice and wickednes of those which inhabited there, especially Superiours, as all that knew it did observe. The divine Piety was not wanting to admonish before-hand those upon whom this judgment was to come; to the end that correcting their faults, they might, like the Ninitives, by fasting, teares  prayers avert from them the wrath of God. For there lived in the same Monastery a man of the Scottish Nation whose name was Adamannus, who lead a very devout life in continence and prayers, insomuch as he never used to take any sustenance but on Sundays and Thursdayes, and oftimes spent whose nights in Prayer.
3. This so rigorous a mortification was first practised by him out of necessity, for the correction of his former wickednes and licentiousnes: but in processe of time ne|cessity was turned into custom. For in his youth he had committed some very great crime: for which, afterwards soberly con|sidering, he had a most horrible remorse, and fearfull expectation of divine judg|ment. Therefore going to a Preist who, he hoped, might shew him the way of sal|vation, he simply confessed his guilt, besee|ching him to advise him how he might es|cape the Divine Vengeance. The Preist having heard his Confession said thus to him: A great wound requires a great cure. Therefore according to thy utmost ability persist constantly in fasting, reciting of Psalms and Prayers, that thus preven|ting the face of our Lord in confession, thou mas find mercy from him. The young man, over|whelmed with sorrow, and infinitly desirous to be freed from the bonds of his sins, thus replyed, I am young in years, and vigorous  body, so that whatsoever you shall impose upo

mee, so I may in the end be saved, I will chear|fully suffer and perform, though you should com|mand mee to spend every night wholly in prayers, standing all the while, and passe the whole week entirely in fasting. The Preist told him, It is too much to endure a whole week without sustenance: it will be sufficient therefore if you continue your Fast for two or three days together. Doe this there|fore for some time, till I see you next, and then I will tell you more particularly what you are to doe, and how long your pennance is to last. Having said this, and prescribed him the measure of his Pennance, the Preist went away: And awhile after upon some pressing occasion passed over into Ireland his Native coun|trey. Neither did he ever after return accor|ding to his promise.
4. However the Penitent mindfull of his injunction and promise, gave himself whol|ly to teares of Pennance, to devout watchings and continence, insomuch as he took his reection only two dayes in the week, as hath been said, and fasted all the rest. And afterwards when he heard that the Preist was gone into Ireland, and that there he was dead, notwithstanding according to his in|junction he persever'd in the observance of the same measure of fasting. So that what at first he undertook out of compunction and fear of Gods iudgment, afterward he conti|nued the same out of Love to God and hope of eternall rewards.
5. After he had with great diligence and care for a long time observed this rigorous course of Mortification, it hapned on a certain day that he in the company of one of his Bre|thren went out of the Monastery, to a place at a good distance, and returned at night. Being come near to the Monastery, and observing the lofty buildings of it, the good man fell presently a weeping, shewing withall great sorrow in his countenance. Which his com|panion observing, askd him the cause. He answered, All these goodly buildings both pu|blick and private, which thou seest shall within a very short time by fire be consumed to ashes. As|soon then as they entred into the Monastery, he to whom this was told, went presently to the Mother of the Congregation, whose name was Ebba, and to her discovered the holy mans speeches.
6 She being extremely troubled with so ominous a presage, as there was reason, sent for the good man, and diligently enquired of him the matter, and how he came to the knowledge of it. He answered thus, Awhile since as I was employed one night in watching and reciting Psalms, I saw standing by mee a per|son whose face I had never before seen, the sight of whom putt mee into a great feare. But he bad me I should not feare: and in a familiar manner said to mee, Thou doest well in passing the night in watching and prayers, and that thou doest not indulge to sleep. I replied, Alas Sir, I have great need to persist in devout watching, and incessant|ly to pray our Lord to pardon my sins. He replied: Thou sayst well, both thou and many others have need to redeem their sins by good works, and when they cease from bodily labours, then to labour more diligently for eternall goods: but few there are who doe thus. For but even now I have taken a view of this whole Monastery, I have beheld every chamber and bed one after another, and be|sides thy self I have not found one person employ|ed in the care of his soules health: But every one, men and woemen, are either benummed in a sluggish drowsines, or if they are awake, they are doing some what that is naught. For the lodgings here which were intended for places of prayer or reading, are now turned into chambers of good fellow-ship, drinking and other wantonnesses. Yea moreover the Virgins consecrated to God, contem|ning the Sanctity of their profession, whensoever they are at leasure they employ their time in weaving delicate garments, wish which they adorn themselves like Brides, or endeavour to win the affection of men who come to visit them. Therefore a terrible iudgment from heaven by fire is deservedly prepared against this place and those which inhabit it.
7. When he had said this, the Abbesse re|plied: Why would you not sooner discover to mee this revelation? He answered, I was silent out of respect to you, and for fear of troubling your mind too much. Notwithstanding this comfort you may have: this iudgment shall not happen in your dayes.
8. This Vision being afterward divulged, the people of that place for a while concei|ved some fear, and began to intermitt their exorbitances. But after the death of the Ab|besse they returned to their former corrup|tions, yea they committed far greater wick|ednes, and when they said, Peace and security, on a sudden the foresaid vengeance came upon them.
9. A true  perfect relation of these things (saith S. Beda) I received from my reverend fellow-Preist Edgils who then lived in the said Monastery, and after the desolation of it, he came into ours, where he lived many years, and afterward dyed.
10. When this hapned, S. Cuthbert being as yet a Monk, though, as hath been said, he bore great respect to S. Ebba for her Sanctity, yet perceiving how dangerous any commerce between Religious men woemen was, what|soever pretext of Charity might be made for it, he utterly forbade it to his Monks. Concer|ning which prohibition and the occasion of it, thus writes Turgothus Priour of Durham quoted by Bishop Vsher, Not long after, saith he,Vsser. in Pri|mord. f. 45. the man of God Cuthbert, being exalted to the Episcopall throne, entirely separated from his Monks all society with woemen, for fear any then alive or their Successours might after the fore|mentioned example, provoke the wrath of God against them. By the generall consent therefore of all of both sexes he both for present and future times interdicted to his Monks any commerce with woemen, wholly forbidding them entrance into his Church. And therefore in the Isle of his Episcopall

See he built a Church,A. D. 684. which in the Sa|xon tongue is called Grenceyric (or, Green Church) because seated in a green plain, and ordained that woemen should come thi|ther to hear Masse or Sermons; but that they should never approach nearer to the Church in which himself and his Monks served our Lord. Which custom is diligently observed to this day, insomuch as, unlesse an invasion of enemies, or burning of the place compell them, it is not permitted that women should sett their feet no not within the Church-yard, where for a time the body of Saint Cuthbert reposed. But quitting this not unusefull di|gression, we will return to the course of our generall History.


XVI. CHXVI. CHAP.

1.2. c. King Egfrids cruelty to the Irish: their imprecations against him: and his punishment foretold.

A. D. 684. Bed. l. 4. c. 26.1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred eighty four, saith S. Beda, Egfrid King of the Northumbers (upon what provo|cation it is uncertain) sent an army under the command of Bertus into Ireland, who miserably wasted that innocent Nation, a Nation withall which had always been affe|ctionate to the English. Yet for all that, so furious was the rage of this army against them, that neither Churches nor Monasteries were spared by them. As for the Irish, ac|cording to their ability they repelled force with force, and withall by earnest prayers solicited the divine help, using many im|precations against their enemies. And al|though those who use bitter language and cursing shall be excluded the Kingdom of God, yet the generall beleif was, that the En|glish who by their impieties deserved such curses, by the just iudgment of God shortly after received their due punishment. For the very next year the same King leading forth his army to wast the Province of the Psts, was slain by them.
2. Among others who fearfully apprehen|ded Gods revenge upon this unjust cruelty of King Egfrid, was his devout Sister Edelfleda, who lately succeeded the Holy Abbesse Saint Hilda in the government of the Monastery of Streneshal. Therefore in great solicitude she consulted with S. Cuthbert, then a Monk and famous for the gift of Prophecy, concerning her Brother, and whether the imprecations of the Irish nation ahainst him would not proove too successfull. And from him she understood that the King her Brother should not out-live the following year. The particular narration of these things is thus compiled by Saint Beda.
3. On a certain time,Bel. in vit. S. Cuthbert. cap. 24. saith he, the most Ve|nerable Virgin and Mother of our Lords Vir|gins Elfleda (or Edilfleda) sent to the man of God Cuthbert, adjuring him in the name of God that she might have the happines to see him and to speak with him about matters of necessary importance. He therefore ac|companied with some of his Brethren took ship, and came to an Island which receives its name from a River called Coqued, before whose entrance into the Sea it was situated: For the foresaid Abbesse had desired him to meet her there. When they were come to|gether, she proposed many questions to him whereto he gave her satisfactory answers: And upon a sudden in the midst of their di|scourse, she cast her self prostrate at his feet, and adjured him by the terrible name of the Almighty and of his Angells to tell her plainly how long a time the life and raign of her Brother was to last: For, said she, I am assured that if you will you can tell mee this by the Spirit of Prophecy which God has given you. But he, astonished at this adjuration, yet unwilling to give her a plain discovery of the secret, thus answered her, It is a strange thing, that you being a prudent woman and skill|full in the Scriptures will call the time of mans life long, whereas the Psalmist sayes. Our years are like a spiders webb; and Salomon admonishes us, If a man live many years, and has spent in mirth all his life, he ought to be mindfull of the time of darknes and the many dayes following, which when they shall come, all that is passed will appear to be vanity: How much more truly may this be applied to him who has but one year more to live?
4. When the devout Abbesse heard this answer, she fell a weeping bitterly,  beway|led this ominous presage: But at last wiping her eyes, she again with a woman-like bold|nes adiured him by the Majesty of God to tell her who should succeed him in the King|dom, for said she, you know he has no chil|dren, and I have never a brother besides him. The Holy man continuing silent awhile, at last said, Doe not say that you want Brethren, for you shall see one to succeed him whom you will affect with as tender and sisterly a love, as you now doe Egfrid himself. She replied: I beseech you tell mee in what countrey he now lives. He answered. Doe you see this Vast Sea, abounding with Islands? It is an easy thing for God out of some one of them to provide a man whom he may sett over this Kingdom. By this she understood that he spoke of Alfrid, who was reputed to be her Fathers (naturall) Son, and at that time lived as a banished man in one of those Scottish Islands, where he addicted himself to the study of learning. After many discourses, he said to her, I command you in the name of our Lord and Saviour that you reveale to none before my death what you have heard from mee. After this he returned to his solitary Island and Monastery.
A. D 655 Before this year was ended King Egfrid, whose disafection to S. Wilfrid still conti|nued, was so far from any intention to re|call him to his See of York, that when there was a vacancy in any of his Bishopricks by the death of any who possessed his place, he would take care that some other should be substituted in their room: as he did this year, in which S. Theodore Arch-bishop of Can|terbury at the said Kings request assembled a Synod of Bishops at a place called Twiford in Northumberland, in which the famous Saint Cuthbert was, notwithstanding his earnest resistance, elected, and the year following consecrated Bishop of Lindesarn, But of this we will treat more largely when we come to the Gests of the said glorious Bishop. We will now declare the successe of his Pro|phecy touching the approaching death of King Egfrid.


XVII. CHXVII. CHAP.

1.2.3. King Egfrid slain by the Picts.
4.5. Different censures of him.
6. Bishop Trmwin driven out of Picts|lands.

A. D. 685. Bed. l. 4. c. 6.1. THE year after the forementioned inva|sion of Ireland, saith S. Beda, King Egfrid would himself conduct an army to spoyle and wast the Province of the Picts, though his freinds and especially S. Cuthbert, lately ordaind a Bishop, ear|nestly dissaded him. Being entred the Province with his army, the enemies conterfeing fear fled from him: whom he pursuing, was lead into streits of inaccessible mountains, and there with the greatest part of his forces slain on the thir|teenth day befoe the Calends of Iune: in the for|tieth year of his age, and fifteenth of his raign. Now, as I said, his freinds earnestly opposed his undertaking this warr: But as the year before he would not hearken to the most Reverend Father Egbert who dissaded him from invading Ireland (Scotiam) from whence he had received no in|jury: So now by Gods just iudgment for punish|ment of that crime, he was hindred from heark|ning to those who desired to with-hold him from his destruction.
2. Whilst King Egfrid was fighting against the Picts, S. Cuthbert anxious about the suc|cesse went to Lugubalia (or Carlile) to com|fort his Queen Ermenburga: and there God re|vealed to him the death of the King, and de|feat of his army. The particulars are thus re|lated by S. Beda:Bed. in vit Cuthbert cap. 27. Whilst King Egfrid (saith he) rashly adventured the invasion of the Picts, and with horrible cruelty wasted their countrey: the man of God Cuthbert, knowing that the time drew near which he had foretold his Sister, that the King should live but one year longer, he went to the Citty Lugubalia, corruptly named by the inhabitants Luel, to speak with the Queen, who there expected the event of this warr in a Mona|stery of her Sister. The day after as the Cittizens were honourably leading him to see the walls of the Citty, and a fountain in the same of a wonder|full structure according to the Roman manner, the Holy Bishop on a suddain as he was leaning on his staff, became troubled in mind, and with a sad countenance cast his eyes on the ground: and pre|sently raising himself up again, and looking to heaven, he said not very loud,Now is the combat decided. A Preist-standing by, who understood his meaning, suddenly and indiscreetly said to him, How doe you know this? But he unwilling to pu|blish that which he had received by revelation, said, Doe you not see how suddenly and strangely the weather is changed, and grown tempestuous? But who can find out the iudgments of God?
3. After this he immediatly went to the Queen, and speaking with her secretly (it was then Sa|turday) Be sure, said he, that on Munday morning betimes you take coach (for on Sunday you must not travell:) and make hast into the Royall Citty, for fear the King be killed And because to mor|row I am entreated to consecrate a Church in a Monastery near at hand, assoon as the dedication is dispatched I will make all hast after you. Thus writes S. Beda: and a little after he addes: The day following one who had fled out of the battell arrived, who plainly enough declared the secret predictions of the man of God and by computa|tion it was found that the same moment the King was killed, in which it had been revealed to the Holy Bishop whilst he stood by the forementioned fountain.
4. Thus unhappily dyed this famous King Egfrid, and has left to posterity an argument of much dispute whether he be to be num|bred among good or evill Kings. William of Malmsbury after a curious debate and exami|nation of his particular acts,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3. abstains not|withstanding from a resolute Sentence: whom we will imitate. Certain it is that he had a great zeale in defending and propaga|ting the Catholick Faith that he was wonder|fully munificent towards Churches and Mona|steries: that he bore great reverence to holy men, as to S. Cuthbert, c. But on the other side what excuse can we find for his obstinat and irreconcileable hatred to S. Wilfrid, or his cruelty against the innocent Irish, c. We will therefore leave him to the Iudge|ment of Him who cannot iudge unjustly.
5. Some Writers affirme that he was slain by Bride or Birde his cousin germain, King of the Picts: However certain it is that by his death the Kingdom of the Northumbers suf|fred an irreparable losse: for by the testimo|ny of Saint Beda, from that time the hopes and strength of the English began to decay:Bed. l. 4. c. 2. for both the Picts recovered all their lands of which the English had been possessed: and the Scotts like|wise living in Brittany, and some part of the Brittains regained their liberty, which they enioy to this time, forty six years after that battell. By which last clause and computation it appears

that S Beda wrote his History in the year of Grace seaven hundred thirty and one.
6. The Picts puffed up with Victory, drove all the English out of their countrey: and among others their worthy Bishop Trumwin who, as hath been said, betook himself to Streneshal, the Monastery of Saint Elfleda, where he lived a great comfort and assistant to her in the government of her Monastery.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2. To Lothere King of Kent succeeds Edric.
3.4 5. Kentuin King of the West-Saxons dying Cedwalla succeeds him.
6 Cadwalader last King of the Brittains.

1. THIS year was fatall to severall of our Saxon Kings in Brittany, for besides Egfria King of the Northumbers slain by the Picts, Lothere King of Kent was also slain by his Nephew Edric. This Lothere was brother to the former King Egbert, after whom he seised upon the Kingdom, to the prejudice of his Nephews, as hath been declared: of which he kept the possession twelve years, though with much trouble and danger. For Edric the elder of his Nephews, and lawfull heir of the Crown, after he was come to years sought to gain his right by force, insomuch as many battells were fought between them with various successe. At last Edric assisted with an army of the South-Saxons, fought with his Vsurping Vncle, in which battell Lothere was sore wounded, of which wounds he shortly after dyed.Vid. l. 23.5.22 He is said to have left behind him a son named Richard, eminent for sanctity: of whom we shall treat here|after.
2. Concerning these two Brothers Egbert and Lothere successively Kings of Kent, our ancient Ecclesiasticall Writers doe observe,Malmbur. de eg. l. 1. c 1. saith William of Malmsbury, that for their cruelty they both came to an untimely end, in as much as Egbert slew; or at least connived at the mur|der of his uncles children Ethelred and Ethebert, who were Canonized Martyrs: and Lother derided the honour done to their memory. Tru it is Egbert afterward bewayld the fact, an in testimony of his sorrow gave part of the Isle of Thanet to their Mother, for the endowment of a Monastery.
3. Besides these, this year also dyed Kent|win King of the West-Saxons after a raign of nine years.Westmon. hc. His memory is celebrated for his great victories against the Brittain,Hutingd. whom he invaded with great forces, and without much difficulty drove them to the Sea; wasting their countrey and inhabitants with fire and sword.
4. His piety and munificence to the fa|mous and ancient Monastery of Glastonbury is recorded in the Antiquities of the same, where we read that Kentwin granted to the said Monastery a liberty from all service,Antiq. Glast. f. 45. six hides of land, and a priviledge that the Monks of the same place might have the power of electing and constituting to themselves an Abbot, according to the Rule of S. Benedict. He gave moreover near the wood called Cantodun, the Mannour of West-munkaton, three and twenty hides, and in Caric twenty hides of land for a supplement of Regular Observance in the same Monastery. And when he had raigned nine years he departed to our Lord. His Body reposes in the Church-yard under a Pyramid of an ancient and noble stru|cture. Some Writers are of opinion that be|fore his death he layd aside his Crown in the said Monastery, spending his last dayes, as his Successours did, in solitude and devotion.
5. To Kentwin succeeded Cedwalla in the Kingdom of the West-Saxons: to Lothere, Edric in Kent: and to Egfrid, Alfrid among the Northumbers, according to the Prophecy of S. Cuthbert to his Sister the Holy Abbesse and Virgin Saint Elfleda. Of which severall Princes more hereafter.
6 To this same year likewise is consigned the beginning of the raign of Cadwallader, Son of Cadwallon, and last King of the Brt|tains in Wales. For after his death, hapning twelve years from this time, the Brittains lost all shew of Monarchy.





THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. Of Boysil the Holy Priour of Mailros.
3.4. c. The Gests and vertues of S. Cuth|bert before he was Bishop.

1. _THE same year that the fore|said Kings dyed, the famous and glorious S. Cuthbert, ha|ving the year before with great repugnance been drawn out of his beloved Solitude, was consecrated Bishop of Lindesfarn. The admirable way by which Almighty God drew him from keeping sheep to a spirituall life of contemplation, by representing to him in a Vision the assum|ption into heaven of S. Aidaeus soule Bishop of Lindesfarn, and how thereupon he be|took himself to the Monastery of Mailrs seated beyond the River of Tweed in the Pro|vince of Tfidale, then part of the dominion of the Northumbers, of which Eata was then Abbot, and Boyfil; Priour, by whom he re|ceived the Monasticall tonsure and was ad|mitted into the Society of the Monks there: all this we have particularly related among the Acts of the year of Grace six hundred fifty one.
2. Nineteen years after that, when the holy man Boyfil dyed S, Cuthbert succeeded him in the government of the said Monastery, in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hun|dred and seaventy. Concerning the said Holy Abbot Boysil, S. Cuthbert; as S. Beda re|lates, was wont to give this Character,Bed vit. S. Cuthbert. c. 22 I have known very many who have much excelled mee bih in purity of mind, and the eminent grace of Prphecying. Among whom was the Vene|rable servant of Christ, never without honour to be mentioned by mee, the Abbot Boysil, who many years since being then an old man admitted and educated mee in the Monastery of Mailros, being then very young. He during the time that I was under his discipline foretold mee all things that should befall mee, and the event confirmed the truth of all his predictions. There remains of all the particulars foretold by him onely one thing unaccomplished, which I wish may never come to passe. This, saith S. Beda; he spke, because the said Holy servant of God had signified to him, that he should be called to the charge and dignity of a Bishop; from which he had a great aversion, out of the love he bore to a retired (contempla|tive) life, and humility.
3. During the fifteen years of his govern|ment of the said Monastery, the odour of S. Cuhberts vertues and graces dispersed it self far beyond the bounds of his Solitude, inso|much as many resorted to him to receive comfort in their afflictions, or light in their doubts and apprehensions: An example whereof we have already given in the Holy Abbesse Elfleda to whom he foretold the

death of her Brother Egfrid King of the Nor|thumbers. If we would be informed of the manner of his life, we shall onely need to read the most perfect precepts of a Monasticall conversation and conceive them to be ex|emplified in his. His whole employment was to perfectionate his own soule and the soules of those committed to his charge, by Solitude both externall and internall; by continuall silence, except when Devotion to God or Charity to his neighbour opened his lips; by zeale and authority of a Governour ioynd with the humility of a Monk; by an uninterrupted attendance to God in spirit, even in the midst of externall businesses; by an Angelicall purity of heart; by rigorous Mortifications of the flesh, fastings., Wat|chings, c. And as for the wonderfull Graces communicated by Almighty God unto him, by which he was enabled to penetrate into the thoughts of such as conversed with him, to foretell future events, miraculous|ly to cure the diseased, yea and to raise the dead: with these things, though testified by great authority, I doe unwillingly enlarge this History: the Reader may have recourse to the compilers of his Life (among whom the principall is S. Beda) to be informed.
4. Omitting therefore a particular ac|count o his privat life, it will be sufficient to relate his Gests during his last three years, two of which he spent in administring the Episcopall Office, and in the last returned to his solitude. That he might have been exal|ted to the dignity of a Bishop long before, appears by a passage in the forementioned conversation between him and the Holy royall Abbesse S. Elfleda: in which after he had signified to her the death of King Egfrid to succeed the year following,Bed. in vit. Cuthb. c. 24. she sayd to him according to the relation of S. Beda,O how variously are the hearts of mortall men di|vided in their intentions and desires! Some doe much reioyce having obtained riches for which they sought: Others who love riches, are yet always in want. As for you, you reiect the pomp and honour of the world, though it be offred you. Though you may arrive to the dignity of a Bishop, which is the highest degree in Gods Church, yet you pre|ferr the enclosure of this wildernes before it. Hereto the holy man answerd, I doe know my self to be unworthy of that sublime degree. Yet I cannot avoyd the judgment of God our Supreme Governour. Whose pleasure if it be that I must undergoe so burdensome a charge, yet I beleive he will free mee from it in a short time: and within the space of no more then two years will restoe mee to my accustomed solitude and rest.
5. Now how his resistance against that ho|nour was combatted  at last vanquished: and how his prophecy concerning the short time of his administring that charge, and how he was permitted to prepare himself for heaven by retiring to a conversation with God only, we will from the same Au|thour consequently declare.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. In a Synod Saint Cuthbert is ele|cted, and with great difficulty perswaded to be consecrated Bishop.
6.7. c. The great munificence of King Egfrid to him.

1. WE have already declared how Egfrid King of the Northumbers the year before his death being constant in his disaf|fection to S. Wilfrid, obtained of S. Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury to make a supply of vacant Sees in his kingdom, by ordaining new Bishops, without any regard to S. Wil|frid, to whom the administration of the whole Province belonged. For this purpose S. Theodore assembled a Synod, saith S Beda, near the River Alne (Alaunum) at which the said King was present,Bed. l 4 c 25.  in vit. Cuthb. c. 24: in a place called Twiford, which signifies a double ford: Which Synod was no small one, (for besides S. Theodore who was President, Seaven other Bishops are said to have mett there, onely four of whose names we can reckon, to witt, Trumwin Bi|shop lately of the Picts, Bsa, Eata and Tum|bert, who was deposed, in whose place suc|ceeded S. Cuthbert. For as touhing Saint Ceadda and S. Ced, whose presence by some Writers is affirmed, the generall consent of History contradicts it, since S. Ced Bishop of London was dead twenty years before this, and S. Ceadda of Lichfeild twelve.)
2. In this Synod, which we may wonder how it came to be omitted by Sir Henry Spel|man, Tumbert Bishop of Hagulstad (or Hex|ham) for what demerit is not expressed in any ancient Authour, was deprived of his See: and by an unanimous consent S. Cuth|bert was elected in his place. But it was no easy matter to obtain his own consent to this Election: For saith S. Beda, though many letters were sent,Bed. in vit. Cuthbert. c. 24. and severall Messengers dire|cted to him from the Synod, he could not be re|moved out of his solitude. At length the fore|said King Egfrid, attended by the holy Bishop Trumwin and very many other Religious persons, sailed to the Island where he was retired: Whi|ther being come, they kneeled before him, they adiured him in the name of our Lord, they be|sought him with teares, and persevered so long in their humble request, till at last they van|quished his resistance, and drew him, full of tears likewise, out of his most sweet retirement to the Synod. Where being arrived, though he again renewd his resistance, yet at last he was overcome by the united wills of all the Bishops, and compelled to submitt his neck to the burden of the Episcopall Office.
4. But though he was then elected, and had consented to his Election, yet he was not

consecrated till the year following, at the great solemnity of Easter. The See to which he was ordained, was not that of Hagulstadt, now vacant by the deposition of Tumbert: but Lindesfarn, administred by Eata. For Eata who at first had been consecrated Bishop both of Lindesfarn and Hagulstad, in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy eight, when that Province was shortly after divided, he surrendred the See of Hagulstad to Tumbert, reserving Lindesfarn to himself: and now per|ceiving that S. Cuthbert rather desired Lin|desfarn, in which Diocese his beloved desart was seated, the humbly devout Bishop Eata willingly surrendred it to him, and again re|sumed Hagulstad: Thus writes the Authour of S. Cuthberts life in Capgrave.
5. This Synod, in which S Cuthbert was Ele|cted Bishop, continued a part of two years, for he was elected towards Winter, and not ordained till the Easter following, at whose ordination all the Bishops were present. And before the dissolution of the Synod King Egfrid gave many munificent gifts to his new Prelat, which were confirmed by the sub|scription of the King and all the Bishops.
Capgrav. in vit. S. Cuthb.6. In his Life preserved by Capgrave we read, That King Egfrid gave to him in York all the land from the Wall of S. Peters to the great Westgate, and from thence to the Citty-wall toward the South. He gave him like|wise a village called Creike, three miles in circuit, that it might be a mansion for him in his iourney to and from York. There Saint Cuthbert founded a Monastery, constituting an Abbot named Gave.Camden in Brigant. The said place called Creike is seated in the forest of Gautres (in Ca|laterio nemore) in some parts abounding with wood, and elsewhere a morish plain: It stands a little Northward from York in the way towards Durham: thus writes Camden.
Capgrav. ib.7. Besids this the King added another and greater Gift: for he bestowd on him the Citty Luel, or Caer-leil: and fifteen miles about it: where the holy Bishop founded a Monastery for consecrated Virgins, ordaining an Abbesse over them. He appointed Schooles for learning also in the same Citty.Concerning this Do|nation the same Camden thus writes in his Description of Cumberland,Camden.  Cumbria. Egfrid gave to S. Cuthbert the Citty Lugubalia in this form, I have given the Citty which is called Lugubalia, and the land about it for the space of fifteen miles.
This name of Lugubalia or Luguvallia was given to that citty by reason of its proximity to the famous rampire (or Vallum) raised by the Romans to exclude the barbarous Na|tions beyond it, commonly called, The Picts Wall.
Capgrav. ib.8. Neither did King Egfrids munificence rest here, for thus it follows in Capgrave, After that S. Cuthbert had raised a child from death in a village called Exenford, King Egfrid gave to him the land called Carthmel, and all the Brittains inhabiting there c. Afterward Egfrid gave to the man of God, Mailros, that is to say, Meuros and Carram,A. D. 686. and all the Appurtinan|ces. It is said that in that rich Treasury of Brittish Antiquities, the Library of Sir Iohn Cotton, there is extant a Charter of these Dona|tions of King Egfrrid, subscribed by Trumwin Bishop of the Picts, and other English Bishops, out of which Bishop Vsher quotes certain passages. And the Munificence of King Egfrid was imitated by severall Princes his Succes|sours, who wonderfully enlarged their libe|rality to his Church and See, afterward trans|ferred to Durham, called the Patrimony of S. Cuthbert Of which more hereafter.
9. But as for S. Cuthbert himself,Bed. l. 4. c 28 he was nothing the richer for these possessions, he practised the poverty of a Monk in the sub|lime state of a Bishop, and, as S. Beda reports in his life, he adorned with works of piety the Episcopall degree undertaken by him, therin imi|tating the Apostles of our Lord, and with his wholesom admonitions invited to eternall happi|nes the flock committed to his charge. And the thing which gave the greatest efficacy to his ex|hortations was, that himself in his own practise afforded an example for others to imitate. For he was in a supreme degree fervent in divine Chari|ty, modest in the vertue of patience, studiously in|tent to Prayer, and affable to all who came to him for comfort. Yea he esteemed the contributing his charitable assistance to his infirm brethren equivalent to Prayer, because he who said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, said also, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self. His abstinence was admirable: he through the grace of compun|ction had his mind always elevated to heavenly things. To conclude, Whensoever he offred to God the most holy Sacrifice, he addressed his prayers to him, not with a loud voyce, but with teares flowing from the depth of his heart. This may suf|fise touching S. Cuthbert for the present: wee shall add more when we come to treat of his death.


III. CHAP.III. CHA

1.2. c. The Gests of Saint Eata Bishop of Hagulstad: with his death.
6. S. Iohn of Beverley succeeds him.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty six,A. D. 686. the holy Bishop Eata after the ad|ministring the Sees of Lindesfarn, and afterward of Hagulstad the space of seaven years, dyed with such opinion of Sanctity, that in our English Martyrologe his memory is celebrated among the Saints on the twenty sixth of October.Martyrolg. Angl. 26. Oct
2. Concerning his education from his infancy wee read thus in the Authour of his Life,Ap. Capgrav in vit. S. Eata Bed l. 3. c. 26 who follows S. Beda: The Holy Bishop Aidan, saith he, undertook to instruct in the Religion of Christ twelve young children of the

English Nation. Of these Eata was one, being a child of a very good disposition and a meek hum|ble heart. By the admonitions and good examples of his pious Teacher, to whom he gave diligent at|tendance, he became notable in all vertues: so that finding grace both with God and man, he became a Monk, and according to the Profession of that state he sedulously gave himself to Watchings, fa|sting and other good Exercises day and night. For he was a man eminent for the vertue of patience, brightly adorned with chastity, affable and plea|sing to all, and, as Venerable Beda testifies of him, he was beyond all others adorned with the Grace of Meeknes and holy simplicity.
Afterward the was made Abbot of the Mona|stery of Mailros, or Meuros, in the execution of which charge he exhibited to his Brethren yet greater examples of humility and charity then formerly, insomuch as they tenderly loved him, not as an awfull Master, but an indulgent Father. He was held in such veneration among the rich and powerfull men of that age, that even Kings themselves reverenced him as a Father, and with devout minds conferred on him large possessions for the building of Monasteries. Whose intentions he diligently executed, erecting severall Churches and Monasteries in commodious places, and assem|bling many Disciples studious of piety and lear|ning: among whom the most eminent were Boysil, Priour of the Monastery of Mailros, and S. Cuthbert afterward Bishop of Lindesfarn, who were men of admirable sanctity, and withall eminently endued with the Spirit of Prophecy.
4. After the disputation and conflict touching the Observation of Easter, which was held in the Monastery of the Holy Abbesse S. Hilda, Bishop Colman by descent a Scott, obtaind of King Oswi that the Venerable Monk Eata should as Abbot govern the Church of Lindesfarn. For the Scots bore a great affection to Eata, insomuch as he was one of the twelve English children which had re|ceived their education from Bishop Aidan. Eata therefore having undertaken the care of the Church of Lindesfarn brought with him thither S. Cuthbert whom after the death of Boysil he had made Priour of the Monastery of Mailros, and constituted him Priour of the Convent in Lindes|farn. And when afterward the dissention grew hott between King Egfrid and the holy Bishop Wilfrid, by means of which he was expelled his Bishoprick, Bosa was in his place substituted Bi|shop of York in the Kingdom of the Deiri, and the Holy Abbot Eata was ordained Bishop in the Pro|vince of the Bernicians, having his Episcopal See partly at Hagulstad, that is, Extoldesham (now Hexham) where at this time there are Canons Regulars, and partly in the Church of Lindesfarn, or Holy Island. They were consecrated Bishops by Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury.
5. Thus writes the Authour of the Life of S. Eata, whereto he adioyns the Narration how the Province of Lindesfarn being divi|ded, S. Eata was confined to that of Lindes|farn, and another placed at Hagulstad: and after the Election of S. Cuthbert, he resigned to him the See of Lindesfarn, and removed to Hagulstad, then vacant by the deposition of Tumbert. And in conclusion he relates the manner of his death, after he had with great zeale and piety administred his Episcopal Of|fice, saying: When our mercifull Lord thought good to crown the labours of this holy Bishop with an eternall reward,Idem ibid. he was struck with a greivous disease of the bowells, called a Dyssentery, the tor|ments whereof encreasing dayly, he was purged therby like gold in a fiery fornace, and at last all the drosse of sinfull imperfections being spent and con|sumed, he dyed most happily, so entring the gate of heaven there to abide for ever. He was buried toward the South end of the Church of Hagulstad, and a little Chappell of stone was built over his Tomb. From which place his body was afterward translated, but by whom is uncertain, and with due honour placed in a Shrine within the Church.
6. His Successour in the said Bishoprick of Hagulstad was the famous Bishop Iohn (de Beverlaco) of Beverley, so called from a well-known Town of that name in Yorkshire, where he, or his family lived. This holy man, as we learn from the Authour of his Life in Cap|grave,Ap. Capgrav in S. Ioan. Bever l. was born in England, and being very young, was for his instruction committed to Saint Theo|dore Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who educated him in all innocence of manners and vertue, and taught him the knowledge and prudence of Holy Scriptures. And after he had been well imbued with other learning likewise, his custome was to travell through severall provinces, sowing among the ignorant people the word of God. But after that the Venerable Bishop Eata by Gods disposi|tion had ended the course of human life, he with the consent of King Alfrid, received the Episco|pall honour. Concerning this Holy Bi|shop more will be said in the Sequele of this History.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHA.

1.2. The Tyranny and death of Edric King of Kent.
2.3. c. Of Cedwalla King of the west Sa|xons: at first a Pagan. His Brother Mol is burnt.
7.8. He conquers the Isle of wight: which re|ceives the Christian Faith.
9. Cedwalla's munificence to S. Wilfrid.

1. WE must awhile surcease this Narra|tion touching the Ecclesiasticall af|fairs among the Northumbers, that we may attend to the great combustions and change in the Southern parts of this Island, This was the first year of the Raign of Edric King o Kent after the death of his usurping Vncle Lothere. His government was Tyrannous, and therefore unquiet:Malmsbur. de Reg l. 1. c. 1 For as William of Malms|bury observeth he did boast but a short time in

the Successe of his Tyranny, for within two years he was deprived both of his kingdom and life: leaving his countrey exposed to be torn in peices by its enemies.
1 But Cedwalla the Successour of Kentwin in the kingdom of the West-Saxons, though at the first no Christian, raigned fair more gloriously, and concluded both his raign and life more happily. He was, saith the same Authour,Id. ib. c. 2. a Noble branch of a Royal Stock, being the great grandchild of Ceaulin by his bro|ther-Cuda. He was a young man of immoderate ambition, who would let passe no occasion of exer|cising his courage. His restles disposition had pro|cured against him the anger of the greatest part of the Nobility of that kingdom, by a faction and conspiracy of whom he was driven into ba|nishment. In resentment of this iniury, he drew out of the kingdom in a manner the whole strength of it: for the warlick youth there either out of pitty of his misfortune or affection to his courage, resorted to him in his exile. Edilwalch King of the South-Saxons was the first against whom he vented his fury: insomuch as coming to a battell, his whole army was defeated, and himself slain. But after that Victory obtained,Wigorn. A. D. 685.
Cedwalla was driven out of that Province by Bertun and Ethelhun two South-Saxon Generalls, who after that possessed themselves of the Kingdom.
3. About this time, Kentwin dying, Ced|walla by consent of the inhabitants was made King of the West-Saxons: Who imme|diatly with new forces invaded once more the Kingdom of the South-Saxons,Id. ib. which he subdued and held in great slavery moreover kil|ling Beorthun, the Prince or Generall of the forces of that Nation.
4. And not content with this acquest, he and his Brother Mul wasied also the Kingdom of Kent:Id. ib. but in the end was driven out with losse. This hapned indeed the year fol|lowing: but since the whole Raign of Cedwalla containd onely two years, or little more, in which short time the hand of God wrought wonderfull changes upon him, converting him from a furious Pagan to an humble devout Christian, from a Lyon to a Lamb: We will here make no breaches in his Story, but deliver it all at once.
5. Concerning his invasion of Kent, William of Malmsbury thus describes it:Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 1. Pre|sently after Cedwalla accompanied by his Brother Mollo breathing forth a furious hatred against the inhabitants of Kent, with all the forces he could make made an invasion into that Province, which he thought might easily be subdued, by reason of a long peace it had enioyed, and at this time was also divided by an intestin warr. But he did not, as he hoped, find them unprepared, nor destitute of courage to resist him. For after many losses sustained in severall parts of the coun|trey, they at last took courage, and uniting their forces together came to a battell, wherein they had the upper hand, and constraind Cedwalla to fly. As for his Brother Mollo (or Mull) he in his flight being compelled to retire into a certain Cot|tage, the enemies fett it on fire, so that he not daring to issue out, was consumed by the flames. Yet did not Cedwalla for all this de|sist from repairing his losses by frequent micheifs done to the inhabitants of Kent: and a more full revenge he bequeathed to his Suc|cessour King na as in due place shall be de|clared.
6. B. Parker in his Antiquities assigns a strange cause wy this Mollo was burnt by the Kentish soldiers,Park. in An+tq. Brit in Brity valdo. saying, Some affirm that the cause of the death of Mollo was, because the Kentishmen perceived that he was very obsti|nat in defending Images, concerning which a Con|troversy in that age was solemnly debated. But it does no where appear that Mollo was a Christian. Certain it is his Brother Cedwalla was not baptised till after this, when he had made a iourney to Rome in devotion for that purpose. It was therefore in probabi|lity his obstinacy not to reliquish his Idols or Pagan worship that might because of his death. And as for the pretended Question about Sacred Images, it was not raised in the Church till about a hundred years after this, and then it began in the East by certain factious Christians, half-Iewes. Neither doe we find any signs in our ancient Re|cords that Brittany was disturbed with that debate. If this Mollo therefore was a Chri|stian, it is well known what doctrine Saint Augustin and his Successours taught in Kent touching the Veneration of Images, and that Saint Birinus, Agilbert. Hedda and Wilfrid taught the same among the West-Saxons.
7. Cedwalla after he had for some time vented his fury against Kent, turned his arms to the subding the Isle of Wight, ad|ioyning to the Province of the south-Sa|xons already conquered by him. And how great a blessing that Island obtained by his cruelty wee find thus related by Saint Beda: After that Cedwalla (saith he) had the posses|sion of the Kingdom of the Gevissi (or West-Saxons,Bed l 4. c. 18.) he subdued the Isle of Wight, the in|habitants whereof were to that time wholly ad|dicted to Pagan Idolatry, whom he endeavou|red wholly to exterminate, and to place in their rooms his own Subjects: yea, as the report is, he obliged himself by vow, though as yet he was no professed Christian, nor baptized, that if he gott the possession of the Island, he would con|secrate to our Lord the fourth part both of the land and spoyles. And this Vow he effectually performed, insomuch as he gave to Saint Wilfrid, who not long before was arrived there out of the Northern parts, the use of the said land and prey. Now the measure of that Island according to the English estimation is so much as may maintain twelve hundred families. So that the possession of three hundred families was given to the Bishop. But he recom|mended the portion given him to one of his

Clarks,A. D. 687. named Berwins, who was his Sisters Son: And withall gave him a Preist called Hildila, to the end he might administer the Word of life and Baptism to all that would be saved.
Selden in Analect. f. 78.8. It is also probable that about this time the same Cedwalla gave to S. Wilfrid the Town called Paganham, concerning which Selden makes mention of a certain clause in the said Kings Charter, importing that a threefold freedom was granted to that place now given to the Church, to witt, a freedom from having a Castle built there and from contribution to men|ding the bridge, and lastly from payments to the army (if this be the right interpretation of the rude Latin phrase, Absque trinoda necessi|tate totius Christiani populi, id est, areis muni|tione, pontis emendatione, exercitij congestime li|beram perstrinxi.) Another Charter to the same holy Bishop is likewise extant, to which is annexed this clause, For a further confirma|tion hereof, I Cedwalla have putt a turf of the said ground upon the holy Altr of our Saviour, and by reason of my ignorance in writing my name, I have expressed and subscribed the sign of the holy Crosse. Now from hence is manifest that at the time of the invasion of the Isle of Wight, Cedwalla was a Christian Cathecumen, though he deferred his Baptism out of a de|sire to receive it at Rome.


V. CHA.V. CHAP.

1.2. Two young Princes Martyrs in the Isle of Wight.
3. King Cedwalla his reverence to Saint Wilfrid.

1. THE Isle of Wight was the last Pro|vince of Brittany which received the Christian Faith: and that New Church was con|secrated with the blood of two young Prince|ly Martyrs, the Brethren of Arvald, or Arvand King of that Island. The manner hereof is thus described by S. Beda:
Bed. l. 4. c. 16.2. Wee must not passe over in silence, saith he, how two Royall children, brethren to Arvald King of the Island were by a speciall Grace of God crownd with Martyrdom, being made an Oblation of First fruits of such inhabitants of the said Island as were to be saved by Faith. For when the Enemies army approached, they fled privatly out of the Island into the adioyning Province of the Iutae (or Hampshire.) Where being come to a place called (Ad lapidem) Stoneham, they hoped to conceale themselves from the sight of the con|quering King Cedwalla: but they were betrayd, and by his command appointed to be slain. The re|port of this command being come to the hearing of a Certain Abbot and Preist, named Cymbert, who governed a Monastery not far distant from thence, called Read-ford, or the Ford of Reeds (it is now called Redbridge,) he came to the K. who then lay privatly in those parts to be cured of his wound received in the late battell in the Isle of Wight,A. D. 688
and humbly requested of him, that of those chil|dren must needs be killed, he would at least per|mitt them to be instructed in the Christian Faith, and baptized before their death. The King yeilded to this request: whereupon the good Abbot taught them the Mysteries of Christian Religion, which they embracing, he washed them from all their sins in the Laver of saving Baptism, and therby gave them an assurance that they should enter into an eternall kingdom. Thus the Executioner being come, they ioyfully underwent a corporall death, not doubting but that thereby their soules should be translated to a life of happines ever|lasting.
3. Thus writes S. Beda:Id. b. Camden in Hampshrre. the summ whereof is repeated by Camden in his description of Hampshire: thereto adding this observation, from the same Authour, That after all other Pro|vinces of Brittany had receiued the Faith of Christ, the Isle of Wight in the last place of all em|braced the same. Notwithstanding by reason of the miserable Subiection thereof to a forrain Prince, not any one accepted the Episcopall mini|stery and charge there, till the time that S. Beda wrote his History, when a certain Prelat called Daniel was ordained Bishop of the West-Saxons and Gevissi. Notwithstanding true it is that at this time, presently after the conquest of the Island, S. Wilfrid discharged that Office there,Malmsb. de Pont. l. 3.
being one (saith William of Malmsbury) whom King Cedwalla sett over the whole Province as Master and Governour, neither without his assent would he himself doe any weighty matter in his kingdom.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. c King Cedwalla having made Inas his Successour, in devotion goes to Rome to receive Baptism.
5.6. c. The occurrents of his iourney: his Companions.
9. c. Assoon as he was baptized, he dyed at Rome: His Epitaph, c.

1. THE year following,A. D. 638. which was the year of Grace six hundred eighty eight, Cedwalla who had hitherto acted the Lions part, now devested himself of his na|turall feircenes, entertaining thoughts and designs of peace, meeknes and humility: and though he was a victorious King, and withall young, full of spirits and vigour, yet he made choice rather to shew himself an humble servant of Christ, then to continue his raign full of temporal glory. This was a wonderfull change of the right hand of the Al|mighty, of which we may confidently acknowledge S. Wilfrid to have been the principal Instrument. And therein admire the

good Providence of God in the disposall of that his faithfull servant.A. D. 686.
2. Wee can scarce find in Ecclesiasticall story any example, except S. Athanasius, of an in|nocent holy Prelate which suffred persecu|tions and banishments so frequent and te|dious: for we shall see S. Wilfrid once more restored, and again banished, and after that restored again: all which vicissitudes of suf|frings did not onely cooperate to the perfe|ctionating his own soule in patience, but were occasions of procuring eternall hap|pines to thousands of soules. Whole na|tions were converted to Christ by this wan|dring Prelate, as the Frisons, South-Saxons and inhabitants of the Isle of Wight, so that he had the fate of the ancient Prophets, to be loved and honoured every where, but in his own native countrey.
2. But to return to Cedwalla This year in a voluntary and herocall devotion he deve|sted himself of his Royall Purple, and assumed the Habit of a Pilgrim, to visit the Monuments of the Holy Apostles at Rome, and there to re|ceive the humble badge of Christianity. There wanted not in Brittany many holy and Venerable Bishops and Prelats, who might have conferred that blessing on him, as S. Theodore at Canterbury, S. Erconwald at London, S. Hedda in his own countrey, and S. Wilfrid also then present with him: to whom wee may adde the holy and learned Abbot S. Aldelm, the Abbot Cymbert, and many others. But it seems Cedwalla calling to mind that his Noble Prede|cessours King Lucius, the Emperour Constantin, and King Ethelbert had received their Faith and Baptism from Rome, he desired to repair to the fountain of Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy, and to pay his hu~ble respects to the Princes oft he Apostles, then in a sort living and governing in their Successour Sergius at that time Pope.Bed. l. 5. c. 7.
3. To this effect S. Beda has left us an ac|count of this matter: In the third year of the raign of Alfrid King of the Northumbers, saith he, Cedwalla King of the West-Saxons after he had for two years space valiantly governed his Kingdom, voluntarily quitted the same for our Lord, and for the gaining an eternall Kingdom, and went to Rome. For his desire was to obtain this singular priviledge and glory, to be washed from his Sins by Baptism at the Sepulchers of the Bles|sed Cheif Apostles: for he had been taught that by Baptism only the entrance into eternall life was opened to mankind. Withall he had a hope that assoon as he was baptised he should be freed from his mortall flesh, and passe to everlasting ioyes. Neither did he fayle of his hope in either of these regards, so great was the Mercy of God to him.
4. Before he departed out of Brittany, he took care to compose and settle his Kingdom under the government of a worthy Successour. For which purpose with the advice and con|sent of his Nobles choice was made of Inas, a Prince of the Blood Royal, being great grand|child of Cuthbald brother to King Knegils, or as Florentius writes, the son of Ken, son of Ceolwald brother of Kinewald sons of Cuthwin who was son of Ceaulin. Others af|firm him to have been the son of Cissa founder of the Monastery of Abindon. He was a young man of eminent endowments which gained him the affections of all, and thereby the Crown. Therefore as William of Malmsbury well observes,Malmsb. de ont. l. 2. cap. 252. he was advanced to the Principality, rather for his courage and indu|stry, thn proximity of blood, being a Prince of admirable valour, prudence and piety: by which qualities he obtaind great affection at home, and reverence abroad. Insomuch as he exercised su|preme authority the space of forty years wan|ting two, without any apprehension of treachery.
5. King Cedwalla having provided so worthy a Successour, delayed not his iour|ney to Rome: In which his Companions were Saint Aldelm Abbot of the Monastery o Malmsbury (who had also another motive,Miraeus in ast . Febr. Sssay id Martyrolog. Gall 4 Febr. to obtain from the See Apostolick certain Pri+viledges and liberties to this Monastery) and as some writers affirm, Saint Leitphard a Bi|shop and Martyr, who returning from Rome, an passing through a forest called Trecaultium near Arras, was by certain impious persons lewdl slain. But of this supposed companion of King Cedwalla no mention is made among ou Ecclesiasticall Writers.
6. Having taken ship they landed in the Province of the Morini (or Terouanne) in France, the nearest to Brittany, where saith Suriu and Miraeus, King Cedwalla then a Cate|chumen, having heard of the Sanctity of an Ab|bot called wulmar, and of his admirable zeale an prudence in instructing soules, repaired to him to receive his spirituall counsell and a more perfect knowledge in Christian Mysteries. The holy Ab|bot at that time had finished the building a Church to the honour of the Blessed Virgn and of S. Peter the Apostle.
7. From thence travelling through France, and having passed the Alpes, Warnefrid de Gest. Lon  barp l 6. cap. 15. King Cedwalla (called by Paul Warnefridus, Theowald) a Prince who in his own countrey had fought many battells, after which having been converted to the Faith of Christ, he hastned to Rome there to receive Baptism, and by the way passing through Calpin Gaule or Lombardy) he visited the King of that Nation, called Cunibert, by whom he was entertai|ned with wonderfull humanity and magnificence.
8. From thence arriving at Rome very op|portunely near the Solemnity of Easter, at which time by the ancient custom of the Church the Sacrament of Baptism was so|lemnly administred to such as had been con|verted from Infidelity, he addressed himself to Pope Sergius in the Second year of his Pon|tificat, by whom he was gladly received, and admitted to Baptism, in which also according to the usuall manner his Name was changed from Cedwalla to Peter:Bed. l. 5. c. the cause of which change is thus related by S. Beda: At the time of his Baptism the foresaid Pope imposed on him the name of Peter, to the end he might bear the Name of the Prince of Apostles, out of a pious





love to whom he had undertaken so long a iour|ney to visit the Monument of his most sacred Body.
9. After the celebration of his Baptism he was, according to the most ancient Eccle|siasticall custom, cloathed with a White Vest|ment or Stole, signifying the immaculate purity of those who had duly received that holy Sacrament. The Stole was to be worn eight dayes: but before those dayes were ended he was seised on by a mortall infir|mity, of which he dyed most happily, to the great greif of the whole Citty.
10. Pope Sergius bewayling the losse of so glorious and pious a Son, to testify his af|fection and esteem of him celebrated his fu|neralls with great solemnity: and moreover by his order his body was entombed in the Church of S. Peter, and an Epitaph both in verse and prose inscribed on his monument, saith S. Beda, to the end the memory of his devotion might remain to future ages, and that those who either did read or hear it, might by his example be inflamed to the love and Zeale of Religion The Epitaph in verse is at large copied out by the same Authour, containing a Sum|mary of what hath been already related touching this glorious King To which was adioynd this Inscription in prose,Bed. l. 2. c. 7. Here lyes buried Cedwalla, otherwise named Peter, King of the Saxons, the twelfth day before the Ca|lends of May, in the second Indiction: who lived about the space of thirty years: and dyed in the fourth year of the Pontificat of Pope Sergius.
11. It deerves not our care to disprove the assertion of the fabulous Writer, Geffrey of Monmouth, who confounds this Cedwalla a Saxon King with Cadwallader the last King of the Brittains, to whom he ascribes the heroicall Gests of Cedwalla, so burying that Kingdom with honour. Whereas it is evi|dent from S. Beda, William of Malmsbury, Henry of Huntingdon, Florentius of Worcester, and the expresse tenour of the forementio|ned Epitaph, that Cedwalla who dyed at Rome was King of the West-Saxons, or Gevissi: Which Nation was so called from the name of the Grand father of the first King Cerdic,Asser in ini|tio Histor. Geuvis, the father of Elesa, the Father of Cerdic, saith Asser. Neither are there three Kings called edwalla mentioned by S. Beda,Baron. hc. as Baronius by mistake affirms, but only two: one who was a Brittish Prince, who in the year of Grace six hundred thirty three slew the pious King of the Northumbers Edwin: and this Saxon King Cedwalla, of whom we now treat.
Martyr. Ag 20. April.12. A place is assigned to him in our Mar|tyrologe among the Saints, where on the twentieth of Aprill his deposition is com|memorated, with this Elogy, that he was ba|ptised at Rome by Pope Sergius, and dyed in his white baptismall robe in the year of Christ six hundred eighty nine. His whole raign not ha|ving co~tinued full three years, we have here to the relation of his Gests added that also of his happy death, because we would not in|terrupt our narration concerning him: though in the progresse of our Story we are not yet arrived to the year in which he dyed. We will therefore return to relate occurrents hapning in the Saxon Churches in the mean time between King Cedwalla's raign and death. Among which the most memorable are those which concern the last actions of our glorious S. Cuthbert.


VII. CHA.VII. CHAP.

1.2 S. Cuthbert gives the Religious Veyle to Queen Ermenburga.
3.4. c. He obtains for a Holy Hermite Herebert, that they should dye at the same time.
8 He cures miraculously a sick Lady with Holy Water.

1. WITH what unwillingnes S. Cuth|bert was drawn out of his solitude to be exalted to the Episcopall Throne,Sup. c. and with what perfection he afterward dischar|ged his Episcopall function, hath been al|ready declared. It remains that we relate how the conclusion of his Life was suitable to the beginning and progresse of it.
2. Yet one action of piety more, perfor|med by him whilst he was Bishop, we will not omitt, which was the consecrating to almighty God the Queen Ermenburga, whose heart it seems Gods holy Spirit had touched with compunction for all the mischeifs done by her to the Holy Arch-bishop Wilfrid. This particular is thus related by S. Beda: Not long after the death of King Egfrid the Ser|vant of God S. Cuthbert, being thereto requested, came to the Citty Luguballia (or Carlile) there to ordain Preists,Bed. in vit. S. Cuth. c. 28 and also to give his benediction to the Queen Ermenburga, by conferring on her the Religious habite of Holy conversation.
3. At the same time he was admonished from heaven concerning his approaching death, which he discovered to a devout Her|mit, to whom he bore a particular affection, and who had been accustomed once a year to repair to him for spirituall comfort and instruction. The circumstances of their last conversation the same devout Authour setts down in the manner following:
[4. There was (saith he) a certain Vene|rable Preist named Herebert,Idem ibid.  l. 4. Hist. c. 29. who for many years before had been ioynd in spirituall freindship to the Holy Bishop.This man lead a solitary life in a little Island situated in the vast lake out of which the River Derwent flows: and his custome was every year to visit the man of God,  to receive from him documents of piety and salvation. He being

informed that S. Cuthbert was to make some stay in the fore-said Citty, came to him, as his manner had been, with a desire to be more inflamed in heavenly desires by his wholesome exhortations.
5. They being thus mett together, and interchangeably communicating to one another draughts of celestiall wisedome, among other discourses S. Cuthbert said to him, Be mindfull, Brother Herebert, to pro|pose now to mee whatsoever doubts you de|sire to be resolved in, for after we are parted, we shall never see one the other in this life. For I am assured that the time of my disso|lution approaches, and that I shall very shortly putt off this my mortall Tabernacle. The de|vout Hermite, having heard these words, cast himself at his feet, and with many eates and grones said, I beseech you by our Lord, that you will not forsake nor forgett your old companion, but make your petition to the Divine mercy that as we have joyntly served our Lord together on earth, we may likewise together passe out of this world to see his Glory. For you know that I have always been diligent to conform my life to your ad|monitions, and likewise according to your will to correct what soever faults I have any time committed through ignorance or frailty.
6. Hereupon the Holy Bishop betook him|self to prayer, and being inwardly taught in Spirit that his petitions were granted by our Lord, he said to him, Arise, dear Bro|ther, weep no longer, but rather reioyce, for the Divine Clemency has mercifully granted our desires.
7. The truth of this Propheticall promise was really confirmed by the event: for after they were parted they never saw one the other corporally: and in the same mo|ment of time their Spirits were delivered from their mortall bodies, and by the mi|nistery of Angells translated to the beatifi|call vision of God. But the devout Hermite before his death was purified by a tedious and painfull infirmity, which probably hap|ned to him by a mercifull divine dispensa|tion, to the end that the torments of a long sicknes might instrumentally supply the defect in which he came short of the holy Bishops merits, that so being made equall in Grace with his pious Intercessour, he might not only in the me moment of time, but with an equall participation, enioy eternall Glory together with him.
8. Among the many miraculous proofes of his Sanctity and favour with God we will here recount onely one, which he perfor|med during his last Visitation of his Diocese, which is recorded by the same Writer, as fol|loweth:Id. in vit. S. Cuthb. c. 29.On a certain day when in Visiting his Province he preached the word of life to the poore countrey-people, and likewise by imposition of hands conferred the Grace of Confirmation on such as had been bapti|zed, he came to the Village of a certain Count,A. D. 687. whose wife at that time lay sick at the point of death. The Count himself mett him in the way, and with bended knees gave thanks to our Lord for his coming, and so conducted him into his house. And when the Venerable Bishop after he had according to the use of strangers, washed his hands and feet, and was sett down, the Count be|gan to acquaint him with the desperate state of his wife, beseeching him that he would give his benediction to water for sprinck|ling her: For, (said he) I firmly beleive that either she will thereby by Gods blessing presently recover, or if she dye she will passe from her miserable and tedious paines to eter|nall rest. The Holy Bishop assented to the mans request, and water being brought he blessed it, and gave it to a Preist, comman|ding him to sprinckle the sick Lady with it. Who thereupon entred into her chamber, where she lay like one deprived of sence  life, and both sprinckled her face and her bed, yea withall opening her mouth distil|led a few, dropps into it. The holy Water had no sooner touched her, but, o Wonder|full! though she was utterly ignorant of what had been done, she prese~tly recovered a perfect health of body and mind, and de|voutly blessed our Lord who had sent such holy guests to visit, and restore her to health. And without delay rising up, she herself, like the Mother of S. Peters wife, came to doe service to the Bishop, being the first of the whole family which presented to him a Cup of refection.]


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. c. Saint Cuthberts preparation to death.
4.5. c. The admirable occurrents at his death.

1. THIS was the last time that S. Cuth|bert visited his Diocese:A. D. 687. after which he again retired himself into his solitude of Lindesfarn, there to prepare himself without distraction for his last account, which he was shortly to make, as Gods holy Spirit had signified to him. Onely three months space was allowed him for this preparation, for as Saint Beda declares, he retired himself when the Feast of our Lords Nativity was ended in the year six hundred eighty six, and dyed on the twentieth of March fol|lowing.
2. What his employment was during this his last retirement, S. Beda who either was,Bed. ib. c. 36. or might have been present, will in|form us:Having passed (saith he) two years in performing his Episcopall charge, the Holy man of God knew in spirit that the day of his departure

out of this world approached, whereupon he dis|charged himself of his Episcopall solicitude, and made hast to return to his beloved exercises of an Eremiticall conversation, to the end that by the flame of his accustomed compunction he might purge away and consume all the drosse of worldly affections. In which time he oftimes would goe out of his solitary mansion to exhort and com|fort his Religious brethren who came to visit him.
3. The same Authour a little after declares the particular occurrents hapning to the Holy Bishop a little before his death which he relates in the words of a devout Monk, whose abode was near to the place, and also was scrupulously inquisitive into all mat|ters concerning the Holy Bishop. The account given by him is as followeth:
4. [The holy man of God S. Cuthbert retur|ned into his Mansion in the Island as soon as the Solemnity of our Lords Nativity was ended. He was attended to the boat by a troop of his Religious Brethren, and being rea|dy to enter into it, one of the ancient Monks venerable for his piety, strong in Faith, but weak in body by reason of a Dyssentery which afflicted him, sayd thus to him, Tell us, my Lord Bishop, when wee may expect your return.To this simple and plain que|stion the holy Bishop answered as plainly: for he certainly knew what should befall him, My return shall be when you shall bring back my dead body.
5. Thus he passed into the Island, where for two months space he spent the time in great ioy for the recovering his beloved tranquillity and solitude, yet not admitting any sensuall refreshment, but on the con|trary mortifying himself both externally in body, and internally in mind according to his ancient accustomed rigour. After which he was suddenly assaulted with a sharp sick|nes, by the bitter pains whereof he was purified and prepared for eternall rest and ioy.]
6. As for the manner of his death, I will relate it (saith Saint Beda) in the very words of him from whose mouth I received it, which was a Preist venerable for his Piety, named Herefrid, who at that time was Ab|bot of the Monastery of Lindesfarn: viz. [Three whole weekes was he continually tormen|ted and purified with his disease of which he dyed: for upon a Wednesday he began to be sick, and upon a Wednesday death ended his sicknes and sent him to our Lord.
7. Now the first day in which his last infir|mity had seised on him, I went early in the morning to him (for three days before I ar|rived in the Island attended by severall of my Brethren:) for I had a desire to partake the comfort of his benediction and pious exhortation. Assoon as I had given the ac|customed sign of my being there, he came to the window of his Mansion, and when I had saluted him, all the answer he gave mee was a sigh. My Lord Bishop said I, how doe you? Perhaps your usuall languishing infirmity has this last night grown upon you. It is true, (said he) I have been very weak this night. Now I thought he had meant it of his old infirmity which seldom left him, and not of a new unusuall sicknes: Therefore I questioned him no further but sayd, Give us your benediction, for it is time for us to return. Doe so, answered he, take boat, and goe home in safety. But when God shall have received my soule, bury mee in this mansion near my Oratory toward the South, which lyes Eastward from the holy Crosse which I have erected. Now toward the Northern part of the said Oratory there is a Coffin covered with green turf, which the Venerable Abbot Cudda gave mee long since: In that Coffin lay my body, having first enwrapped it in a sheet which you will find in the same place, which I would never make use of in my life time, having had a care, out of my affection to the devout Abbesse Verca who sent it mee, to reserve it for my Winding-Sheet.
8. When I had heard him speak thus, I said to him: Since you speak of your sicknes and that you shall dye shortly, I beseech your Pater|nity to permitt some of our Brethren to remain here to attend you. But his answer was, For the present goe away and in convenient time return hither again. Notwithstanding I earnestly entreated him to accept of one to serve him; which he utterly refusing, at last I asked him when he would have us return to him: He answered, when it shall be Gods pleasure to direct you.
9. Wee therefore according to his com|mand went back to our Monastery where as|sembling all the Monks together, I ordained Prayers to be said without intermission for him: for, said I, I perceive by some speeches of his, his departure is at hand. Now I was very solicitous to hasten my return to him by reason of his sicknes: But for five days to|gether there was such a tempest that we could not possibly take boat. And the event shewed that this impediment was caused by a speciall dispensation of Divine Providence. For Almighty God having a purpose by his Fatherly chastisements to purify his servant from all staines of humane fraylty, and to shew how weak were all attempts of his Spirituall Adversaries against the firmnes of his Faith, he was therefore pleased that he should remain so long a time separated from all society of men, that he might be examined and tryed to the uttermost both by bodily paines, and a most sharp com|bat and assault of his Old Enemy the De|vill.
10. At last when the weather grew calm wee returned to the Island: where being ar|rived wee found that he was gone out of his own mansion, and was sitting in the house, where wee ordinarily made our aboad when wee visited him. Now because a

particular necessity required it, I took order that the Brethren who came with mee, should sayle back to the next shore, and my self remained alone in the Island to assist  minister help and comfort to him There|fore warming some water, I washed one of his feet, which having been long swoln was broke then into an ulcer, out of which corrupt matter issued, so that it stood in need of dressing. I likewise brought him a little wine which I had warmed also, and desired him to drink of it: For I perceived by his look that his spirits were even spent with fasting and feeblenes caused by his infirmity.
11. After I had administred these refresh|ments to him, he sate up upon his couch, saying nothing: and I also sate by him. And when he remained still silent, I sayd to him, I perceive my Lord Bishop, that since we left you you have been much tormented with your sicknes: and indeed I wonder why you would not permitt us to leave with you any to assist you. He answerd, This was done by the Divine Will and Providence, to the end that being destitute of all human society and help, I might be exposed to suffrings. For assoon as you were departed from mee, immediatly my sicknes encreased: and therefore I went out of mine own mansion to this place, that if any of you came to attend mee, they might find mee here, and not be obliged to goe into my mansion. And from the time that I entred into this room and seated my self here, I have never stirrd from hence, but remained these five dayes and five nights quiet in the same place. I replyed, But how was it possible you should continue so? Have you remained so long a time destitute of all sustenance? Then he lifting up a skirt of the Coverlet on which he sate, shewd mee five onyons hid there, and sayd, This has been all my food these five dayes. For whensoever my palate was dryed and burnt with thirst, by tasting of these I received some refresh|ment. Now I perceived that one of those onyons had had a lesse half of it dimi|nished.
12. Moreover he added saying, My spirituall Enemies have these five last days assaulted mee with more frequent and bitter persecutions then they have done all the time that I have abode in this Island. I durst not presume to ask him concerning the nature and quality of those tentations: Therefore I only besought him that he would admitt of some to assist him. To this request he yeilded, and retained with him certain of our Brethren: among whom one was the Elder Beda a Preist, who anciently had been his familiar assistant, and particularly had taken an account of what|soever he had given or received: Him he made choice of to the end he might ac|quaint him whether any thing had been re|ceived, for which no recompence had been made, and which before his death he would needs have restored. He designed likewise among his attendants another Monk especial|ly, who a long time had been sick of a fluxe, and could receive no help from Physicians: but for his piety, prudence and gravity be|came worthy to be a wittnes of the last words of the holy Bishop and of the manner of his happy death and departure to our Lord.
13. In the mean time I returned home, and acquainted my Brethren that it was our Venerable Fathers will to be buried in his own Island: But in my opinion it would be more just and fitting that we should soli|cite him to permitt his Body to be translated hither, and buried with honour in our Church. The motion made by mee was plea|sing to them all: therefore going to the Bi|shop we petitioned him saying, We dare not presume contemptuously to disobey your Order that your Body should be buried in this place. Notwithstanding we humbly request you to ho|nour us so far as to permitt us to translate it to our Monastery, that we may enioy the blessing of its presence among us. He answerd, Truly my desire was to repose in my body here where I have combatted so long time against my Spirituall Enemies, and at last according to the Grace given mee consummated my course: and my hope was that from hence I should be called by my mer|cifull Iudge to receive a crown of glory. More|over my opinion is that it would be more commodious for you also that I should repose here, considering that notwithstanding my many im|perfections, a fame is gone out and entertained by the people that I am a faithfull servant of Christ, by which many facinorous or persecuted men will probably have recourse to my Tombe for protection and safety, upon which account you will be oft obliged to intercede in their behalf with Princes and Great men, to your great distraction and in|convenience. For this reason it is that I am un|willing that my Body should repose among you.
14. But notwithstanding all these allega|tions we persisted in our Petition, profes|sing that the incommodity and trouble al|ledged by him would seem light and even gratefull to us. Whereupon the Holy Bishop seing our constancy, at last with great gra|vity sayd, Since you are resolved to conquer my will, and will needs have my Body among you, it seems to mee your best course to bury it within your enclosure, for so you may whensoever you have a mind visit my Sepulcher, and it will be in your power to admitt or exclude strangers. When he had given us this permission and advice, we upon our knees gave him most humble thanks, and returned home. Yet after this we frequently went to visit him.
15. But when by the encrease of his dis|ease and weaknes he perceived his death to be at hand, he commanded us to carry him into his own little mansion and Oratory: It was then about nine a clock in the mor|ning. We caried him therefore, for through extremity of weaknes and pain he was not able himself to walk. When we were come to the entrance of it, we desired him to per|mitt some one of us to enter with him for

his assistance: For during the space of many years not any one but himself had entred thither. He therefore taking a view of us all, fixed his eyes on the Monk who, as I said, was troubled with a fluxe,  said, Let Walch|sted (that was his name) enter in with mee. He therefore went in, and remaining with him till three a clock in the afternoon, came then out and called mee, telling mee that it was the Holy Bishops pleasure I should enter also to him: He added withall, I can tell you a strange thing, Assoon as ever I touched the Bishop to conduct him into his Oratory, imme|diatly I perceived my self perfectly freed from all my pan and infirmity.
16. I went in therefore to him about the hower forenamed, and I found him sitting in a corner of his Oratory over against the Altar. I sate also by him He spoke very little, because the extremity of his pain and weaknes made speaking difficult to him. But when I earnestly asked him what good advice he would leave to his poore Brethren for a last Legacy, he then began to make a short, but efficacious discourse concerning peace and humility, and the avoyding of such as were enemies to these vertues Be ca|refull, (said he,) to conserve Peace and Divine Charity among you: and whensoever any necessity shall oblige you to consult in common about your affaires, be unanimous in your counsells. Main|tain likewise a good correspondance and concord with other Servants of Christ who professe also a Religious life, and whensoever they come to you for hospitality, doe not neglect them but entertain them with familiarity and kindnes, and so dis|misse them, not preferring your selves before others of the like Profession. But as for such as have broken Ecclesiasticall Vnity either by their perverse living, or celebrating Easter out of its due time, have no Communion at all with them. Know this therefore, and be sure not to forgett that in case you be compelled to make choice of one among two opposite incommodities, I had much rather that you should dig my body out of the tombe, and carry it with you to what other place so ever God shall provide for you, then that you should in the least measure consent or submitt your necks to the yoke of Schismaticks. Be diligent to learn and observe the Catholick Instituts of our Fathers, as likewise those which by Gods mercy I have ordained for regulating your Religious conversation. For I am assured, that though to some I appeare contemptible, yet after my death it will appear what an one I was both for my life and Doctrine.
17. When the Holy Bishop had concluded these and the like discourses, with many in|termissions, because, as I said, the extremity of his weaknes would not permitt him to continue his speaking, he spent the rest of the day till evening in silence and repose. The following night likewise he passed in watching and still prayers. But when the usuall time of Midnight Prayer was come, perceiving his end to be at hand, he re|ceived at my hands the last Sacraments, and armed himself against his Spirituall Ene|mies with the Communion of our Lords Body and blood. After which lifting up his eyes to heaven, and stretching likewise his hands on high he breathed forth his soule, then fixedly intent on the Divine Praises, to continue the same Praises for ever in cele|stiall ioyes,
18. Assoon as he was dead I presently went out and signified it to my Brethren, who likewise had passed the whole night in watching and Prayer, and, as it hapned, in the same moment, according to the order of the Nocturnall Office were singing the fifty ninth Psalm, which begins, Deus repulisti nos  destruxisti nos: tratus es  misertus es nobis. At the same time one of them likewise in hast ran out of the Quire, and taking in each hand a candle lighted, went with them to a place more elevated, and there waved them that the Brethren re|maining in the Monastery o Lindesfarn might see them, for that was a sign agreed on between them to signify the Holy Bishops death. This being observed by a Brother who for that purpose stood on a Watchtower in Lindesfarn, he presently ran to the Church where the Monks likewise were then em|ployed in the Nocturnall Psalmody: and at his entrance thither they also were repeating the same Psalm. And the following Events shewed, that this was ordered propheti|cally by Divine dispensation. For assoon as the Holy Bishop was buried, so great a Ten|tation and storm of persecution shook that Church and Congregation, that severall of the Monks chose rather to depart from thence, then to expose themselves to the dangers threatning them.
19. But after a year was passed, and Ead|bert, a man of great piety and knowledge in the Scriptures, and withall much given to Almes, was ordained Bishop, these tempests of persecution were dissipated, and to use the phrase of Scripture, our Lord again built up Hierusalem, that is the Visian of peace, and gathered together the dispersions of Israel: He healed the broken in heart, and bound up their ruptures: By which it was plainly discovered what was signified by the foresaid Psalm sung at the Holy Bishops death, to witt, that immediatly after his departure his children should be persecuted and oppressed, but after men had for a while made shew of their fury, Divine pitty would again com|fort and refresh them.
20. We layd the venerable Body of our Holy Father in a boat, and so brought it back to the Isle of Lindesfarn, where it was recei|ved by a great Troop of devout people who mett it, together with severall Quires of Monks singing Psalms: and it was with great reverence layd in a Stone-Coffin and buried in the Church of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter, on the right side of the Altar. This is the

Narrative which the Venerable Abbot He|refride, who was an eye-witnes of all things, gave to Saint Beda touching the circumstan|ces of the happy death of the glorious Saint Cuthbert.


IX. CH.IX. CHAP.

1 2. c. The incorruption of Saint Cuth|berts Body: testified in all ages. The great liberality of our Kings to his Church: Its Priviledges, c.

1. SO precious in the Sight of God was the death of this most admirably holy Bishop, that to shew the incorruption of his Faith God was pleased to conferre an incor|ruption on his Body likewise. A miracu|lous Priviledge not only conspicuous to the age immediatly following, but even to these our times. Saint Beda who wrote his life, and might have been an eye|witnes of what he wrote, testifies as much for that age.
Bed l. 4. c. 3  in vi. S. Cuthb. c. 4.[. The Divine disposition, saith he, being pleased to demonstrate in how great glory the man of God Saint Cuthbert lived after his death, the Sanctity of whose life had before been arrested by many miracu|lous signs, gave this illustrious testimony: Eleaven years after his buriall God inspi|red into the minds of his Brethren the Monks to take up his his bones, which they conceived according to the course of Nature to be dry, and the flesh dissolved into dust. Those bones they intended to lay in a new Coffin, and place them more honourably in a Tombe raised above the pavement. This intention of theirs they signified to their Venerable Bishop Eadbert: who approving it, commanded them to put it in execution on the next Anniversary day of his Deposition. They did so, and opening the Sepulcher found his body per|fectly entire, with a lively freshnes, and all his limbs as flexible as if he had been alive, so that he appeared like a person ra|ther asleep then dead. Moreover all his Vestments were not only undecayed, but appeared in their primitive freshnes and al|so with the addition of a wonderfull luster.
. The Monks seing this were much asto|nished, and with great hast signified these wonders to their Bishop, who then had re|tired himself to a place a good way distant from the Church, which every tide was en|compassed by the Sea: (For his custome was every year both during the time or Lent and forty dayes likewise before our Lords Na|tivity to confine himself to that solitude, there passing the time in great abstinence, compunction and prayer. And to the same place his Venerable Predecessour S. Cuthbert had been accustomed severall times to retire himself for devotion and mortification, before he went to the Isle Farne.
4. Hither came the Monks, bringing with them some shreds of the vestments wherwith the Sacred Body had been cloathed, which they presented to the Bishop. He ac|cepted their gift very thankfully, and with much content heard their relation of this miracle, with an affectionate devotion kis|sing those garments, as if the body which they had covered, had been there present. Withall he commanded them to provide new vestments to enwrapp the body, and to lay it reverently in the New Coffin which they had provided: For I am assured, said he, that the place consecrated by God with so celestiall a miracle will shortly be frequented with great devotion. And how hap|py shall that man be on whom God, the Authour of all Blessednes, shall conferre the Grace and priviledge to repose there. Many other like speeches did the Venerable Bishop adde with a trembling tongue and great compunction. After which the Monks ac|cording to his command inwrapped the Sa|cred Body in new vestments, and layd it in a New Coffin which they putt into a Tombe rai|sed above the pavement of the Sanctuary.
5. Presently after this the devout Bishop Ead|bert was assaulted by a very sharp disease, the violence of which encreasing more  more, an within in a few dayes, that is, the day be|fore the Nones of May, he also departed to our Lord. Whose body likewise the Monks layd in the Tombe of their Blessed Father S. Cuthbert over the Coffin in which his incorrupted Body rposed. After which many miraculous cures there done have given an assured testimo|ny of the Sanctity of them both: a particu|lar relation of severall of which I have sett down in the Book of the life of the same glo|rious S. Cuthberth (to which I referr the Reader.)]
6 Occasion will frequently be given in the pursuit of this History to renew the memory of this glorious Saint, for severall times have his Sacred Relicks been translated, and never without a renewing of miraculous testimo|nies of his Sanctity and glory.
7. So wonderfull was the Veneration in which his memory was held by all succee|ding ages, that Kings  Princes sett no bounds to their magnificence toward him, that is, toward the Church for his honour, heaping Gifts, lands, Priviledges and immunities on it.Camden in Dunelm. Alfrid, who at this time was King of the Northumbers, out-passing the liberality of his Father Egfrid, gave the whole countrey between the Rivers Were and Tine for a perpetuall possession to S. Cuthbert, and those who administred divine Mysteries in his Church. Which likewise suc|ceeding Kings made a Sanctuary and Refuge to all that on any occasion whatsoever repai|red to it, granting them an entire securi|ty for the space of thirty seaven dayes, upon no

ccasion to be infringed. Thus writes Camden in his Description of the Bishoprick of Dur|ham, to which place S. Cuthberts Reliks were last of all translated.
8. And for that reason, saith the same Authour, that whole Region with others con|fining is by Monks in their writings called, The land or patrimony of Saint Cuthbert. For that title was given to all the land belonging to the Church of Durham of which Saint Cuthbert was Patron. This Cuthbert in the first infancy of the Saxon Church was Bishop of Lindesfarn, a man of such Sanctity and integrity of life, that he was canonized among the Saints. And our Kings and Nobles, beleiving him to be a Tutelary S. against the Scotts, did not onely very oft visit his Body with great devotion (which our Writers have perswaded us to have continued hitherto entire and uncorrupted) but likewise bestowed upon it very large possessions and many immunities.Idem ibid.
9. Among which immunities this was one not the least signall, that all the in|habitants of that countrey, as being the Watchmen and Guards of Saint Cuthberts Body, were exempted from all servitudes and obligations of attending even the King him|self in his warr:Idem ibid. for as we read in the an|cient Book of Durham, They sayd that they were Halywerke folks, and that they held their land for the defence of the Body of Saint Cuth|bert: and they ought not either for King or Bishop to goe out of the limits of the Bi|shoprick, that is, beyond the Rivers Tine and Teise.
10. It was no doubt not so much by perswasion of our Writers, as by evidence of wonderfull Miracles wrought by the in|tercession of this illustrious Saint that our Kings honoured his Monument with such extraordinary Priviledges: Such esteem our greatest among the Saxon and Danish Princes before the times of the Normans had of Saint Cuthbert:Idem ibid. And particularly of the last of these, King Canutus, it is related that going in devotion to visitt his body, he approached his monument with bare feet: a signe of his ex|cellency and incorruption of his Body.
Malmsbur. de Pont 4. f. 478.11. Four hundred and eighteen years after his death his Sacred Body was again raised out of his Monument, and shewed openly to all who had a mind to see it: at which time it was found still uncorrupted. This Translation was made by Radulph afterward Arch-bishop of Canterbury,Harpsf. serc. 7. c. 34. saith William of Malmsbury. And four hundred twenty-three years after that, when by command of King Henry the eight the Srines of all our Saints through England were broken and robbed, his body was again found entire. onely a small part of the extremity of his nose was wanting: and on his finger was found a gold ring in which a Saphire was enchased, which Harpsfeild boasts that he had seen and touched;Flor Hist. Ec|cles. p. 110. and the late learned Bishop of Chalcedon with greater reason gloried in the possession of it, having received it in gift from the late Lord Antony Viscount Montagu. who had it from Robert Hare a Noble Catholick Gentle|man, and he, from Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln, who in Queen Elizabeths time suf|fred much for the Catholick Faith.
12. So unquestionably illustrious was his Sanctity, that even Protestant Writers deny him not their testimony.Godvv. in Episc. Du|nelm. B. Godwin affirms that he discharged the Episcopall Office com|mitted to him with great praise of Sanctity and industry. And if any one be desirous to read the miracles performed by him, he may find them at the end of the fourth Book of Saint Beda's Ec|clesiasticall History.Fx in Acts p. 110. He addes, That he was a diligent preacher of Gods word. And Foxe in his Acts writes thus, Cuthbert, Iaruman, Cedda and Wilfrid lived in the same age: all whom I esteem to have been Bishops of holy Conversation. A touching their miracles, since they are not written in the Gospell or Creed, but in certain ancient Chronicles of that age, they are no part of my Faith. But as for their lives, this I read and beleive, that the Brittish and English Clergy of that time had no worldly de|signs, but gave themselves wholly to preaching and teaching the word of our Saviour, and in their lives and actions they performed what they taught, so giving good examples to others, c.
13. Both the Scotts and Irish would arrogate him to their own countreys. The Scotts, because he was in his childhood bred at Mailros, a place now belonging to Scotland. But they forget that in this age the Province of Laudon in which Mailros is seated, was under the dominion of the English: and was afterward in the year of Grece nine hundred seaventy five given to Kened King of the Scotts by Edgar King of England,Westmast. A. D. 975. as Mathew of Westminster witnesses.
14. As for the Irish,Ap Vsser. in Relg. Antiq. Hibrn. some of their writers affirm that Saint Cuthbert was born in Ireland of a certain Kings daughter defloured by force, and left in England at Mailros, whilst his Mother performed a pilgrimage to Rome. But Saint Beda a witnes beyond all exce|ption,Bed in Crm. de vit. Sns Cutbert. Id in vit. iusd c. 14.4.6. in the beginning of his Pom of Saint Cuthberts life expressly sayes that he was born in Brittany: and likewise affirms that he oft visitted a devout woman in England, who had nourished him in the very beginning of his childhood, whom therefore he oft called Mother. And moreover, that being a child he had the care of guarding Cattell committed to him. And being come to mans age, he entred the Monastery of Mailros. Yea his Name alone, compounded of English-Saxon words, Cuth, that is, knowledge, and Bert, or bright, ma|nifestly declares his Originall to have been English.
15: The Anniversary celebration of his Memory is in our English Martyrologe assign'd to the twentieth day of March:Martyrolog. Angl. 20. Mart. And with him is ioynd S. Herebert the holy Hermite before mentioned, who in the same day  moment in which S. Cuthbert dyed in the Isle of Farne,

departed likewise this life in an Island seated in a very great lake (in Cumberland) out of which first issues the River Derwent: Which was obtained by the merits and prayers of S. Cuthbert.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

i.2. c. Saint Theodore repents his per|secuting Saint Wilfrid: and is recon|ciled to him, recommending him to the Kings of the Mercians and North|umbers: By whom he is restored to his rights.

1. THE same year in which by the death of S. Cuthbert the Northern Provinces were deprived of so eminent a Light, a com|pensation was made by the return of Saint Wilfrid from his long, but not unproffitable five years exile. For Saint Theodore Arch|bishop of Canterbury, who had so earnestly opposed him, was at last, a little before his death, mollified by the good Bishops patience, and struck with admiration of his Sanctity and successfull labours in the Conversion of so many nations from Idolatry to the obedience of Christ. Insomuch as he was desirous, instead of restoring him to his Nor|thern Province, to make him his Successour in the See of Canterbury. Almighty God like|wise touched the heart of Alfrid King of the Northumbers to desire and endeavour to procure the Holy Bishops return. This, to|gether with the circumstance of time is thus breifly related by Saint Beda:Bed. l. 5. c. 0. Wilfrid, saith he, in the second year of the raign of Alfria who suc|ceeded Egfrid, by the invitation of the said King received again his See and Bishoprick. In the quiet possession whereof he remained the space of five years, after which by a New tempest he was driven out of the haven, as in due place shall be declared.
2. As touching Saint Theodores repentance and reconciliation with Saint Wilfrid, the particular circumstances thereof are thus sett down by William of Malmsbury:Malmsb. de . l. 3. At this time Egfrid King of the Northumbers had been slain in his warr against the Picts, and Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury declined toward his end: when being wounded in conscience for his injustice committed against Saint Wilfrid, he sum|moned him and Bishop Erconwald to meet him at London. There being mett together, he confes|sed to them all his sins, acknowledging withall that the thing which caused in his mind the sharpest remorse was his injustice against the said Holy Bishop, in that he had partly by open endeavours procured, or by secret connivance permitted him to be despoyled of his Bishoprick against the Ecclesiasticall Canons.And because, said he, I am by a warning from heaven and my frequent infirmities admonished that my death will not be delayd beyond the next year, I beseech you, O holy Bishop Wilfrid, mildly to forgive mee my fault, and moreover to take upon you the charge of my Arch-bishoprick for I doe not know any one of the English Nation so capable of it, con|sidering the eminence of your learning and skill in the Ecclesiasticall Lawes of Rome. As for my self, I will by Gods grace for the future be very diligent to wipe out all old offences by my care to perform all good offices, and among the rest I will endeavour by my intercession and all the autho|rity I have to reconcile to you all the Princes who have hitherto been your persecutours.
3. Saint Wilfrid answered the Arch-bishop with all meeknes, as became so holy a person: but to accept of the Arch-bishoprick without the order and decree of a Nationall Councill, he would by no means consent. Saint Theodore notwithstan|ding used his utmost endeavours to obtain his complyance in this point, but in vain. Therefore he sent Messengers with letters to Alfrid King of the Northumbers who succeeded Egfrid, and to his Sister Elfleda Abbesse of Streneshalch, earnestly requiring them to lay aside all displeasure, and without delay to receive into their affection and favour the Holy Bishop. These Letters are not now extant: but others which he wrote to the same effect to Ethelred King of the Marcians have been preserved by William of Malmsbury in this forme:
4. Your admirable Sanctity, My beloved son may hereby take notice that a perfect reconcilia+tion is made between my self and the Venerable Bishop Wilfrid.Id ibid. Therefore I doe admonish you, and in the Love of Christ require that yu woul still continue, as you have hitherto done, your pro|tection of him, who these many years has bee despoyled of his revenews, and forced to live among Pagans, in the Conversion of whom he has seved our Lord with great effect. Therefore I Theodore humble Bishop doe now in my decrepite age make this request unto you, desiring the same which the Apostles authority recommends, tou|ching a Holy Bishop who has so long a time posses|sed his soule in patience, and in imitation of Christ our Head with all humility and meeknes expects an end of so many injuries done him. More|over if I have found favour in your eyes, let mee enioy the comfort of seeing your face most desirable to mee and let not a iourney for that purpose seem burdensome to you, that my soule may blesse you before I dye. Beloved Son, perform the reques I have made you in behalf of the said holy Bishop, and be assured that if you obey your Father who am shortly to depart out of this world, you will reap great proffit to your soule by it. Fare|well.
5 S. Wilfrid armed with these Letters and rerecommendations, took his iourney to the Kingdom of the Northumbers: and befor he entred it, he received a kind invitation rom King Alfrid, who at his coming, with the consent of a Synod assembled, restored to him all the revenews of which he had been de|prived. The Church of Lindesfarn was now vacant by the voluntary cession and ensuing death of Saint Cuthbert. And as for Bosa

Bishop of York, and Iohn lately ordained Bi|shop of Hagulstad (or Hexham.) they shewed a greater inclination to preserve peace and declare their obedience to the ordinance of the Pope, then to retain their dignities or re|venewes.
To this effect the foresaid Authour thus writes,Id. ib. When Saint Wilfrid came with the Arch-bishops Letters to the forementioned Kings, he was entertained with very kind speeches and all expressions of favour. And particularly King Alfrid, who had familiarly known him before, of his own accord invited him to come to him: And being arrived, he first of all restored to him the Monastery of Hengsteldeim: and afterward by decree of a Synod, the Bishoprick of York together with the Monastery of Rippon. We will now leave him in quiet possession of his Bishoprick: which lasted the space of five years: after which shall be related fresh troubles and persecutions renewed against him.


XI. CHA.XI. CHAP.

1. The Martyrdom of Saint Lewina a Virgin.
2.3. Her Relicks removed into Flanders: and venerated there.

1. TO this year of Grace six hundred eighty seaven is assigned in our ancient Re|cords the death and Martyrdom of a certain Brittish Virgin called Lewina, whose memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the two  twentieth day of Iuly,Martyr log. Angl 22. Iu+lij. and she is said to have been slain in this our Island by a certain Saxon out of his hatred to the Christian Faith. She suffred in the Province of the South-Saxons, whom S. Wilfrid had lately converted to the Faith. And she was buried in Sussex at a place called Seaford, not far from the Town of Lewes, which probably took its name from this Virgin.
2. When the Danes in after ages cruelly vexed this Island, and with a furious zeale, imitated since by Calvinistes, raged against the Monuments of Saints, the Holy Virgins Body was taken up, and translated beyond Sea, where it was reposed at a place called Berga, or Monts in Brabant, or rather Flanders, where now is seated the Town of S. Winoc. Thus writes Miraeus in his Belgick Calender,Miraeus in Fast. Belgic. 22. Iulij. on the two and twentieth of Iuly: Then is celebrated the memory of Levinna, or Lewina an English Virgin, whe flourished under Eubert (or rather Egbert the Father of Alfrid) King of the English Nation, and suffred Martyrdom in the time of Theodore the seaventh Arch-bishop of Canter|bury. Her Sacred Body was taken out of her Mo|nument by Edelin a Bishop, and translated at last to Bergs of S. Winc, together with the Relicks of S. Oswald King and Martyr, and of S. Itiberga (or Idalberga) a Virgin. Concerning the Miracles of Saint Lewina there is extant a Book written by Drogo Bishop of the Morini (or Terone.A. D. 688.)
3, Consonantly hereto wee read in the Gallican Martyrologe,Martyr. Gall. 5. Aug. on the fifth of August, At Bergs in the Province of the Morini is then celebrated the Memory of the reception of Saint Lewina Virgin and Martyr, whose most Sacred Body was by Balger a Monk of Bergs brought to his Monastery from the Monastery of S. Andrew at Zevored (or Seaford) a Sea port in England. The said Sacred Body being caried through seve|rall villages and Towns in Flanders before it came to Bergs, became illustrious by many Mi|racles, affording comfort and health to any one who implored her intercession, as Drogo Bishop of the Morini manifestly declares in his Book of the said holy Virgin and Martyr Miracles.


XII. CHAP.XII. CHA.

1. Ina King of the West-Saxons.
2.3. c. Saint Aldelm at Rome obtains Priviledges for his Monastery of Malms|bury. A fabulous report concerning Pope Sergius.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty eight began the raign of the glorious King Ina,A. D. 688. King of the West-Saxons, as we have already declared when we treated of the cession of King Cedwalla after his conversion, who left his throne to undertake a pilgri|mage to Rome, there to receive Baptism, where he happily dyed in his Baptismall in|nocence.
2. The same year Saint Wilfrid, contenting himself with the Churches of York and Ha|gulstad, which he administred with great perfection, voluntarily surrendred the Church of Lindesfarn, which he committed to the governance of Eadbert (mentioned before upon occasion of the death of S. Cuthbert) who was ordained Bishop of that Diocese. At this time the English-Saxon Churches flourished wonderfully, when the Princes and others following their example, sought not their own interests, but those of Iesus Christ. This wee shall shorty make good, by relating the actions of severall of our Kings and Apostolicall men, who filled France, Germany and even Italy it self with the seeds of Gods Word, and the fame of their Sanctity.
3. The year following in which King Ced|walla dyed at Rome,A. D. 89. S. Aldelm, who, as hath been said, was his companion in that iour|ney, became a Petitioner to Pope Sergius, and obtaind of him in the behalf of his Mona|stery of Malmsbury a Priviledge of exemp|tion from Episcopall Iurisdiction, and a power to the Monks of electing their own Abbot, accor|ding to the Rule of S. Benedict: Of this Priviledge,

saith William,A. D. 690. a Monk of the same Monastery, the same S. Aldelm obtained a confirmation from Ina King of the West-Saxons,Malmsbur. Hist. Novell. l. 2. and Ethelred of the Mercians.
4. Among other Acts of S. Aldelm at Rome,Baron. A. D. 689. there is reckoned by a certain Authour of no great credit, saith Baronius, his freeing Pope Sorgius from a scandalous imputation and calumny imposed on him of being the Father of a bastard then incestuously born. Which calumny S. Aldelm is said to have dissipated,Vid. S. 25. Maij. by commanding the infant then but nine dayes old, expressely to acquitt the Pope of that crime. This fable the Centuria|tours of Magdeburg having mett with, they according to their accustomd impudence doe thus pervert, There was great familiarity between Aldelm and Pope Sergius: to whom a Son having been born by adultery at Rome,Centur. Mag|deb. cent. 7. f. 5, 9. he had not the boldnes to declare the truth ingenuously. What ever the truth was, certain it is that these Writers have most disingenuously ad|ulterated it.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1.2. The death of Saint Theodore Arch|bishop of Canterbury: His Disci|ples.
3. The death of S. Eanfleda.
4.5. Likewise of S. Hersewida.

1. THE next year after the death of King Cedwalla at Rome, that is, the six hun|dred and ninetieth after our Lords Incarnation,A. D. 690. Bed. l. Bar. hc. saith S. Beda, Arch-bishop Theodore of blessed memory, being an old man and full of dayes, for he was then in the eighty eighth year of his age, happily dyed. That his life should be continued to this number of years, he had been advertised by Revelation in a dream, as he oft told his freinds. He administred the See of Canterbury the space of two and twenty years: and was buried in the Church of S. Peter, where the Bodies of all the Arch-bishops were enterred. Concerning him, and all his Predecessours in that See likewise it it may be truly and properly said, Their Bodies doe rest in peace, and their names live from gene|ration to generation. For to summ up all in a word, the English Churches received more spiri|tuall advancement during his government, then they had done in any age before.
2. A great ornament to S. Theodore were his Disciples, whom he left behind him for the perpetuating his name. Among which the most eminent were those who are named by Bishop Parker in his Antiquities, where speaking of S. Theodore,Antiqui Brit. in Theodore. he saith, Besides his other vertues he was in great perfection lear|ned, and after his death he did, as it were, live in his Disciples, which were many and illustrious. Among which the more notable were these, Saint Beda, Iohn of Beverley, Albin the Venerable Abbot of the Monastery of S. Augustin in Can|terbury, and Thobias Bishop of Rochester, who was as skillfull and ready in the Latin and Greek as his own native language. S. Beda inge|nuously acknowledges that Albin assisted him much in the collecting his History, and for the tongues makes him equall to Thobias. Of all these Disciples of S. Theodore, wee shall speak particularly hereafter.
3. The same year dyed also S. Eanfleda the daughter of Edwin King of the Northumbers. She was the first person baptized in that Province. After her Fathers death she re|turned with her mother into Kent, and in processe of time was married to Oswi King of the Northumbers: who by her admonition built the Monastery of Gethlin, now called Gilling, not far from Richmond in expiation for the death of Oswin slain by Oswi. After the death of her husband, she retired into the Monastery of Streneshalch (or Whitby) in which her daughter S. Elfleda had spent ma|ny years in great devotion, and after the death of S. Hilda, was made Abbesse of it. There S. Eanfleda received the Religious habit and veyle, and submitted herself to the in|structions and command of her own daugh|ter. She was buried in the Church of Saint Peter belonging to the said Monastery, where formerly her husband King Oswi, and after|ward her daughter S. Elfleda were also en|terred.Martyrolog. Angl 5. De|cemb. Her name is commemorated in our Martyrologe among the Saints on the fifth of December.
4. To the same year is likewise assigned the happy death of S. Hereswida the daughter of Hereric Nephew to the glorious King S. Edwin. She was married to Ethelhere King of the East-Angles, to whom she bore three Sons, all which were consequently Kings, Aldulph, Eflwold and Beorna. After her husbands death, she retired from Court, and being desirous to passe to a more strict and private life, she left her countrey, and in the famous Monastery of Cala (or Chelles) in France, she undertook the Profession of a Religious life. So great was her devotion and piety, that both in France and Brittany many were inflamed to imitate her example. And among the rest her Sister S. Hilda had an in|tention to follow her into France, but was perswaded not to deprive her own countrey, the Kingdom of the Northumbers, of the lu|ster of her vertues. In the mean time S. He|reswida having spent many years in the deli|cious exercises of Contemplation, this year received the Crown so long expected by her.
5. In the Gallican Martyrologe we read this testimony of her,Martyrolog. Gallic. 20. Septemb. In the Monastery of Cale seated in the territory of Paris, this day, being the twen|tieth of September, is celebrated the memory of S. Hereswida: She being a Queen in England out of love to Christ forsook her Scepter and kingdom, and betook her self to the said famous Monastery

where after she had afforded admirable examples of Piety,A. D. 691. humility and Regular Observance pro|fessed by her, she was consummated with a blessed end, and obtained the reward of a heavenly crown. Her glorious gests Saint Beda, who was a great admirer of her, hath celebrated with con|digne praises.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2.3 Saint Wilfrid again expelled his Dio|cese.
4 5. c. He retires among the Mercians: where he succeeds to Sexulf in admini|string the See of Leicester: and ordains Bishops.
7 8. Bosil Bishop of Worcester dying: Ostfor succeeds.

A. D. 691.1 SAint Wilfrid had now five years enioyd with quietnes, and with great piety ad|ministred his Province of the Northumbers, when this calm was disturbed with new torms. S. Beda dispatches this Tragedy in a ew words, saying, After five years he was accused once more, and by the said King Alfrid and very many Bishops expelled from his See, not mentioning the heads of his accusation.
2. But William of Malmsbury insinuats that the ground of their charge against him was the same with the former, to witt, that he had united the Iurisdiction and revenews of two Bishopricks, which S. Theodore had formerly separated, namely York and Hagul|stad. Adding, that considering the vast ex|ent of the Province, it was fitt to erect a third at Rippon.
3. The freindship, saith he, between King Al|frid and S. Wilfrid stood a good while unshaken,Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 3. till about five years after his return the poyson|nous counsells harboured in the breasts of certain malignant persons at last broke forth. By these mens suggestions King Alfrids mind being pre|vented, withdrew some of the possessions belonging to the Monastery of Rippon, having a design to con|stitute a new Bishoprick there: For he alledged that these Decrees of the late Arch-bishop Theodore which he made, not in the beginning or end of the Controversy, but in the time intervening, were  continue in force.
4. S. Wilfrid resenting this iniustice and vio|lence, left the Province of the Northumbers, and retired to his freind Ethelred King of the Mer|cians, with whom he continued a long time. After whose departure King Alfrid restored the See of York to Bosa, who formerly had the possession of it: and Iohn, sirnamed of Bever|ley, he constituted Bishop of Hagulstad (or Hexham,) who this same year at the request of the Abbot Ceolfrid promoted to the Order of Deacon S. Beda now entred into the twen|tieth year of his age.A. D. 692.
5. Before S. Wilfrid entred into the King|dom of the Mercians, Putta, who ten years before had been ordained Bishop of Hereford, dying, there succeeded him in the same See, Tirtellus this year, according to the Calender published by Sir Henry Savill. So that not any Church being vacant in that Kingdom, S. Wilfrid lived a private retired life, but in high esteem and favour with King Ethelred, who had a great desire to fixe him in the go|vernment and Episcopall administration of some Province there.
6. Which good design of his was effected the year following,A. D. 692. by the death of Sexulf, Bishop of Lichfeild, who in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy eight, as hath been de|clared, was constituted Bishop of that Dio|cese upon the deposition of Winfrid. This Sex|ulf was a very holy man, and highly ho|noured and beloved through his whole Pro|vince, in so much as after his death he was numbred among the Saints.
7. To him by Kings Ethelreds appoint|ment succeeded S. Wilfrid. Notwithstanding some Writers affirm that after the death of Sexulf, his Diocese was divided into two Sees, the one at Lichfeild and the other at Leicester: and that S. Wilfrid was constituted Bishop of Leicester, and that Headda Bishop of Winchester adioyned the other to his Diocese. However these matters were ordered, certain it is that S Wilfrid exercised the Office not only of a Bi|shop, but a Metropolitan also, ordaining Bi|shops there. Thus this very year in the Dio|cese of Worcester (Wicciorum) Bosi who twelve years before was there consecrated Bishop, being now broken with age and labours, at the request of King Ethelred, S Wilfrid or|dained Bishop there a man of eminent piety and worth named Ostfor.
8. Concerning this Ostfor,Bed. l. 4. c. 23 S. Beda gives this account: Ostfor, saith he, after that in both the Monasteries of the Holy Abbesse Hilda he had employd his time diligently in the study of the Divine Scriptures, at length aspiring to grea|ter perfection, he went into Kent to the Arch-bi|shop Theodore of blessed memory: where having spent some time in sacred Lections, he resolved to goe further, as far as to Rome: for in that age it was an argument of great vertue and piety to under|take that iourney. In processe of time returning from thence into Brittany, he diverted into the Province of the Wiccians (or Worcestershire) the Governour whereof was a person called Osri. There he remained a long time, preaching the Word of God, and in his conversation affording an example of all vertues and piety to those that saw or heard him. At this time the Bishop of tha Province, named Boselus, was so oppressed with in+firmity of body, that he could not himself discharge his Episcopall Office. Therefore by the iudgment and consent of all, the foresaid holy man Ostfor was elected Bishop in his place, and by comman of King Edilred, Wilfrid of happy memory, wh then administred Episcopall iurisdiction amon

the Midland-English (or Mercians) ordained him Bishop, because the Arch-bishop Theodore was then dead, and not any as yet ordaind to succeed him.


XV. CH.XV. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of King Ina's Lawes: especially such as regard the Church.
4 c. The Welsh, whence so called, c.
6 7 Preists, whether then maried.
8. The Saxons, c. tender of shedding blood.

1. THE same year Inas King of the West-Saxons being desirous to compose and settle his kingdom in good order, by rooting out such ill customes as had crepp'd in among the people, called an Assembly of his Bishops and Nobility, (at which great numbers of other inferiour Ecclesiasticall and Secular persons were present also,) and by common advice enacted those famous Lawes, called King Ina's Lawes, which conti|nued in force many ages, even till the co|ming and Conquest of the Normans, and of which William of Malmsbury saith,Malmsbur. de Reg l. 1. c. 2. Spelm. de Synod. f. 182. a mirrour of their purity remained to his time. These were seaventy five in number, and are ex|tant in Sir Henry Spelmans collection of Councils, to which the curious Reader may have recourse. I will onely select a few of them, such as regard Ecclesiasticall affaires, and therefore are pertinent to this History.
2. In the first place (saith King Inas) wee command that Gods Ministers be carefull to ob|serve the Canonicall order of living:Ibid. And our Will is, that these Lawes and Ordinances be obser|ved by the people 2. Let each infant be baptized within thirty dayes after he is born. If this be not done let the person in fault be fined in thirty shillings (solidis.) But if it happen that the in|fant dye before he is baptized, let the faulty per|sons forfeyt their whole estate. 3. If a servant (a slave) shall doe any servile work on our Lords day by his Masters command, let him be free, and his Master fined in thirty shillings. But if the ser|vant without command of his Master doe any such work, let him be whipped, or redeem that penalty with money. If a free man work on that day, not commanded by his Master, let him either be made a slave, or pay sixty shillings. And if a Preist offend in this kind, let his penalty be doubled. 4. Let the Firsts-fruits of seeds be payed on the so|lemnity of S. Martin. And whosoever shall not then pay them, Let him be fined in forty shil|lings, and moreover pay the said First-fruits twelve-fold. 5 If any one guilty of a Capitall Of|fence shall flye to the Church, Let him enioy his life, and make compensation according to iustice and Law. And if any one who has committed a fault punishable onely with stripes, and shall im|plore the priviledge and favour of the Church, let those stripes be remitted.
3. Then after severall Ordinances tou|ching Civill matters follows the eleaventh Law, If any one shall buy one of his own coun|trey, servant or free, or guilty of any crime, and shall send him away to be sold beyond sea, let his penalty be the full price of such a person, and moreover let him make full satisfaction both to God and his Master. (That this was the an|cient custom among the Saxons to sell their children, hath been formerly declared in the relation how S. Gregory having seen in the Roman market-place certain children brought to sale out of the Province of the Northumbers, was by that spectacle moved to procure the conversion of our countrey.) The twelfth Law is, If any one shall bring a false testimony or pledge before a Bishop, let his penal|ty be one hundred and twenty shillings (solidos.)
4 We will hereto add the two and twen|tieth Law, though not regarding the Church, because therin is the first mention that can any where be found of the Welsh (Walli.) Let a Wallus (or stranger) who payes an annuall taxe, be rated at one hundred and twenty shil|lings: and his Son, at one hundred. From whence we may observe that the German-Saxons among us called the Brittains, Walli or Welch|men, (a Name which they never gave to themselves) and the utmost Western Province, Cornwall, not from a certain Qveen called Wallia, nor as descended from the Gaules, but because they were strangers, and spoke a language not understood by them, for such the Germans call Wealsh: and hence it is that the lower Germans called their neighbours towards France,Camd. in Danmoniis. Wallons, as Camden has lear|nedly observed.
5. There remain onely three Laws which regard Bishops, and the Font of Baptism. One is the forty sixth Law, in which by the piety and sence of that age a King and a Bishop are in a sort esteemed equall. Let one hundred and twenty shillings be the penalty of one breaking peace in a town of the King or Bishop: and four|score shillings, in the town of a Senatour (who is called in the Saxon tongue Ealdorman, and Eorle) c. Another Law is this, Let every one pay the first fruits of his Seeds out of that house in which he abode at the Solemnity of our Lords Na|tivity.
6. The last, being the seaventy fifth in or|der is this, If any one shall kill the God-father or God-son of any one, let him pay to the kinred of the person slain as much as is due to a Lord for compensation of the slaughter of his servant And let this payment be encreased or diminished ac|cording to the rate of the slain persons estimation, in like manner as the payment to a Lord for his servant slain is to be rated. But if the person slain was the Kings God-son, let satisfaction be made to him according to that made to the kinred of the

slain.A. D. 687. But if such a mans life was taken away by one of his kinred, let some abatement be made of the money to be payed to the God-Father, accor|dingly as it uses to be done when money is to be payed to the Lord for the slaughter of his servant. And if he who is slain be the Son of a Bishop, let the amercement be diminished by the halfe.
7. As touching this last clause Sir Henry Spelman well observes, That whereas some Writers would thence contend that Bishops in this age were married, because here is mention made of a Bishops Son, they are mistaken: For this is not to be understood of the Naturall or coniugall Son of a Bishop, but of his spirituall Son, for whom he was undertaker at the Sacred font. This is mani|fest from the Rubrick of this Law, which is inscri|bed, Of the slaughter of a God-father or God-son, or to use the ancient Terms, Of him that shall kill Patrinum or filiolum of any one. For in old time a God-father or undertaker for one in Baptisme was called Patrinus, and a God-son, filiolus: (as now in France, Parrain and Filieul.)
8. In generall, from these Laws of King Inas wee may observe, That among the Sa|xons, man slaughter was never punished with death, but onely with a fine of money: nor any other crime except Robbery, and that com|mitted not by a single person, but by at least seaven in a troop: So tender they were of blood. Wheras in later times the life of a man is become of so low an estimation, that the losse of it is made the satisfaction for a trifle, as the private pilfering of any thing beyond the valew of a shilling. And the like tendernes of mens lives wee may observe in the Lawes of all the Northern Na|tions of old, as the Visigoths, Vandals, Lom|bards, c.


XVI. CHAXVI. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Aldelm appointed to write to the Brittish King of Cornwall, to invite his Bishops to Catholick Vnity.
4. His Book of Virginity, written to certain devout Virgins.

1. AS touching the foresaid Assembly in which these Laws were enacted, whether it may properly be called a Synod, is doubtfull. But since in the Title of these Laws the only persons, as Authours of the same named, are King Inas himself, by the per|swasion and appointment of his Father Kenred, and Hedda and Erkenwald his Bishops, together with his Aldermen, it is not probable that this was that Synod concerning which S. Beda writes thus,Bed. l. 5. c. 19. Aldelm being only a Preist and Abbot, by command of a Synod of his Nation wrote an ex|cellent Book against the errours of the Brittains, because they celebrated Easter not in its due Season,A. D. 688. and did many things contrary to Ecclesia|sticall chastity and peace (So the printed Copies read, wheras in ancient Manuscripts we read, Ecclesiasticall Charity and peace,) and concer|ning which Synod S. Aldelm himself thus writes, When I was lately in a Synod of Bishops assembled out of all Brittany almost,Aldelm. Epist. ad Gero. 7 an innume|rable company of Gods Preists mett there, c.
2. However, certain it is that such a Natio|nall Synod of the English-Saxons was convo|ked and held about this time, in which after wholesome Constitutions made for the regu|lating and composing their own Churches, the charity of those Bishops extended it self to their uncharitable neighbours the Brittains, especially such as inhabited in Cornwall un|der the government of their King then called Geruntius, who was Tributary to Inas King of the West-Saxons. Which Brittains hitherto re|tained their old aversion and hatred of the Saxons, and perhaps for that reason were ob|stinate in persisting in their old Errours, par|ticularly about Ecclesiasticall Tonsure, and, which was most considerable, an undue ce|lebration of Easter: insomuch as this their perversenes rendred them Schismaticks from the Catholick Church. To restore them there|fore to Ecclesiasticall Vnity and charity the Saxon Bishops enioyned S. Aldelm, present in the same Synod, to write effectually in their names to Geruntius King of the sayd Brittains in Dnmonia, or Cornwall, and to de|monstrate to them their dangerous errours and schism, earnestly inviting them to de|pose their passions and aversenes from their brethren, and unanimously to promote the true Faith. This charge was imposed on S. Aldelm, as being a person the most emi|nent for learning and piety in that age, and this he discharged with the sufficiency expe|cted from him, as may appear by the said Treatise or Epistle yet extant, the tenour whereof in English wee will hereto ad|ioyn.
3. And whereas from those words of Saint Beda, saying that Saint Aldelm wrote against the Brittains because they offended much against Ecclesiasticall Chastity, certain of our late more learned Potestant Writers doe pretend to derive and confirm the lawfullnes of mariage in Bishops and other Ecclesiasticall persons. But besides that this collectio~ is dis|proved by ancient Manuscripts, in which wee read, not Castitatem, but Charitatem, the following Epistle it self will be an evident confutation, in which not one word can be found which gives any suspicion that the Brittains were guilty of incontinence or im|purity, but extreme uncharitablenes is imputed to them. Which clearly evinces that the printed copies ought to be corre|cted.
4. But before we sett down the said Epi|stle of Saint Aldelm, it will be fitt to premise how in the way as he was going to this Sy|nod, he was presented with a Letter from

certain Religious Virgins,A. D. 692. to witt, Hilelida, whom he stiles the Mistresse of Regular and Monasticall conversation, together with Iustina, Cuthburga, and Osburgi; who had some relation of kinred to him: also Alfgiaa, scholastica, Hid|burga, Berngida, Eulalia and Tecla. Which Letter he highly commended, as arguing not only a great zeale and love of chastity vowed by them, but an exquisite skill in Holy Scriptures, with the flowers whereof they gracefully adorned their Letter. In answer whereto he compiled a whole Book, which he inscribed Of Virginity, and which the Reader may find in the Bibliothec Pa|trum.


XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The tenour of Saint Aldelms Letter in the name of the English Saxon Synod, to Geruntius King of the Brittains in Cornwall.

1. THE Letter of Saint Aldelm reproving the errours of the Brittains now fol|loweth: which though it be some what long, will deserve a place in our History, though it were onely to shew, that exce|pting two or three points of Discipline, there was a perfect agreement between the Saxons and Brittains in all things touching the Ca|tholick Faith: otherwise the Saxon Bishops would not have railed, in case they had er|red, to rectify their iudgment. The Inscription of the said Letter is as followeth.
[2 To my glorious Lord Geruntius King of the Western Kingdom, whom I, as God the searcher o hearts is my witnes, doe em|brace with brotherly charity: And likewise to all Gods Preists inhabiting Danmonia (or Cornwall.) I Althelm, unworthy Abbot, doe wish health and salvation in our Lord.
3. Being lately in a Synod of Bishops assem|bled out of the whole nation in a manner, a wonderfull multitude of Gods Preists came thither, being moved thereto out of a solici|tude for the good of the Churches, and care of the peoples salvation, to the end that ad|vising in common about the Ecclesiasticall Canons and Ordinances of the Fathers, they should through Christs assistance be putt in practise.
4 After these things were duly perform'd, the whole Assembly uanimously imposed upon mee, though unworthy, a command to frame Letters directed to your Piety, in which I might acquaint you with their fa|therly suggestion  request that you would be carefull not to break the Vnity of the Ca|tholick Church, nor admitt opinions not sui|ting with the Christian Faith, since so doing you would deprive your selves of future re|wards in heave~. For what proffit can any one receive from good works done out of the Catholick Church, although a man should be never so strict in Regular Observances, or retire himself into a desart to practise an Anacho|reticall life of Contemplation?
5. Now that you may better understand for what especiall causes this Letter is directed to you I will here breifly discover them to you. Wee have heard, and by severall rela|tions been assured that your Preists doe very much swerve from the Rule of Catholick Faith enioynd in the Scriptures, and that by their quarrells and verball co~tentions there is arisen in the Church of Christ a greivous Schism  scandal, whereas the Psalmist saith, Great peace is to those who love thy name,Psal. 18., 5. and among them there is no scandall. For the Peace of Religion is preserved by a charitable concord of mens minds, as on the other side conten|tion violates Charity. Hence the same Psal|mist exhorts all those who embrace the true Faith to a fraternall unity saying, It is God who makes brethren to live in one mind in a house. Now by this House is understood the whole Church of God spread through the world.Psal. 6.7 For Hereticks and Schismaticks being estranged from the Communion of the Church, and by contending about severall new opinions encreasing in their nu~bers, doe, like unprof+fitable tares sown in a rich soyle, corrupt and defile our Lords harvest. But the Apostles tru~pet doth represse this shamefull humour of contention, saying, If any one will be conten|tious we have no such custom, Cor 11. nor the Church of God, which is without spott or wrinckle. For that peace is the Mother of Catholicks, is declared by the Evangelicall Oracles,Math 5. Blessed are the peace|able, for they shal be called the children of God. And hence it is that when our Lord and Sa|viour descended from heaven that he might wipe away the hand-writing of our first pa|rents which was against us, and that by Peace intervening he might reconcile the world, an Angelicall Quire melodiously sung,Luc. 11. Glory to God on high, and on earth peace to men of good will: and the Psalmist saith, Let Peace be made by thy power, and abundance in all thy Towers.
6. Moreover a rumour is spread abroad, that in your Province there are certain Preists and other Ecclesiasticks, who contrary to the teaching of the Church doe obstinatly refuse to admitt the Tonsure of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles: and doe pertinaciously defend themselves with this excuse, that they doe imitate the Tonsure of their Predecessours whom with pompous phrases they exalt, as men eminently illustrated with Divine Grace. Whereas if we presse them to tell us who was the first Authour of this their rasure and Tonsure, either out of ignorance of the Truth or dissembling a lye, they have not a word to say. But wee, and many others with us can as|sure them that Simon the Inventour of Magi|call arts, was the Authour of this Tonsure. The fraudulent and diabolicall skill of Necro|mancy contrived by whom against S. Peter,

is testified by the ancient Book called The Combat of the Apostles, and by the ten books of S. Clement.
7. But as for us, we are able according to the authority of Holy Scriptures to give a true and sufficient testimony of our Tonsure, and doe affirm that S. Peter ordained this Rite of Tonsure for severall causes: First that thereby he might on his head bear a representation of our Lord, who ascending the Crosse for our Redemption was Crownd by the execrable Iews in a cruell manner with sharp peircing thorns. Next that the Preists of the Old and New Testament might be distinguished by their habit and Tonsure. And lastly, that the same Apostle and his followers might carry the ridiculous expression of scorn used by the Romans, who when they sold their slaves taken in war, they were wont to crown them. But in the Old Testament this Signe of Tonsure took its Originall, if I be not mistaken, from the Nazarites, who were persons consecra|ted to God: for it is a mark of a Royall and Sacerdotall descent. For a Tiara was anciently sett on the heads of the Preists; which being enwrapped in fine linnen was round, like the Middle Sphere: and this is represented by that part of the head which is shorn. Now a Crown or Diademe was a golden circle of some breadth, which encompassed the heads of Kings. And both these signs are expressed on the heads of Clergy-men, concerning whom S. Peter saith, You are an elect nation, a Royal Preist-hood. And moreover by this Rite of shaving and polling is signified our duty to cutt off all our vices,1. Pet. 11.9. and that we should devest our selves of our sins as we doe of our haires.
8. But there is among you another pra|ctise, far more pernicious to soules, which is, that in the observation of the Solemnity of Easter you neglect to follow the Rule of the three hundred and eighteen Fathers who in the Nicene Councill, with great sagacity established the Circle of Nineteen years to last to the end of the world, by the numbers of Eight and Eleaven: and also ordained the Paschall supputation from the fourteenth day of the Moon to the one and twentieth, making these the terms of the Paschall Circle, which it is unlawfull for any one to trans|gresse. Whereas the Preists among you ac|cording to the Account and Circle of Ana|tolius, or rather according to the Rule of Sul|pitius Severinus who described a Course of eighty four years, doe some-times observe the Paschall Solemnity on the fourteenth Moon with the Iews, whereas the Bishops of the Ro|man Church doe observe neither of these ways of calculation: Neither have they de|creed that posterity should follow the Pas|chall Table of Victorius, which contains a course of five hundred thirty two years. For there was a sort of Heretiks in the East called Tessera-decatitae, because they celebrated the Paschall Solemnity on the fourteenth Moon with the Iews who blaspemed our Lord, and trode under foot the pearles of the Gospell. And for this they were excluded from the Com|munion of the Church, and ranked among the unhappy conventicles of Schismatiks. Of these, as I remember, S. Augustin makes mention in his Treatise of Ninety Heresies.
9. But besides these enormities, there is another thing wherein they doe notoriously swerve from the Catholick Faith and Evange|lical Tradition, which is, that the Preists of the Demetae (or South-west Wales) inhabi|ting beyond the bay of Severn puffed up with a conceit of their own purity, doe ex|ceedingly abhor communion with us, in|somuch as they will neither ioyn in prayers with us in the Church, nor enter into society with us at the Table: yea moreover the frag+ments which we leave after refection they will not touch, but cast them to be devoured by doggs and unclean Swine. The Cupps also in which we have drunk, they will not make use of, till they have rubbed and cleansed them with sand or ashes. They refuse all civil salutations or to give us the kisse of pious fraternity,Rom. 16. contrary to the Apostles precept Salute one another with a holy kisse. They will not afford us water and a towel for our hands, nor a vessell to wash our feet. Where|as our Saviour having girt himself with a towell, washed his Disciples feet, and left us a pattern to imitate, saying, As I have done to you, so doe you to others. Moreover if any of us, who are Catholicks, doe goe amongst them to make an abode, they will not vouch|safe to admitt us to their fellowship till we be compelled to spend forty dayes in Pen|nance. And herein they unhappily imitate those Hereticks, who will needs be called Cathars (or Puritans.)
10. Such enormous errours and maligni|ties as these are to be mournfully bewayld with sighes and teares: since such their beha|viour is contrary to the precepts of the Go|spell,Math. 23. and suiting with the Traditions of Iewish Pharisees, concerning whom our Saviour saith, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees who cleanse the outsides of Cupps and dishes. On the contrary our Lord disdaind not to be present at feasts with Publicans and sinners, thereby shewing himself a good Physician, who was carefull to provide wholesom ca|taplasms and medecines to heale the corrupt wounds of those that conversed with him. Therefore he did not, like the Pharisees, de|spise the conversation of sinners, but on the contrary, according to his accustomed cle|mency, he mercifully comforted the poor sinfull woman who bewayld the former pol|lutions of her life, and casting herself at our Lords feet, washed them with showres of teares, and wiped them with the curled locks of her haire, concerning whom he said, Her many sins are forgiven her, because she hath loved much.
11. Since therefore the truth of these

things cannot be denyed, we doe with earnest humble prayers and bended knees beseech and adiure you, as you hope to at|tain to the fellowship of Angels in Gods heavenly kingdom, that you will no longer with pride and stubbornes abhorr the do|ctrines and Decrees of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter, nor pertinaciously and arrogantly despise the Tradition of the Roman Church, preferring before it the Decrees and ancient Rites of your Predecessours. For it was S. Peter, who having devoutly confessed the Son of God, was honoured by him with these Words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church,Math. 16. and the gates of hell shall not prevayle against it: And to thee will I give the keyes of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in hea|ven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shal be loosed in heaven. If therefore the Keyes of the kingdom of heaven were given to S. Peter, who is he, who, having despised the principall Statuts and ordinances of his Church, can presumingly expect to enter with ioy through the gate of the heavenly Paradise? And if he by a peculiar Priviledge and happines received the power of binding and the Monarchy of loosing in heaven and earth, who is he, who having reiected the Rule of the Paschall Solemnity, and the Rite of the Roman Tonsure, will not rather appre|hend to be indissolubly bound, them merci|fully absolved from his sins?
12. But it may be some nice Disputer pre|suming on his skill in Scripture and other learning, will fancy that he can excuse and defend himself under the sheild of such an Apology as this, saying, I doe sincerely vene|rate the Precepts of both the Old and New Testa|ment, and with my heart and tongue I doe con|fesse in God an Vnity of Essence and Trinity of Persons: I doe freely preach to the people the My|stery of our Lords Incarnation, the Crosse of his Passion, and the Victorious Trophey of his Resur|rection: I doe diligently denounce to my hearers the last Iudgment of the living and dead, in which with a most equall ballance every one ac|cording to their different merits, shall receive a different retribution of happines or misery This I beleive and professe, and by the priviledge of this Faith I doe not doubt but I shall be reckoned and rewarded with the lott of true Orthodox Ca|tholicks.
13. But alas, this seeming Fortresse under which they hope to lurk securely, I will en+deavour to batter to the ground with the Engin of the Apostles reproof;Iam 11. For S. Iames who is called the Brother of our Lord, saith, Thou beleivest that there is one God: and imme|diatly he adioyns, directing his speech by an Irony to the twelve Tribes in the dispersion, Thou doest well. But take notice of this, The De|vills likewise beleive this, and tremble: For Faith without Works is dead. His meaning is, that Catholick and Brotherly Charity must in|separably walk together in the same path, as that glorious Preacher and Vessell of Ele|ction S. Paul testifies,1. Cor 13 saying, If I knew all Pro|phecy and all Mysteries, if I had Faith so that I could remove mountains, and if I should give my body to be burnt, and had not Charity, all this would proffit mee nothing at all. I will summ up all in one short sentence: That man does in vain boast of the Catholick Faith, who does not follow the Dogme and Rule of S. Peter. For the foundation of the Church and stability of Faith which can be shaken by no winds or tempests, rests principally on Christ, and after him consequently on S. Peter.1. Cor. 3.11. Hence the Apostle saith, Other foundation can no man lay, besides that which is layd, which is Iesus Christ. And Divine Truth it self hath thus establi|shed the Priviledge of the Church to S. Peter: Thou art Peter,Math. 16. and on this Rock I will build my Church.
14. This is the tenour of Saint Aldelm's Epistle to Geruntius King of Cornwall, and to the Brittish Preists his Subjects, in which may be observed what extreme bitternes and ma|lice still possessed their minds against the Sa|xons, insomuch as they chose rather to be separated from the Communion of the Catho|lick Church, then to conform to them by relinquishing any of their old irregular Rites. And here likewise may be observed, how vainly our Protestant Writers endeavour to fly to the Brittains for defence of their de|serting Catholick Doctrines. Hence the Centu|riators of Magdeburg,Magdeb. Cent. 7. f. 5 9 (and others imitating them) taking advantage from an errour in the printed Copy of S Beda's history, where Castitatem is read for Caritatem, doe affirm, That there was a sharp debate between Aldelm and the Brittains, against whom he earnestly in|veighs, because they would not approve Celibacy of Preists, and other new invented Rites, as Beda testifies in the fifth Book of his History and nine|teenth Chapter. The same likewise is manifest out of Aldelms Epistle to Geruntius King of the En|glish. Whereas it is manifest that not a word is spoken in this Epistle touching Celibacy.
15. This Epistle was not written in vain, for as S. Beda testifies, By the reading of it many Brittains subject to the West-Saxons were brought to the Catholick Rite of celebrating our Lords Paschall solemnity.Bed. l. 5. c. 2. Whence we may likewise observe that these Brittains, though they were immediatly governed by a King of their own nation, yet both he and they were subordinatly dependent on Inas King of the West-Saxons: Notwithstanding which depen|dence and subjection, the Saxons did not seek by violence and terrour to force their consciences, but with all meeknes and ten|dernes to invite them to Catholick Vnity.



A. D. 693.
XVIII. CHXVIII. CHAP.

1.2. Withred, after six years interregnum, is made King of Kent.
3.4. He redeems with money an invasion of his Countrey: by King Inas: And builds S. Martins Church in Dover.

A. D. 693.1. IN the year of Grace six hundred ninety three the Kingdom of Kent began to take breath after six years agitation both by civill and extern commotions. For after Edrick had deposed his usurping Vncle Lo|there, and obtained the throne by right of blood due to him, by his Tyranny and inju|stice he incurred the hatred of his Subjects, and after two years raign lost both his go|vernment and life. His death notwithstan|ding rather encreased then ended the trou|bles of that Province, for whether it was that many pretending to the succession, factions and civill debates divided the nation, or whatsoever was the cause (for Historians af|ford us little Light to discover those affairs distinctly) during the space of six years there was not any King there.
2. To these civill broyles was added an invasion of that Kingdom by Cedwalla King of the West-Saxons, as hath been declared. Which invasion notwithstanding for the time united their dissentions, so that after much hurt received, the inhabitants of Kent repulsed Cedwella, and driving his Brother Mul (or Mollo) into a Cottage, sett it on fire and consumed him in it. Cedwalla after this being converted to Christianity, and relinquishing his kingdom to perform a pilgrimage to Rome, where he desired to re|ceive Baptism, recommended the revenge of the death of his Brother Mul to his Successour Inas. Who having prudently employed the five first years of his raign in settling his own kingdom  the Churches in it by whole|som Lawes and constitutions, at last this year he made a terrible impression into Kent.
Malmsb. l.  c. .3. At this time the principall Pretender to that Kingdom was Withred the Son of Egbert, who by his courage and industry had repressed the envy of his opponents, and gained the generall affection of the people, so that he was unanimously chosen and acknowledged King. When King Ina there|fore in revenge of the death of Mul, brought a formidable army into Kent for a while a vigorous resistance was made. But King Inas having great advantage by his martiall skill and courage assisted with a far greater power, King Withred was at last forced to redeem the safety and peace of his countrey with money. So that a Treaty was begun, and King Inas being mollified with the summ of thirty thousand marks of gold, pardoned them the death of Mul, and drew back his army into his own countrey.
4. Bishop Parker from S. Beda gives to Wi|thred an associate in the throne, his Brother Swinfard:Antiq. Brit. who ioyntly administred the king|dom with great justice and piety. They built, saith he, the Church of S. Martin in the Town of Dover, and enriched the Monks living there with large possessions.


XIX. CHAP.XIX. CH.

1. Brithwald consecrated Arch bishop of Canterbury.
2.3 Pope Sergius his Letters to the Saxon Kings: and Bishops.
4. Brithwald ordains Bishops.

1. PEace and tranquility being thus re|stored to the Kingdom of Kent, the Consecration of a New-Arch-bishop in the place of S. Theodore, dead two years since, was very seasonable and necessary.Bed. l. 5. c. 9. His Successours name was Brithwald, who, saith S. Beda, was an Abbot in a certain Monastery seated near the place called Raculf, where the River Genlade discharges it self into the Sea. He was a man well versed both in holy Scriptures, and likewise in Ecclesiasticall and Monasteriall Disciplines: Yet much inferiour to his Predecessour. He was cho|sen Bishop in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred ninety two, on the first of Iuly: Wichtred and Suebhard being then Kings of Kent. But his Ordination was deferred to the year following: for the attaining of which he was forced to passe over the Sea to Rome,  thence returned into France, where he was consecrated by Godwin a Metropolitan there on the third day before the Calends of Ianuary: and took possession of his own See on the day before the Calends of September, being a Sunday.
2. The same year there came Letters from Pope Sergius,Malmb. de Pont. l. 1. f. 29. directed to Ethelred, Alfrid and Adulf English Kings, to whose protection and favour he earnestly recommended the New Arch-bishop. The Motive of writing this Letter seems to have been the divisions and turmoyles of Kent, of the composing of which it seems the Pope was ignorant and therefore did not addresse it to Withred King of Kent.
3. Other Letters also came then from the same Pope to all the Bishops of Brittany, in which he acquaints them with how much gladnes he entertained the said Elect Arch-bishop newly arrived at Rome, as likewise the tidings of the Orthodox Vnity which was amo~g them. Conseque~tly he signified to them that according to the ancient Priviledge of that Church of Ca~terbury from the dayes of his Holy Predecessour S. Gregory to the present time, he had invested him with the Primacy of all the Churches of Brittany,  conferred on him the Sacred use of the Pall and Dalmatick Vestment. Whereupon he required and commanded them to yeild to him all due honour and obedience as their Supreme Prelat and

Primat. These two Letters are cited by Wil|liam of Malmsbury, in his Discourse touching the dignity of the See of Canterbury.
4. The first care of this New Arch-bishop was to supply the vacant Sees with worthy Prelats:Bed. and saith S. Beda, among many Bishops ordained by him, he consecrated in the place of Gebmund Bishop of Rochester then dead, Tobias a man skilfull in the Greek, Latin and Saxon tongues, and adorned with great variety of litte|rature. To Tobias we may adioyn Waldher about this time ordained Bishop of London, and successour to the holy Bishop Erconwald, concerning whose Princely extraction, ver|tues and Sanctity attested by many miracles before and after his death, we have already spoken. S. Erconwalds body was buried in his Church at London: but in the year of Grace eleaven hundred forty eight his Sacred Re|licks were taken up, and translated to a more honourable place, where for many miracles they were held in great veneration, as Mathew of Westminster testifies,Mat. Westm. . in the same year.


XX. CHA.XX. CHAP.

1.2. c. King Sebbe becomes a Monk: His sicknes: and Blessed death.
6. Impious folly of the Centuriators of Mag|deburg.
7. c. A miracle at the enterrement of the Holy King Sebbe.
9. The Holy Bishop Egwin succeeds to Ostfor in the See of Worcester.

1. THE same year afforded to the world an illustrious example of the conte~pt of perishing honours and pleasures in the person of a Prince, who had many years en|joyd them and by experience knew the iust valew, or rather the reall basenes of them, and unsatisfaction to be found in them. This was an example as ordinary in that age, as to be esteemed miraculous in this.
2. The person who afforded this example was Sebbe King of the East-Saxons, concer|ning whose piety, and desire to relinquish his purple for a poor Religious habit we have spoken already. This desire at last he this year executed. The order and manner where|of is thus related by S. Beda.
Bed. l. 4. c. 11.[3. When Sebbe had spent thirty years in the government of the East-Saxons, all which time by his piety and devotion he shewed himself a soldier contending for a heavenly kingdom, he was at last assaulted by a grei|vous sicknes, which left him not till it brought him to his grave. Being in this con|dition he admonished his wife that she should no longer oppose his retirement from the world, but rather ioyn with him in dedicating the remainder of their lives in the service of God, since neither of them could any longer enioy any content in the pleasures, or rather slavery of the present world. It was with much adoe that he ob|tained her liking hereto: But having at last with much importunity wrested her consent, he went to Valdhere then Bishop of London, and successour to S. Erconwald, and with his approbation and benediction he re|ceived the Habit of Religion so long and so earnestly desired by him. He brought to the said Bishop a great summ of money to be di|stributed among the poore, reserving no|thing at all to himself, so great was his desire to become truly poor in spirit for the king|dom of heaven.
4. When his sicknes encreased on him so far that he perceived his death to approach, being a person of a truly royall mind, and therefore apprehending least the pains of his end night enforce him either by words, ge|stures or actions to behave himself other|wise then became a person of his quality and condition, he being then at London, sent for the foresaid Bishop, and desired him that besides himself and two of his own servants, no other should be present at his death.
5. This request the venerable Prelat willing|ly granted: And not long after the devout King in his sleep by a comfortable Vision was freed from all the anxiety of his former soli|citude, and moreover had notice given him of the precise day in which he was to end his life. For, as himself afterward related, he saw three men in shining vestments coming to him: of which one sate down before his bed, whilst the other two his companions stood by, and askd him how he did. Then he that was sett down, said to him, Be of good chear, for your soule shall without any pain at all, and with great splendour forsake your body: and on the third day following you shall dye. And the event really made good both these promises which he received in the vision. For on the third day immediatly after Noon, without any sence of pain he breathed forth his soule as if he had quietly rested in sleep.]
6. Thus happily dyed this Religious King, whose death no doubt was precious in the eyes of God, and is with devotion celebrated by his Church, being commemorated both in our English and also the Roman Martyrologe on the twentieth day of August.Martyrolog. Anglic.  Rom. 20. Au|gust. Magdebur. Cent. 7. f. 579. But the Centu|riators of Magdeburg reading all these things, are moved to choler both against S. Beda, Sebbe and all Monks in generall, which choler sug|gested this profane censure to their pens, A Monasticall course of life, not having any ground in Gods word, stood in need to be recommended by vain dreams and Visions. And again: In this seaventh age, say they, Kings began to relinquish their authority, and to addict themselves to a Mo|nasticall life Which impiety must be adorned with lying miracles. Hence Beda writes concerning King Sebbe, that in a Vision three men appeard to him as

he lay sick in his bed, and foretold to him both the day of his death, and that it should be without pain. So that to forsake all worldly pleasures and contentments purely for the Love of God is not only not warranted by Gods word, but is an impiety, excluding men from the enioying of God, in the judgment of these new sensuall Evangelists.
7. But how after this holy Kings death God was pleased to declare how far different a judgment he gave of his servant, the same learned and devout Historian thus further relates:Bed. l. 4. c. 11. A Coffin of Stone, saith he, was prepa|red for entombing the Body of this holy King. But when they endeavoured to putt the Body into it, they found that it was a hands-breadth too long for the Coffin. Whereupon paring away as much of the stone at each end as they could, they there|by lengthned it about the measure of two fingers breadth. Yet after all it would not receive the body. Whereupon finding so great a difficulty to enteire him, they intended either to seek out a new Coffin, or to endeavour by hewing the body to shorten it so much as to make it enter into the Coffin. But by a wonderfull accident, which could proceed from no lesse then a heavenly power, both these designs of theirs were prevented for pre|sently in the sight of the Bishop, and Sighard son to the said King and Monk, who together with his Brother Seofrid raignd after him, a great mul|titude likewise of others being present, the Coffin was found of a convenient length, insomuch as there was room enough to place a cushion under his head, and yet at the feet there remaind four fingers breadth beyond the body. He was buried in the Church of Saint Paul, the Doctour of the Gentiles, by whose teaching he had learnt to aspire to heavenly things onely.
8. To this day his Sepulcher is seen in the same Church adioyning to the Wall on the North side, and encompassed with railes. But the present Monument being of marble, and not ordinary stone, as at first, shews that in ages following through some mens devotion it was changed, and more honou|rably entombed. So that a late malignant Historians skoffe does little prejudice S. Be|da's narration,I. Speed. saying, that the Coffin which in the beginning was miraculously lengthned, hath been since by a new Miracle again contra|cted.
9. The Holy Bishop of Worcester Ostfor, con|secrated the year before by Saint Wilfrid, this year dyed, in whose place succeeded a Re|ligious person named Egwin, born of Prince|ly blood, but one who aspiring to a higher kingdom, for Christs sake became poor. Concerning whom we shall treat more lar|gely hereafter, for great examples of pa|tience and equanimity in suffrings he will afford us, insomuch as being tryed in the furnace of many tribulations his sanctity became illustrious not in Brittany onely, but forrain regions also.




THE TWENTIETH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. Of English Missioners sent to convert the Germans.
3.4. c. S. Egbert the First Mover in that work: He is desirous to goe himself: but is hindred by God: and employed to bring the Scotts to the Vnity of the Church.
8.9 Wibert preaches without Successe to the Frisons.
10.11. S Willebrord with eleaven others under|take the Mission.

1. _THE same year of Grace six hundred ninety three was made illustrious by the death and Martyrdom of two Aposto|licall Brethren of the English Nation,A. D. 693. both of them called by the same name, Ewald; whose zeale for the enlarging of Christs kingdom compelled them to become strangers to their own countrey, and in the company of severall other devout Preists, to passe over into Germany, exposing themselves to all incommodities and dangers, yea death it selfe for the rescuing of a world of soules from ignorance and Idolatry, in which hi|therto the Devill had held them captive.
2. But before we apply our selves to the relating of the particular Gests of these two Apostolick Martyrs, it will be requisite that we return three years back to the year six hundred and ninety in which the Mission for the conversion of severall German na|tions began. We deferd it to this year, be|cause now are seen the first fruits of the la|bours of those Apostolicall Missioners. It will now therefore be seasonable to relate the occasion and first execution of this Mission, the names of the devout persons who un|dertook it, their first attempt and succeeding progresse hitherto: Which having done, we will in due place declare the wonderfull and happy successe of it.
3. The First Mover in this holy Work and cheif Architect of so glorious a design was S. Eg|bert, of the rudiments of whose Sanctity this our History has from S. Beda treated in the year six hundred sixty four: where we de|clared how he together with his companion Edelhum, in the time when Finan and Cole|man were Bishops went out of this their na|tive countrey into Ireland together with many other associats both of Noble and meane condition. Not long after, the great plague, which had almost wasted Brittany; passed over into Ireland, and among many others seised on this S. Egbert then living in an Irish Monastery called Rathmelsige: Who expecting death, with great compunction examined his former life, and with many

teares besought almighty God not to take him out of the world till he had performed due pennance for his sins: He adioynd to his Prayers a Vow never to return to his native countrey: to recite the whole Psalter dayly: to fast every seaventh day, c. After which God restored him to his health, and he lived many years in great perfection of humility, meeknes, continence and simplicity: and both by his example and teaching was very beneficiall to the Irish.
[4. After he had spent twenty six years thus devoutly in Ireland,Bed. l. 5 c. 10. Baronius. A. D. 690. in the year of Grace six hundred  ninety (saith S. Beda, and out of him Baronius) he took a resolution to extend his charity to forrain Nations, and for that purpose to undertake the Apostolicall Office of preaching the Gospell to such as had yet never heard of it. Particularly he knew that in Germany there were many Nations as yet in darknes from whom the English and Sa|xons now inhabiting Brittany drew their Originall, such were the Frisons, Rugini, Danes, Hunns, Old Saxons, Boruchtuarians  se|verall other. To these the foresaid soldier of Christ intended to direct his voyage round about Brittany by Sea, to the end he might endeavour to snatch some soules out of the snares of Satan, and bring them to the obe|dience of Christ: Or in cae his endeavours proved fruitles, to continue his voyage to Rome, and there devoutly visit the Monuments of the Blessed Apostles and Martyrs. But this his good design could not take effect: and by what impediments it was obstructed, the same Writer from Saint Beda thus further relates:
Baron. ib.5. Saint Egbert pursuing this good reso|lution, was notwithstanding forbidden by Divine Oracles and wonders to putt it in exe|cution. For having made choice of compa|nions in the said work, men of learning  courage, when he had prepared all things necessary for the voyage, on a certain day early in the morning there came to him a Monk who had formerly in Brittany been a Discple and attendant on the Venerable Preist Boisil, then Priour of the Monastery of Mailrose under Eata: Which Monk related to him a Vision which had appeard to him the night before.
6. When I had finished the Midnight Psal|mody (said he) I laid my self down to sleep, in which there appeared to mee my ancient Master and benefactour Boisil, who addressing his speech to mee said, I am come hither to bring an answer and commission of our Lord and Saviour to Egbert, with which thou must acquaint him. Tell him therefore that it is Gods will that he pursue not this voyage, but betake himself to the Monasteries instituted by Columba, and there teach the Monks their duty. Now this Columba was the first who preached the Faith to the Northern Picts inhabiting beyond the Mountains: he was also the first founder of the famous Monastery seated in the Isle called Hy: which Columba is now by some called Colum|celli, by a name compounded of Columba and a (Monasticall) Cell. When Egbert had heard the words of this Vision, he charged the Monk to tell no man of it, having a suspicion that it might be an illusion. Yet considering better of it, he had an apprehension that it was a truth: Notwithstanding he ceased not for all that to make preparation for his iourney.
7. But a few dayes after, the same Monk came again to him and told him that the night before presently after Matins Boysil appeard once more to him saying: Why didst thou so negligently and coldly relate the commis|sion I gave thee, to Egbert But now goe and tell him, that whether he will or no he shall be forced to goe to the Monasteries of Columba, because their ploughs doe not goe right: and it must be his charge to rectify those disorders. Egbert hearing this, again commanded the Monk not to dis|cover these things to any. And for himself, though he had no doubt of the Vision, yet he adventured to begin the designed iour|ney with his Brethren.
8. Assoon therefore as all things necessa|ry for their voyage were putt into the Ship after they had for some dayes expected a fa|vourable wind, there hapned one night so furious a tempest, that the ship was cast on one side in the water, which entring in spoy|led most of the provisions layd therein: yet whatsoever belonged to Egbert and his companions was saved. Egbert seeing this and saying in the words of the Prophet, For my sake is tempest as hapned, retired himself, not daring to pursue the iourney, and so was compelled to stay at home. But one of his companions named Wibert, being eminent for his contempt of the world and his knowledge in spirituall matters (for he had spent many years in Ireland leading an Ana|choreticall life in great perfection) took ship, and coming into Friseland, preached the word of life to the inhabitants there, and to their King Radbode, yet with small fruit among them. After two years therefore un|proffitably spent there, he returned to his beloved solitude, where he attended to God only, and since his endeavours had been un|successfull in converting strangers to the Faith, he was carefull to proffit his own countreymen by the good example of his piety.
9. Baronius having recited these things out of Saint Beda, adioyn this observation, That since all things which proceed from God are orderly and free from confusion, it is no wonder that these zealous devout men had no successe, since they had not received their Mission from the Pope to whom belongs the power to conferr the Apostolicall Of|fice.
10. Saint Beda proceeds in his Narration thus,Bed. ibid. Assoon as the man of God Egbert per|ceived that himself was not permitted to

goe and preach to the Infidell Nations, being detained for another benefitt of the Church revealed to him by a Divine Oracle: and more|over that Wibert, who had made a voyage thither, had small successe in his preaching; His zeale rested not here but he attempted the same design once more, and sent other holy men, and withall very industrious, among whom the most eminent was Wille|brord a Preist of great desert. Those new Missioners, twelve in number, assoon as they had passed the Seas, turned aside out of their way to visit Pipin Duke of the French nation, by whom they were favourably received. And wheras he had a little before subdued the Southern Friseland, out of which he had driven the foresaid King Radbode, he sent them thither to preach: and moreover assisted them with the royall authority, forbidding any one to molest them in their preaching, and promising his favour to all who should receive the Faith. Hence it came to passe through the divine Grace that in a short time many were converted by them to the Faith of Christ.
11. The place where these holy men abor|ded was Wiltemburg, or Traiectum (now called Vtrecht) seated on the ancient Rhin, in lower Germany, mistaken by some Writers for ano|ther Citty called likewise Traiectum or Maestricht in Brabant, seated upon the River Meause Of the former Traiectum S. Willebrord was afterward Arch-bishop, as shall be shewed in due place.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Names of the twelve Aposto|lick Missioners. c.

1. IT will not be curiosity, but duty to pro|pagate to posterity the names of these twelve Apostolicall Missioners, as likewise to declare by what authority they willingly undertook the charge of preaching the Gospell to Pagans. A perfect information hereof we have received from one of that number, S. Marcellinus, who has committed to writing an account of their progresse, as likewise the particular Gests of S. Willebrord and Suibert who were most eminent among them
Marcellin. p. Suria in . Suibert.[2. The illustrious Prelat S. Egbert; (saith he) thirsting after the salvation of all, and particularly of the Pagan Frisons and Saxons, in as much as the English were descended from them,  persevering in this charitable design, endeavoured to send to the discharge of that holy employment of converting soules certain holy and industrious persons, fitted thereto both in point of learning, courage and diligence. He selected there|fore and assembled out of diverse Monasteries twelve Apostolicall men, firmly established in the Faith to preach Catholick Doctrine to the Germans.
3. Now the names of those zealous Mis|sioners were these, Willebrord, Swibert, Acca, Wigbert, Willibald, Winnibald, Lebwin, two Bre|thren called Ewald, Werenfrid, and my self the meanest of all called Marcellin, who am the Writer of this History as likewise of the Gests of S. Willebrord. All these forenamed were Preists: and to them was adioyned the holy Deacon Adelbert Son of the King of the Deirs (or Yorkshire,) who for the love of Christ quitted his Royall Patrimony, and refused not a voluntary banishment in the compa|ny of the foresaid holy Preists, having been elected thereto by S. Egbert.
4. And because these Holy Doctours born in England were descended from Progenitours who were Frisons and Saxons, by that means they were enabled to preach the Gospell of Christ in the German tongue. Some of these were afterward crownd with Martyrdom, others persisted to their death in laborious preaching among Barbarous Nations, and some were substituted Bishops in Episcopall Sees when they were vacant.
5. When all necessaries therefore were pre|pared, the foresaid Twelve Apostolicall Mis|sioners, after they had taken leave of their freinds and kinred, and received the holy Prelats benediction, took ship, and by Gods blessing having a prosperous wind they made a quick voyage and landed safely at Wiltemberg or Vtrect (Traiectum) in the year six hundred and ninety after our Lords Incar|nation which was the third year of the Ponti|ficat of Pope Sergius, Iustinian then being Em|perour, and the most glorious King Alfrid then raigning over the Northumbers, a Prince zealously affectionat in observing the Laws of Holy Church.]
5. Cornelius Kempius in his Treatise concer|ning the Writers of Friseland affirms that those Twelve Apostles were elected out of the whole En|glish-Saxon Nation,Kmp. de cript. Fris. Decad. 4. being the most eminent for learning and piety that could be found But most of them, were furnished out of the Kingdom of the Northumbers, which certainly was the Native soyle of S. Egbert, as likewise of Saint Willebrord, S. Swibert and S. Adelbert.


III. CHAP.III. CHA.

1.2. c. The rudiments of S. Swibert.

1. THese were the names of the Twelve English Missioners and glorious Apo|stles of the German Nation, whose memorie remain in benediction in many Provinces of that vast Continent, and are moreover cele|brated in most of the Martyrologes of the Western Church. It would be a blameable ingratitude to neglect the recording whatsoever particular actions or occurrents

pertaining to any of them have hitherto es|caped the injury of time: Since therefore our Ecclesiasticall Monuments have delivered to us very little concerning any of them before they laboured in this Mission, except of Saint Willebrord and Saint Swibert, wee must of force content our selves with an account of the birth, descent and Gests of these two glo|rious Prelats.
2. Of these S. Swibert was the elder, whose Life and actions have been recorded by his companion in the Mission, S. Marcellin, as likewise by Saint Ludger Bishop of Munster. From both whose relations Haraeus thus breifly recounts his descent and wonderfull birth.Hara. Man.In the year of Grace six hundred forty seaven the blessed child Swibert was born in the Kingdom of the Northumbers: His parents were Sigebert Count of Nortingra and the pious Countesse Bertha, who before she brought him forth was favoured with a Di|vine Vision and heavenly light.
3. Assoon as he was come to the fifteenth year of his age preferring a Religious before a secular life, he was gratiously received into the Monastery of Berdeney, In which having spent nine years in great continence and mortification, having by the grace of com|punction his mind elevated to celestiall hings, employing himself withall in Sacred Lections and Monasticall Disciplines, and thereto adioyning rigorous Fasts, Prayers and unwea|ried watchings, he was advanced to the di|gnity of Preisley Order Thus breifly writes the said Authour.
4. But as touching the wonderfull prodigy attending his birth, by which was portended his future Apostolicall employment, it is thus more particularly related by S. Marcellinus S. Ludger:Marcellin. ap  Martij.The pious and Noble countesse Bertha frequently meditating with inward ioy how that the children of severall Princes adorned with the luster of many vertues, had made the people partakers of the fruits of their piety, to the great happines and peace of the whole kingdom, she became inflamed with an incredible desire of enioying the like favour: and thereupon with dayly prayers she solicited our Lord to bestow upon her a Son, whom she promised to consecrate to his service.
5. Not long after it hapned on a certain night when she was falln into a quiet sleep, she seemed to behold in the firmament a star of a wonderfull magnitude and luster, from he ast side of which proceeded two beams of admiable brightnes, one of which regar|ded Germany, and the other France. At last after she had with great wonder contempla|ted this star, it seemed to her that it fell from heaven into her bed. At which being ex|tremely affrighted, she shreekd out aloud,  with the noyse awaked her husband Sigebert, who trembling all over at this unusuall cla|mour of his wife, with great solicitude de+manded of her the cause of her fear, which she plainly declared to him. The next mor|ning they sent for Aidan Bishop of Lindes|farn, to whom they discovered the manner and order of the Vision. At the relating of which, he by a celestiall Light illustrating his mind, gave them a confident hope of a child, which by the luster of his learning and pie|ty should enlighten the soules of many with the beams of Divine Truth.
6. The event proved him to be a true in|terpreter of the Vision: for the child whose coming into the world was attended with so prodigious a sign, from his very infancy gave proofs of most sublime vertues. And being arrived at the fifteenth year of his age, out of a care least worldly tentations and al|urements should draw him among the dan|gerous rocks of vice and errour, he took re|fuge in the secure port of Religion. And after he had spent nine years in the dayly contem|plation of divine things, he attained the De|gree of Preist-hood. Which he administred the space of seaven years with so great san|ctity, that he drew severall Kings and Princes into a great admiration of him.] Such were the rudiments of S. Swiberts sanctity: con|cerning whose admirable actions and mira|cles we shall frequently be obliged to treat hereafter.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. Of S. Wilgis the Father of S. Willebrord
3.4. c. The Nativity and rudimens of S. Willebrord.

1. ELeaven years after the birth of S. Swi|bert, S. Willebrord,A. D 658. by divine Providence designed his companion in the Apostolick Office, was born, whose Nativity likewise was attended by the like celestiall prodigies. His life has been written by S. Marcellin and also by our learned Alcuin: in the preface where of he thus describes the quality and piety of his Parents.
2. [In the Isle of Brittany and Province of the Northumbers,Alcuin. in vit. S. Wil|lebrord. saith he, there lived a certain Saxon named Wilgis, who together with his wife and whole family lived a religious life in Christ, as afterward appeared by evident proofs. For having relinquished a secular habit he made choice of a Monasticall course of life: and not long after the fervour of aspiring to Spirituall Perfection encreasing in him, he retired himself to a rigorous solitude in a certain Promontory encompassed partly by the Sea, and partly by the River Humber. There he served God a long time in a little Oratory dedicated to S. Andrew the A|postle, mortifying himself with fastings, prayers and watchings: and moreover be|came notable by many miracles. Whereu|pon great multitudes of people repaired to him, whom he by many sweet admonitions out of Gods word exhorted and encouraged in the wayes of Piety. Hereby he became

highly esteemed by the King and Nobles, who bestowed on him certain possessions adioy|ning to the said Promontory for building a Church wherein our Lord might perpetually be served. There this devout Father assem|bled a small but well ordered Congregation of persons which consecrated themselves to God: Of whom I my self, though in merits and order the meanest, have by legitimate succession received the government in the same Cell built by him.
Thus Writes Alcuin touching S. Willebrords Father Wilgis:Adding withall, how on the Anniversary of his So|lemnity in S. Willebrords Monastery Wine fayling for celebrating Masse, God was pleased to supply it by a miracle.. Angl. 3. . For the merit of his Sanctity he is placed in our Martyrologe on the last day of Ianuary.
3 Thence he proceeds to treat of his Son S. Willebrord, in these words, As Blessed S. Iohn Baptist the Forerunner of our Lord, being san|ctified to God from his Mothers womb, was as the Gospell teaches us, born of Religious Pa|rents, and like the Morning-Star went before Christ the Sun of righteousnes, being designd by Almighty God to procure blessings to many: In like manner S. Willebrord who was also designed for the eternall good of many nations, is known to have descended from devout and Religious Parents. For we may piously beleive that the Venerable man Wilgis by Gods predestination undertook a Matri|moniall life for this end onely, that from him might proceed a Son of so eminent Sanctity, by whom many Nations might receive spi|rituall benefit.
4. This seems to have been signified by a heavenly Vision appearing to his Mother in her sleep about midnight: at which time it seemd to her that she saw as it were a New Moon in the heave~s, which increased by little and little till it came to the full. Whilst she was earnestly looking upon his Moon, on a sudden it seemd with a swift course to fall into her mouth, and from thence descen|ding into her stomack, all her inward parts glistered with a shining brightnes. Whereu|pon she awakd in great fear: and the next day recounted her dream to a certain Reli|gious Preist. Whose answer was this. The Moon which you saw at first very small and afterward encreasing to a larger magnitude, denotes the Son which you conceived this night, who with the beams of heavenly Truth shall dissipate the dark|nes of errours, and wheresoever he shall goe, the splendour of Divine Light shall accom|pany him, so that by the brightnes of his vertues he shall draw the eyes and admira|tion of all men to him. Thus did the said Reli|gious Preist interpret the Vision, which inter|pretation was confirmed and verified by subsequent events.
5. Now it came to passe that the sayd wo|man in due time brought forth a Son, to whom at his Baptism she gave the name of Willebrord. And not long after he was weaned his Father gave him to the Monks of Rippon to be instructed in learning and piety, to the end his frail and tender age might be forti|fied by Religious disciplines in a place where he should see nothing uncomely, and hear nothing but what was pious and holy. Di+vine Grace gave a good successe to his Fathers pious intention, insomuch as from his child|hood he proffited wonderfully in learning, prudence and vertue, so that in that age he seemed a young Samul, being pleasing and acceptable both to God and men.
6. In the said Monastery S. Willebrord conti|nued till he had received Ecclesiasticall Ton|sure: after which he undertook a Monastical Profession among severall other devout young men, to none of which he was infe|riour in a chearfull Observance of Discipline, Humility and sedulous study of learning: but dayly proffited so much that in modesty, di|scretion and gravity he much transcended his age, being in understanding aged, though in body tender and small.
7. Thus encreasing in the knowledge of Sacred learning,A. D. 678. in sobriety and vertuous manners, when he arrived at the twentieth year of his age he was inflamed with a fer|vent desire of a more strickt course of life, and a love of visiting forrain places. And because he had heard that in Ireland learning did much flourish, he intended to goe thi|ther, being hereto principally moved by the fame spread abroad concerning the pious conversation of severall Holy men, among whom the principall were the Blessed Father and B. Egbert, called the Saint, as like|wise the Venerable Preist Wigbert, both who for the love of a celestiall countrey had for|saken their houses and kinred, and retired into Ireland where in solitude they enioyed the sweet fruits of heavenly contemplation, naked and poor as to the world, but plenti|fully enriched with Divine Grace.
8. The Blessed young man Willebrord piously emulating the Sanctity of these two Holy men with the connivence and permission of his Abbot and Brethren took ship presently for Ireland, where he adioynd himself to the society of the said holy men, to the end that like a diligent Bee, he might by their vicinity suck the mellifluous flowers of piety, and build up in the Hive of his own breast the sweet Honey-combs of vertue. There for the space of twelve years under the tuition of those two illustrious Masters of Piety  lear|ning he treasured up knowledge and vertue, by which he might be enabled to become a Teacher of many Nations.]
Now at the end of these twelve years, that is, in the year of Grace six hundred and ninety, he together with his eleaven devout companions wa sent an Apostolicall Preacher of Christian Faith to the Germans, as hath already been decla|red.



V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

i.2. c. The Martyrdom of two Aposto|licall Brethren, called Ewald, the Black and the white.

1. WE will now recount the successe of the pious endeavours of these Apo|stolicall Missionners. Their first arrivall was in Friseland at Vtrecht, where they immediatly began to sow the precious seed of the Go|spell. Now among them, as hath been said, there were two Brethren called by the same name of Ewald, who seeing the industry of their companions in the conversion of the riss, were desirous to employ the like charity among the Saxons: which they hap|pily performed, for they confirmed the Faith which they preached with the sacrifice of their lives. The manner of their Martyrdom is thus described by S. Beda.
Bed. l. 5. . [2. Two certain Preists of the English Na|tion, who or attaining to their heavenly ountrey had lived as it were banished per|sons a long time in Ireland, went into the Province of the Old Saxons, hoping by their preaching there to gain soules unto Christ. They were both of them, as of the same de|votion, so likewise of the same name, each of them being called Ewald: yet with this distinction, that according to the colour of their hair the one was called Black, and the other White Ewald. There was little diffe|rence between them as to their piety and eale: but he who was called Black Ewald was more skillfull in the learning and knowledge of Scriptures.
3. These two Brothers, assoon as they were entred into the Province took their lodging with a certain Farmer, whom they entreated to direct them to the Prince of the countrey, because they had a Message to deliver to him which would bring much proffit to the pu|blick. Now those Saxons had no Kings but severall petty Princes, who upon occasion of any war approaching meet together and by lotts chuse a common Ruler and Generall, whom for the time they all obey: but the war being ended, they return to their for|mer state of equality among themselves.
4. The countrey-farmer entertained them therefore, promising them that he would ondct them to their Prince: nd in this ex|pectation he detained them in his house se|verall days. Now the barbarous Neighbours adioyning, perceiving that they were stran|gers and of a quite different Religion from that of the countrey; for they spent the greatest part of their time in Hymnes, Psalms and Prayers, and dayly offred to God the sa|ving Sacrifice, for which purpose they were furnished with Sacred Vessels,  a small Table in stead of an Altar: Thereupon having a suspicion that if those Holy men should have accesse to their Lord, and converse with him, they would avert him from their Gods, and induce him to embrace a New Religion, by which means the whole Province might by little and little be in danger to forsake the old Religion: They therefore suddenly sett upon them, and forcing them out of the house, lew them Him who was called the White Ewald they killed with the sword: but the other they putt to death with great and tedious tortures, tearing his members asunder, and having slain them, they cast their Bodies into the Rhene.
5. When the Prince of the countrey, whom these Holy men desired to see, heard of this, he conceived great fury against those his barbarous Subjects for not permitting stran|gers desirous to speak with him to come to him: Whereupon he sent soldiers, and slew all the inhabitants of that Village, and burnt their houses with fire. The foresaid Preists and Holy Martyrs suffred on the fifth day be|fore the Nones of October.
6. Now how precious their death was in the eyes of God appeared by many celestiall signs. For whereas their dead bodies, as hath been sayd, were by the Pagans cast into the River, it so fell out that they were caried against the stream the space of forty miles upward to the place where their compa+nions abode. Moreover every night a very great light reaching to heaven shone over the place where the said bodies remained. And this was observed by some of the Pa|gans who had murdred them. Likewise one of these Brethren Martyrs in a Vision by night appeared to one of their companions, na|med Tumon, a man who while he lived in the world had been in great esteem for his No|ble birth, but from a soldiers profession be|came a Monk. To this man the Holy Martyr discovered that he might find their bodies in the place where he should see a glorious Light shining from heaven. And so it came to passe: for their Sacred Bodies being thus discovered, were with great honour enterred as became such glorious Martyrs, and the days both of their suffring and Invention is celebrated in those places with due Vene|ration.
7 In the Gallican Martyrologe we read the foregoing relation abbreviated,Martyrolog. Gall. 3. Octob the place of their Martyrdom to have been in Westphalia. And there is this addition, That when Pipin the glorious Duke and Generall of the French Nation was informed of these things, he caused the Mar+tyrs Sacred Bodies to be brought to him, which he buried with great splendour at Colen in the Collegiate Church of S. Cumbert. Their Memory is celebrated on the third of October, which was the day either of their suffring, or in|vention.
8. These were the First-fruits which con+secrated

this English Apostolick Mission.A. D. 694. How plentifull the succeeding Harvest was reaped by the incredible labours, the unwearied industry and neglect of dangers, yea rea|dines in these zealous labourers to expose themselves to death it self for the salvation of barbarous and pittilesse Nations, shall shortly be more largely declared.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. A Synod in Kent: The Acts of it, c.

A. D. 694.1. WHilst those Holy men were labouring abroad, the new ordained Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury Brithwald, assisted by the pious King of Kent Withred, employed his in|dustry and zeale in composing that Church and Kingdom, much deformed by the late tu|mults and disorders. For which purpose by the ioynt consent of them both a Synod was assembled at a place called Becancelde, at which were present besides the King and Arch-bishop, the greatest part of the Nobility and Clergy of that Kingdom.
2. The Acts o this Synod, or rather mixt Assembly, to which were admitted certain Abbesses also, have been rescued from obli|vion and darknes by the learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, who out of five Manu|scripts, of which three were more contracted then the other, hath lately exposed them to publick view. Neither Saint Beda nor Wil|liam of Malmsbury have spoken particularly of this Synod, though both of them have re|corded in a generall expression the magna|nimity and piety of this King Withred.d. l. 4. c. 26. Thus writes the former, Victred son of Egbert the le|gitimat King of Kent, assoon as he was firmly esta|blished in his Kingdom, by his Religious piety and industry freed his Nation from externall invasion. And the latter thus,Malmsbr.  l. 1. . 1. King Withred was at home civill and courtous, and abroad invincible: He with great devotion advanced Christian Religion and piety, and withall did largely extend his Re|gall power.
3. As touching the forementioned Synod; in as much as the Acts thereof doe well re|present to us the piety and iustice of that Age, it would be a wrong to the Reader to be deprived of the particular knowledge of them: I will therefore adioyn them in this place according to the largest Copy extnt in Sir. H. Spelman. They are composed in the person and as the Laws of King Withred, ac|cording to the form following:
Spelm n Synod. l. 1. f. .[4. In the name of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, a great Council was assembled in a place named Becancelde in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred ninety four: In which Council the most Clement King of Kent Withred presided, likewise Bertwald the most Reveren Arch-bishop o Brittany, to+gether with Tobias Bishop of the Church of Ro|chester, and other Abbots, Abbesses, Preists, Deacons, Dukes, and Lords, all which met to|gether, and in common with great diligence and solicitude we advised and consulted what ordinances were to be made and esta|blished for perpetuity touching the state o Gods Churches and Monasteries within the Kingdom of Kent, and the Revenews of them given by devout Kings my Predecessours and kinsmen for a perpetuall possession.
5. Therefore I Withred earthly King, being touched with compunction, and inflamed with a love of Iustice by the King of Kings, have learnt from the Ancient Traditions and Precepts of the Holy Fathers, that it is not law|full for any lay-person to draw and usurp to himself as his own proper possession any lands or Revenews formerly given to our Lord, and consecrated or established with the Crosse of Christ: for wee know and by expe|rience find, that whatsoever thing any man hath thus taken into his own power from the Church, our Lord will not suffer such sa|crilege to passe without Divine vengeance. It is a horrible crime therefore to robb the li|ving God, or to mangle his coat and inheri|tance. When therefore any part of our earthly substance has been offred to God, to the end that thereby wee may expect an eternall retribution in Heaven, it is mani|festly declared, that the lesse cautiously a se|cular person shall invade the inheritance of the Eternall King; the more severely shall he be punished by him.
6 These things being seriously considered we doe ordain, decree and in the Name of the Omnipotent God and all his Saints we doe command all our Successours, Kings, Princes and all persons whatsoever of se|cular state, that not any of them presume to usurp the Demeans or rights of any Church or Monastery which either by my self or any of my Predecessours in ancient times have been offred for a perpetuall inheritance to our Lord Iesus Christ, to his Holy Apostles, as likewise to the Blessed Virgin Mary Mother of our Lord.
7. Great care moreover is to be observed, according as is commanded in the Ecclesia|sticall Canons, that whensoever any Prelat, Bi|shop, Abbot or Abbesse shall dye, intimation thereof be given to the Arch-bishop of that Province, and with his counsell and consent let another be chosen whose life hath by examination been found to be pure and un|blameable: And without the advice and con+sent of the said Arch-bishop, Let none be promoted. For things of this nature doe not at all pertain to the command or dispo|sition of the King.
8. Now if any one either through igno|rance or malice shall doe otherwise, let his Election be voyd and himself deposed without delay. Neither let secular King

interpose their authority in the spiritual mat|ters,A. D. 695. for it belongs not to them to ordain Ec|clesiasticall persons, but secular Princes, Prefects and Officers: Whereas to govern the Chur|ches of God, to constitute Abbots, Abbesses, Preists and Deacons, to consecrate, establish or depose such persons, and to have a care that not any of our Lords sheep should wan|der from his flock, all this belongs to the Office of the Metropolitan Bishop. This our Precept we ordain shall be observed with regard of these Monasteries here named, the Monastery of Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles called Vpminster, Raculf, Sudminster, Dofras, Folcanstan, Hymminque, Scepeys and Hor. We doe utterly forbid any lay-person whatsoever to usurp or take into his own possession any thing belonging to any of these Mona|steries: And let this Law in behalf of all the Churches of God in our Kingdom remain and be in force for ever, for the eternall health of my own soule and the soules of my Prede|cessours, and the hope of an everlasting King|dom.
9. We further add in this place the con|cession of a greater liberty to the Church. In the first place let the whole Church (of Can|terbury) with possessions thereto belonging, and in like manner the Church of Rochester, with her possessions and all the other fore|said Churches be subject to God: For the sal|vation therefore o mine own soule and my Predecessours, and for the hope of an heavenly kingdom, from this day hence forth we give and grant unto them that they be free from all difficulties of secular service, from all provision to be given to the King Princes o Counts, likewise from all labours, all greivances greater or lesser, from all claims, violence and censures of Kings: Which liberty is to continue for ever, ex|cept of their own free will and abundance they shall think good to contribute any thing. Which if they doe, such free con|tributions shall not oblige them for the future to the like, nor advantage be made from them to bring in an ill custom: But on the contrary let them remain in all secu|rity, to the end they may offer to Almighty God worthy Sacrifices for us, and by their im|maculate Oblations wash away our sins, that by their intercessions we may becom wor|thy to hear that happy Sentence, Come ye bles|sed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
10. Now if any King hereafter to be rai|sed to this Throne, or any Bishop, Abbott or Count or any other in authority shall at|tempt to contradict or infringe this Charter, Let him know that he is sequestred from the Body and Blood of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that he is so excommunicated that he is un|capable of remission of his sins in this world and the world to come, except he first make full satisfaction according to the judgment of the Church.
11. Let this our Writing irrefragably con|firmed be kept and preserved for ever in the Church of our Saviour seated in the Citty of Canterbury, where the Primat resides, for an Example and Defence of all Churches in the Kingdom. Let this Law remain unviolable to the end of the world: For these Priviledg|es are not given to any earthly man, for they are all granted and given into the hands of the Omnipotent God and all Saints.
12. This is the tenour of the Charter made in this Assembly of the Clergy and Nobility of Kent: To which are adioyned in order these subscriptions following: I Withred by the aid of Christ have subscribed to these Laws constituted by mee for my self, for the Queen Werburga, and our Son Alric  I Bert|wald by the Grace of God Arch-bishop have subscribed to these Laws constituted by us  The sign of the hand of Ethelbart for him|self and his Brother Eadbert  The sign o the hand of Tobia Bishop.  The sign of the hand of Etheldride Abbesse.  The sign of the hand of Wilnolda Abbesse.  The sign of the hand of Redemptus Preist.  The sign of the hand of Bothred Bishop.  The sign of the hand of Walch Prst.  The sign of the hand of Mildreda Abbesse.  The sign of the hand of Aete Abbesse.  The sign of the hand of Herelwida Abbesse.  The sign of the hand o Ealfrid Preist.  The sign of the hand of Bis|san Preist.  The sign of the hand of Aldulf Preist.  The sign of the hand of Bonn Preist.]
13. The same King Withred the year fol|lowing granted another Charter to a certain Abbesse in the Isle of Thanet called Eabba,A. D. 695. by which he gave unto her four plough-lands in the same Island belonging to the said King, and seated in a small Territory called Hu|man. Which Charter he made in his own name, and in the Name of his Queen Kine|gytha. So that it seems the Queen in the for|mer Charter named Werburga either was dead at the making of this, or had two names.
14. Thus by the piety of King Withred, and the zealous diligence of the Arch-bishop Brithwald the Kingdom of Kent recovered its former tranquility, and the ruins which through factions and disorders in the state had hapned to the Church, were repaired. But far greater and more happy changes on the other side of the sea, caused by the industry and zeale of our foresaid Apostolick Missio|ners, invite us a while to leave Brittany and attend to them. Where we shall see how prosperously the seeds of heavenly Truths sowd by them, doe grow and multiply, and this the more plentifully, because these Spi|rituall Labourers ioyfully watred them with their own Blood.



VII. CHAVII. CHAP.

2 c. Gsts of the Missioners among the Frisons: Cruelty of King Radbode.

1. THE Narration of these happy suc|cesses in the countrey of the Frisons we will here sett down in the words of the Eminent Cardinall Baronius taken from the faithfull Relation of Marcellinus one of the said Missioners,A. D. 695. who wrote what he saw with his eyes, and in which himself had a part.
[2. In the six hundred ninety fifth year of our Lord,Ba. hc. ex Marcelli. in ct S. i|bert. and in the eight Iudiction (saith he) the Church of the Frisons was happily propagated, being bedw'd with the blood of Martyrs.For besides the Martyrdom of the two Brethren called Ewald, before re|lated, the Holy Preist Wigbrt, one of the twelve Apostolick Missioners was this year made partaker of the same Crown. These things are particularly declared by Marclli|nus in the Acts of S. Swibert, where to the Gests formerly related he adioyns the fol|lowing Narration:
3. At that time Radbode the infidel King of the risons, having been expelled out of Vtrecht by the illustrious and most Christian Prince Pipin Senschall of the Court of France, made his abode in the Isle of Fosteland, called so from the name of a certain Idol-Dety cal|led Fosta, where that Sect of Idolatry was most solemnly celebrated. In that Island the Holy Preists and Apostolick Missioners by the sug|gestion of S. Wigbert being assembled toge|ther, destroyd the profane Temples of Iupiter and Fosta: and yet with all their diligence in preaching could perswade onely three per|sons to renounce the Pomps of Satan, and ioyn themselves to the Orthodox Faith.
4. But King Radbode, an obstinate Idolater, having heard that his Idols had been destroyd by Christians, conceived a most furious rage against them, and resolving to revenge the injury done to his Gods, commanded Saint Wigbert, whom he knew before to be a Chri|stian and companion of the Holy Missioners, to be putt to death with horrible torments. Which manner of death was most accepta|ble to him, for in his dayly prayers his cu|stom had been to begg of almighty God the favour of suffring Martyrdom for him. And as for the rest of the Holy Preachers, he drove them violently out of the said Island.
5. These devout Preists perceiving that King Radbode could by no means be with|drawn from the profane worship of Idols, and that by reason of his Tyranny they could by preaching make small progresse in gai|ning of soules, they retired out of that countrey to the foresaid illustrious Prince Pipin, by whom they were gratefully en|tertained. And whereas a little before he had by conquest obtained the possession of the Southern Fseland, from whence he had expelled the said King Radbode, he sent them back to preach the Gospell there, with a com|mand from the King directed to his Pagan Subjects that not any of them should dare to disturb or in the least sort molest them in their preaching. Hence it came to passe by Gods Grace assisting them, that by their se|dulous teaching they dayly converted many soules from Idolatry to the Faith of Christ.
6. The place where these Holy Preists upon any occasion mett together, was the Castle of Vtrecht, anciently called Wiltanburg, which at this time was under the power of the Eastern Francks: and where a little before in the raign of the Emperour Heraclius the illu|strious and Holy King of France Dagobert had caused a Church to be built to the ho|nour of the Apostle S. Thomas: which Church presently after, the perverse and obstinat Frisons had utterly ruind to the ground. In the same place these Holy Preists this year built another Church to the honour of the Holy Crosse, adioyning to the ruines of the former, where they consecrated likewise a Sacred Font to which the new-converted Christians might have a secure accesse to re|ceive the holy Sacrament of Baptism, by rea|son of the strength and defence of the said Castle and garrison.
Thus writes S. Macelli|nus, cited by Baronius.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH.

1.2. c. The Gests of S Swibert.
9. He and S. Willebrord ordained Bishops.

1 TO the foregoing Narration the same Authour subioyns another more par|ticularly of the Gests of S. Swibert, according to the tenour following:Mrcellin. in Act S. S+bert.[After this the fore|said Preists perceiving that the harvest was indeed great, but the laborours few, they therefore divided themselves, and after the manner of the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord wnt two and two, or three and three through diverse Provinces of Germany, ta|king with them certain new converts, and so preached the Gospell to the Nations.
2. Among these, that glorious Preist of our Lord S. Swibert inflamed with the fire of Divine Love, at the same time attended by Werenfrid and my self went to a great Village filled with a world of Pagan Rites, and adorned with diverse Idoll-Temples: And it was distant from Vtrecht about two miles Eastward. There whilst he preached that Christ was the true God, who would give eternall life to all who beleived in him, and admo|nished

them to reliquish the vain worship of Idols, which were full of Devills, which could not afford any help to such as served them, presently he was seised upon by the Pagans and Idoll-Preists, and greivously scour|ged by them, crying out and saying, This blasphemer prophanes our Law, affirms that our Omnipotent Gods are Devills, and would seduce the people, boldly telling them, that the man who was crucified is the true God: So that unlesse he be killed or driven out of our countrey, the Worship of our Gods will cease, and the Rites taught  by our Fathers shall be extermi|nated.
3 Having said thus they took him and cast him into prison, intending the day fol|lowing to putt him secretly to death: for being under the dominion of the French who were Christians, they durst not kill him openly.
4. As for Werenfrid and my self (Marcellin) we followed him to the prison weeping: Which the Holy Preist Swibert observing, with a chearfull countenance he comforted us, and exhorted us to stand constantly for the Faith of Christ, and not to fear death for his cause.
5. Now the following night towards morning as Saint Swibert was praying and we weeping, an Angell of our Lord appeard to him in the prison with great splendour, and said to him, Servant of the true God, fear not, for our Lord is with thee. Having said this in the presence of the Keepers, who stood amazed, he sett him at liberty, commanding him to preach Christ constantly every where to the Pagans After this the Angell ascended to heaven, and the Holy man came, and knee|ling down devoutly related to us what had hapned, whereupon we with great fervour gave thanks to God for this Angelicall Visita|tion and consolation.
6. The Pagans, and specially the Idoll-Preists the next day hearing that he had been thus delivered, began to perceive the impotency of their Idols, and extolled the power of Christ. As for the Holy man he with great courage preached the Go|spell to them to their great astonishment, and converted many of them to Christ: and no man had the boldnes to lay hands on him.
7. Assoon as he had performed his Mini|stery there, he returned with us to Vtrecht, where he declared to our Brethren all things which had hapned to him at Duerstat, at the hearing whereof they wept for ioy, and una|nimously blessed God for his goodnes. After which he departed into severall villages and towns in Friseland, Holland and Teisterband, publickly and constantly preaching the Go|spell o Christ to all: and though thereby he suffred in many places great persecutions from the Pagans, which he endured with pa|tience and ioy, yet being always sustained by Divine assistance he brought great mul|titudes to the knowledge and obedience of Christ.
8. Toward the end of the same year, being attended by Werenfrid and my selfe he went into the Eastern coast of the Principality of Holland, where there was a town a mile distant from Vtrecht toward the South called Haganstein. At which time there hapned a famous solemnity of the Pagans, whereto were assembled great multituds of them to perform detestable sacrifices, incense and Rites to their false Gods. The Holy man then went boldly into the midst among them, crying aloud, O yee men, if you have any rea|son left in you, draw near and hearken to mee: I am a Messenger sent to you from the most high God, c. (And with a long Oration, re|corded by Marcellinus an car-wittnes, he de|clared to them the Truth of Christs Doctrine, and vanity of their Idoll-worship.)Moreover his preaching was confirmed by a following miracle, for he restored sight to a man well known to them all, whose name was Gisel|bert, and who had been born blind. After which succeeded a notable conversion of many Pagans of the blind mans ac|quaintance, who were witnesses of the Mi|racle.
9 Now the Brethren seing so manifest an assistance of God, thought fitt to chuse amongst them all two persons, to be or|dained Bishop, to witt, Swibert and Wille|brord. The former they sent into England to S. Wilfrid Bishop of the Mercians by whom he was consecrated Bishop this same year.
As for Saint Willebrord he was sent to Rome, where he was by Pope Sergius ordained Arch-bishop of Vtrecht and the whole Province of Friseland, as shall be declared. What spe|ciall Diocese was allotted to Saint Swibert, does not appear: yet in a particular man|ner he is named the Apostle of Teisterband, Westphalia and the Boructuarians, as the com|panion of his labours Marcellin hath in|formed us. And the reason why he was di|rected into Brittany to Saint Wilfrid for his ordination, and not to the Arch-bishop Brith|wald, seems to be because, as hath been declared, a Legatin Power had been conferred by the Pope on the Arch-bishop of the Nor|thumber, which Power was not taken from him by his unjust exile: Or else because these Holy Missioners being come out of that Kingdom acknowledged a particular relation to and dependance on S. Wilfrid.



A. D. 696
IX. CH.IX. CHAP.

1.2. The Gests of Saint Swibert being a Bishop.
3.4. c. His miraculous raising to Life a person who had been drowned: and the Successe of that Miracle.

A. D. 696.1. IN the year of Grace six hundred ninety six S. Willebrord was consecrated Arch-bishop of Vtrecht hy Pope Sergius, but returned not to his Province and companions till the year following: In the mean time Saint Swi|bert having dispatched a shorter voyage into Brittany came back this year, and glori|riously bi arged his Episcopall function, God assisting his labours with the Gift of most stupendious Miracles, faithfully related by the companion of his Travells S. Marcellinus, as followeth:
Marcellin. i vit. S. i|bert.[2. The most holy Prelat Swibert having been exalted to the Pontificall Dignity and consecrated by S. Wilfrid, after he had salu|ted his kindred  freinds, he together with his attendants and companions returned to the Work of the Gospell, and arrived at Wil|tenburg or Vtrecht some what more then a year before S. Willebrord was come back from Rome. He was received by the Brethren and New Converts with great honour and ioy. He adorned his Episcopall Degree with all the vertues becoming it, living afterward in yet greater perfection of Humility, Meeknes, Simplicity and piety. The Work of preaching the Gospell he constantly fullfilld, travelling through the Villages and towns not on horseback, but as the Apostles were wont to doe, on foot. Thus he passed through all the quarters of Friseland, Holland and especially the County of Teisterband, con|verting great multitudes to the Faith of Christ, and diligently extirpating Idolatry. Thus by his assiduous preaching and exhor|tations he reduced in a manner the whole County of Teisterband to the beleif of the Gos|pell: and there in many places he built new Churches, and elsewhere consecrated Idoll-Temples to Christian Churches: Thus in Zanduic near Tel a Church was erected to the honour of the Holy Martyr S. Vincent, another in Arkel to the honour of the Blessed Virgin Mary Mother of God: and a third in Hornaer to the honour of S. Denys Areopagite, with ma|ny others.
3. Now how in the Dedication of one of those Churches he raised to life a young man who had been drownd, is at large described by the same devout and most faithfull Writer, whose relation though diffused, will very well deserve a place in this our History.
Ibid.[4. The Divine Providence did so order (saith he) that whilst on the eighth day be|fore the Calends of October this same year Saint Swibert was dedicating a Church in Malsen a Village seated neer the River Lighen in the Country of Teisterband, a certain young man, named Splinter of Adingyn, Son of a person cheif in authority at Duerstat, being out of curiosity desirous to see the manner of Chri|stian Worship, and particularly the Actions of S. Swibert, of whom he had heard wonderfull things, though as yet he remained in his ignorance and infidelity, he attended by three servants took boat about seaven a clock in the morning, willing to see the Ce|remonies of the Dedication of the Church at Malsen, which was but a small mile distant from Duerstat. Now as the boat was sayling in the midst of the River Rhene or Leck, the young man sate on the side of it leaning on his sword, and sportfully passing the time: but on a sudden by reason of the moistnes and slipperines of the boat, his feet sliding he fell backwards into the River, and not|withstanding all the endeavours of his ser|vants to save him, was swallowd by the deep gulfe and drowned. Whereupon the ser|vants filled the shores on both sides of the river with their clamours: and not daring to return to his parents, they ran away. This misfortune caused an incredible sorrow not only to his parents and kindred, but all the inhabitants neer adioyning.
5. At last about noon the same day his body was taken up in a Nett by fishermen, and with great lamentation caried to the house of his parents, and though his ioynts were become stiff and inflexible, yet by the advice of the Pagan Preists he was putt into a warm bed, and so caried into their Idoll-Temple of Mars. For they had heard that the Christians having caried severall persons who had been drowned into their Churches, they were by the Sacrifices and prayers of the Bishops re|stored to life. The Father, therefore of this young man, called Gunther, a Noble Soldier and Lord of Adengyn, made hast with his fa|mily and freinds to the Temple of Mars, where he offred an abominable Sacrifice, killing many beasts of severall sorts to their great God Mars, hoping thereby to have his onely Son restored to life. But after they had with mournfull hearts continued in their Sacrifi+ces and Prayers two howers, and found no help, the afflicted Father despaired of his Sons recovery, neither indeed had they ever heard that their false God had had the power to doe such things.
6. Now the same day there were present severall Christians, who being desirous to see the successe of these Sacrifices and Prayers, followd the Funerall to the Porch of the Tem|ple. These seeing the inexpressible greif of Gunther and his freinds, and reioycing at such a proof of the impotency of Heathen Gds, they called Gunther aside, and to the end that Christ might be magnified, they advised him with all speed to send for S. Swibert the

Christian Bishop from Malsen, to whom his Sons intention had been to goe, assuring him that upon condition himself would re|nounce his Idols and beleive in Christ, the Bishop by our Lords Power would raise his Son to life.
7. Gunther having heard this, and calling to mind how the same Saint Swibert in that very Citty had been freed by an Angell out of Prison, and how in Hagenstein he had in the Name of Iesus restored sight to one born blind, was encouraged by these Christians speeches, and without delay, taking with him some freinds of the better sort, he went presently to Malsen. Where being come to the presence of Saint Swibert, he immediatly leaped from his horse, and ca|sting himself at the Holy Bishops feet, and kissing his hands, he with many tears and sighs declared to him the manner of his Sons unfortunate death, beseeching him that he would vouchsafe to goe with him to Duerstat, and by the power of the glo|rious Name of Iesus the Omnipotent God, re|store his Son to life, promising that himself with his whole family and kindred would beleive and be baptised.
8. Saint Swibert with great courtesy and respect raised him up, speaking comforta|ble words to him: but notwithstanding he had great compassion of his greif and la|mentations, yet he piously excused himself, fearing to tempt God in a matter of so great importance. Gunther therefore again em|bracing his feet, with great importunity be|seeched him for the love of Iesus Christ the living God to goe along with him. Thus at last being overcome with his pittifull cryes, and principall with the prayers of Werenfrid, and my self, together with other New-Con|verts, he, attended by us entred a Charret pre|pared for him, and with great speed came to Duerstat after Complin, about six of the Clock. Now there was a great multitude of people assembled on the banks of the Rhene or Leck expecting the arrivall of Saint Swibert, at which Profane Idoll-Preists were much greived.
9. Assoon then as we had passed over the River Leck, as he was in the way toward the place where the dead body lay, being attended by his Disciples and also a great troop of Pagans, the Lady Mechtildis the Mother of Splinter who had been drownd, mett him almost distracted with greif, and casting her selfe at his feet in the open street, she with a loud voyce cryed, O servant of the living God help mee, and restore my Son in the Name of thy God, and I will beleive in him with my whole family, for our Gods are unable to raise him up. S. Swibert took up the Lady, and comforting her, sighed within himself a little.
10. Now the Body of Splinter who had been drownd, was again caried from the Temple of Mars into his fathers house. When the Holy Bishop then was come before it, he desired that the Pagan Preists would please to be present with him, that they might see the power of our Lord Iesus Christ the Omnipotent God. In the mean time he commanded us to attend devoutly to our prayers, and to im|plore the Divine Mercy for restoring life to the dead man, and himself likewise prayed. Whilst the whole multitude therefore wept, and when some of the Idoll-Preists at the re|quest of the Lord Gunther stood by trembling, S. Swibert kneeling down, and weeping abundantly, with a loud voyce cryed unto our Lord, saying, O Lord Iesus Christ who art our Refuge, incline thine eare unto our prayers, that thy glory may be revealed to these men, and thy holy Name be glorified by these Vnbeleivers That they may know that our Faith is not vain, and that besides thee there is no other God, whose Mer|cy is endlesse, and whose gifts are measurable. For the glory of thy Name restore life to this thy servant, who has been deluded by the fraud of the Devill; that they may know that all Idolls which they worship for Gods, are images filled with De|vills, and that seeing the Power of thy Mercy, they may beleive in thee, and beleiving may be saved.
11. Having thus said, he rose from Prayer, having a great confidence in Christ, and said, O Lord Iesus Christ, the comforter of the sorrowfull, who hast sayd, Whosoever beleives in mee, the works that I doe he also shall doe, and greater then these he shall doe: O most mercifull Lord God, who at the tears of the two holy Sisters, Mary Magda|len and Martha, didst restore to life Lazarus ha|ving been four days dead, vouchsafe for shewing the power of thy Divinity, to raise to life this dead person.
12. Then taking the hand of him who had been drownd, he said, In the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ who was crucified, God omnipotent, I command thee to rise, live and confesse thy Crea|tour.Immediatly after this he who was dead opened his eyes, and sighing arose as from a deep sleep, and embracing the feet of the holy Bishop, he cryed out with many groa|nings, There is no God in heaven and earth but the Lord Iesus Christ who was crucified, and whom this his holy servant Swibert preaches, who by his mercifull goodnes at his prayers has raised mee from death and Hell. O how glorious is this mans life, who by his Prayers has driven away death from anothers body, and by the trust he has in Christ, ha's robbed hell of its prey. Surely death can have no power where the holy man Swibert interposes his prayer.
13. Immediatly upon this all that were pre|sent, and had heard these words and seen the wonderfull and strange Miracle, exalted with condigne praises the goodnes of God through Iesus Christ our Lord, who had vouchsafed to make his holy Servant Swibert illustrious by so glorious a Miracle: Whereupon casting them|selves at the feet of the H. Bishop, they professed their readines to beleive in Christ, and desire to be baptized in his name: And amo~g these, some were Pagan Preists, who despised and

renounced the vain worship of their Idols.
14 Lastly the parents  kinred of the Young man with infinite ioy gave thanks to God and his Saint, embracing him with great devotion, and affectionatly kissing him and his Disciples. Saint Swibert also himself, with the other Christians, prostrated themselves on the ground, blessing God who had done great things among his people. There was moreover in the street so great a clamour or Pagans who had a desire to see the young man who had been restored to life, that S. Swibert was compelled, after he was cloa|thed, to lead him forth by the hand with great devotion to the glory of God, that he might be seen by all: Whom assoon as they saw alive and walking, they cryed out, Of a truth the God of the Christians is a great God, who by his servant has wrought such admirable things. There was therefore an universall ioy among them all who saw these wonders, and the name of our Lord Iesus Christ was glorified.
15. At the same time Splinter who had been restored to life was baptized together with his parents, kinred and others, to the number of one hundred twenty six, besides many children of both sexes.
16 The day following, when an infinite multitude of Pagans were assembled toge|ther, Saint Swibert, after he had premised a Prayer to the Holy Ghost, that he would open their hearts to despise Idols and embrace the Faith (in which Prayer his Disciples ioynd with him) he preached to them at large, de|claring to them the Transgression of our First Parent Adam, the Incarnation of the Son of God, and how all those shall be eternally damned who contemning the true God wor|ship Idols, and boast in graven Images: And the efficacy of his Preaching was such, that a great part of the Citty was converted to the Faith of Christ.
17. Now that Citty though by Profession Pagan, was subject to the Dominion of the Christian Princes the King of France and his Generall Duke Pipin and the Regions confi|ning, Brabant, Flanders and Part of Holland had already embraced the Faith: So that the Pagans of Duerstat freely conversing with Christians, had frequently heard mention made of Christ.
18. S. Swibert remained many dayes in the same Citty, with great vigilance and assu|rance preaching Christ to the Pagans, and confirming the Neophytes: Insomuch as not only the ordinary Sort of Pagans, but like|wise many Idoll-Preists seeing the wonder|full Miracle, and heavenly Grace shining in the Holy Bishop, cast off their Infidelity and Idolatrous Profession, and with great devotion received Baptism of him.]
Thus does Mar|cellin relate the Gests of his Master S. Swibert, till the return of Saint Willebrord Of which Gests himself had been an eye-witnes.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c The Wonderfull story in S Beda of a man revived, and recounting his Visions.

1. IT will be pertinent, and, I conceive, not unpleasing to the devout Catholick Reader that here should be adioyned ano|ther Story related at large by S. Beda, in which we shall read how about the same time in Brittany another dead person, for the in|struction of the living, was restored to life. Which Story though by some Protestant Wri|ter: it be derided, because the Churches Do|ctrin touching Purgatory is confirmed by it: Yet since no arguments can be produced by them to disproove it besides their vo|luntary ungrounded asseveration that they will not beleive it, I will not be sparing of the labour to sett it down, as it is found in S. Beda's History.
[2. In these times,Bed. l. 5. c. 13. saith he, a Miracle ve|ry memorable which might be compared to the Wonders of old, hapned in Brittany: For to the end that negligent Christians then alive might be raised up from the death of their soules, a certain man who had been a good while dead, was restored to the life of his Body, and related many Notable things which he had seen. This man was an honest House-keeper, who with his family lived a re|ligious life in a Region of the Northumbers, caled Incuningum. Who having been struck with a disease, the same growing more and more violent upon him, it brought him to extremity, so that on a certain day towards evening he dyed. But the day following early he came to life again, and suddenly raising himself up in his bed, all those who mourn fully watched the Body, were terribly affigh|ted, and ran away: Only his Wife whose love to him was excessive, though she trembled at the sight, stayd still by him.
3. The man seing his Wie, bid her be o comfort: Fear not, said he, for I am truly restored to life from death which had seised on mee, and permission is give mee to live awhile longer among men. But my conver|sation hereafter must he quite otherwise then formerly it has been. Having said this, he presently rose, and went to an Oratory of that Village, where he remained a good while in Prayer. Afterward having divided his whole substance into three portions, one portion he gave to his Wfe, a second to his children, and the third he distributed to the poor.
4. Not long after, having thus freed him|self from all worldly cares, he went to the Monastery of Mailros, which for the greatest part is encompassed with the River Tweed.

There having received Tonsure, he entred into a secret mansion assigned him by the Abbot, where he continued to the day of his death in such contrition and mortifica|tion both of mind and body, that though his tongue were silent, the manner of his life did sufficiently tell the world that he had seen many things, some extremely horrible, and others wonderfully pleasant and ravi|shing, which are concealed from the rest of mankind.
5. Now the account which he gave of his Visions, was on this manner: A certain person brightly shining in his face and vestments conducted mee: and wee walked together silent, as it seemed to mee towards the place where the Sun rises in high Sum|mer. Thus walking together, wee came to a place where there was on our left hand a valley of a vast depth and breadth, and the length of it seemed infinite. One side of this valley was terrible with its burning flames: and the other no lesse intolerable for the bitternes of the cold blasts, hayle and snow driving through it. And both these places were full of mens soules, which seemed to be orcibly tossed from one side to the other: For those which were in the fire, not being able to endure its scorching, leaped into the horrible cold: and not inding ease there, they leaped back into the unquencheable flames Having obser|ved an infinite number of deformed soules thus tormented with an interchangeable viissitude of tortures without any respite of ease, I began to think that this place sure|ly was Hell, of whose intolerable torments I had oft heard Preachers speak. But my onductour who went before mee, answered these my thoughts, saying, Doe not entertain such an imagination: for this is not Hell, as thou thinkest.
6 But when he saw mee affrighted with so orrible a spectacle, he condued mee leasu|rely somewhat further, where I saw all places round about mee become obscure, and at length filled with utter darknes. Into which when wee were entred, the darknes was so thick, that I could see nothing but the shape and vestment of my Conductour. And as wee went on further in this shady darknes, on a sudden there appeared before us frequent globes of hideous flames ascending out of a deep pitt and again falling down into it.
7. When I was come thither, presently my Guide vanished out of sight, leaving mee done in the midst of this darknes and hor|rid spectacle. But when the said globes of fire without any intermission mounted up and again fell down, I perceived that they were full of human soules, which like sparks of fire caried up by the smoke, were sometimes cast upward, and then drawn back by the vapours of fire Moreover an unexpressibly noysom stink belched out by those vapours filled all the dark spaces round about. As I was thus standing still in a terrible fright, being uncertain what to doe, whither to goe, and what would be the end of all this, I heard behind my back a most horrible noyse, as of persons wailing in unutterable misery, and also at the same time I heard others loudly and scornfully laughing, as the rude vulgar people are wont to doe when they insult over their captive enemies. When this Noise came nearer to mee, I perceived a troop of wicked Spirits haling into the midst of that darknes the soules of men which wofully cryed out, whilst the others burst forth into laughters. And among these soules I could distinctly see that one was shaved like an Ecclesiasticall person, another was a lay-man, and a third was a woman. These unhappy soules thus haled along by those spitefully malicious Spirits, at length were plunged into the midst of that burning pitt. Into which after they were descended a good way, I could no longer distinctly hear the wayling of men and laughing of Devills, but only had in mine eares remaining a confused promis|cuous sound.
8. In the mean time certain obscure Spi|rits ascended out of that fire-vomiting pitt, which approached mee on all sides, and with flaming eyes and stinking fire issuing out of their mouths and nostrills vexed mee greivously. Moreover with fierie pin|cers which they held in their hands they threatned to catch mee: but for all that, though they frighted mee, they had not the boldnes to touch mee. Being thus on all sides encompassed with darknes and ene|mies, I turned mine eyes every way to see if there were any one to deliver mee. At last there appeared by the way which I had pas|sed some thing that shone like a stars, which encreasing and approaching nearer and nea|rer, assoon as it came to mee, all those hate|full Spirits which had endeavoured with their fiery pincers to lay hold on mee, were dispersed and fled.
9. Now he whose coming drove away these Spirits was the same who at first had been my Conductour. Who presently after turning his steps more southerly toward the East ledd mee out of that darknes into a clear and lightsome aire: In which after we had walked awhile, I saw before us a migh|ty wall of the length and height whereof every way I could see no end, I began then to marwell to what purpose we should goe to that wall, in which I could discover neither dore, window nor any other pas|sage. But being come to it, presently, I know not by what means, we found our selves on the top of it. And there appeared to mee a most large pleasant feild, so replenished with all sorts of odoriferous flowers, that the sweet fragrancy of them immediatly took away all the former stench of the dark

fiery furnace.A. D. 695. And so great was the light there on all sides, that it far exceeded the brightnes of midday Moreover there were in that feild innumerable assemblies of men in pure white garments, all reioycing and singing. Now as he ledd mee among these happy Quires, I began to think, that this might be the Kingdom of Heaven, which I had oft heard preached of. But he again answered to any thought, No this is not Heaven, as thou supposest.
10. And as wee passed on in our progresse: I saw before mine eyes a far greater and more pleasant Light, then wee had seen be|fore: and in that Light I heard a most sweet Melody of persons ioyfully singing: and so wonderfull a fragrancy of a most sweet odour issued from thence, that the former sweetnes, which before seemed excessive to mee, now I very meanly esteemed. As like|wise the former light compared with this, appeared almost obscure. Now when I was in a hopefull expectation that wee should enter into this Blessed place, my Guide made a stopp: and presently turning his steps, he lead mee back again the way that wee had come.
11. And when in our return wee were come to the ioyfull mansions of those inha|bitants cloathed in white garments, he said to mee, Duest thou know what all these things are which thou hast seen? I answered, No. He replied, That valley which thou sawest so terrible by the scorching flames and horrible frosts, is the place in which those soules are to be tryed and afflicted, which having delayed to confesse and amend their sins, at the very point of death retire for safety to Repentance, and so depart out of the body. These because even in the last moment of their lives they confessed and were contrite for their sins, they shall all at least in the day of Iudgment come to the Kingdom of heaven. And many of them before that day are eased and delivered by the Prayers, Fasting and Alms of the living, and especially by the celebrating the most Holy Sacrifice. Moreover that flame-vomi|ting and stinking pitt which thou sawest, is the very Mouth of Hell, into which whosoe|ver once falls, he shall never come out of it for all eternity.
12. As for this pleasant flowry feild here before thine eyes, in which thou seest such multitudes of youth making mercy and cloathed with white raiment, this is the place which is the Receptacle of such soules which have continued to their death in the exercise of vertue, but yet their Works have not been of such Perfection as to deserve their present admission in the Kingdom of Heaven. Yet all these in the day of Iudgment shall arrive unto the Vision of our Lord, and the Ioyes of his heavenly Kingdom. But as for those who in their Words, Works and Thoughts have attained to Perfection, such assoon as they have left the Body, shall enter into that Blessed Kingdom. To the confines of which Kingdom that Place pertains where thou sawest so glorious a Light, and heardst so sweet Harmony, and wast refreshed with so admirably sweet-smelling Odours.
13. Thou therefore having seen all these things, must presently return to thy Body, and again as formerly live among men. If then hereafter thou wilt be diligent to examine all thine actions, and to observe uprightnes and simplicity in thy conversation and speeches, thou also after death shalt receive a mansion among these ioyfull troops of happy Spirits. For I, having departed for a time from thee, did it to this end that I might see what would in the end become of thee. When he had spoken thus to mee, I had a horrible aversion from returning to my Body, being extremely delighted with the sweetnes and beauty of that place which I saw, and the happy society of the persons living in it. Notwithstanding I had not the boldnes to make any such request to my Guide. And whilst I was busy in these thoughts, I know not how, I presently per|ceived that I was again alive among men.
14. These and other particulars did the Man of God usually recount concerning his Vision: and these he related not to negligent slouthfull Christians, but such only as being either affrighted with the meditation on fu|ture Torments, or delighted with the Hope of eternall Ioyes, were in a disposition to receive proffit by his words.
15. At a small distance from his Cell there li|ved a certain Monk, whose Name was Geni|gills, who was also exalted to the Degree of Preist-hood, which he adorned with many vertues: He is alive at this day, leading a soli|tary life in Ireland, and sustaining his decre|pit age with bread and cold water onely. This Monk often visited that devout man, and asking him many particulars touching his Vision, received perfect information from him.
16. The same Holy man related likewise his Visions to King Alfrd, a Prince adorned with all sorts of learning, who with great willingnes and attention hearkned to his Narration nd at this Princes entreaty he was entertained in the foresaid Monastery, there receiving the Monasticall Tonsure. And when the King had occasion to make his progresse into those parts, he very oft visited him out of a desire to heare the same things again. At that time the Abbot of the Monastery was Aedilwald then a Preist of a conversation very Religious and modest, who now worthily possesses the Cathedrall Church of Lindesfarn. Now the Holy man had assigned unto him in the said Monastery a very retired place, where he might with all freedom attend to the service of his Creatour and Prayer.
17. And his privat Mansion being seated on the bank of the River, his custome was fre|quently

for mortifying his Body to plunge himself into the same,A. D. 696. sometimes to the loyns, and sometimes to the neck, where he continued singing Psalms and praying, as long as he could possibly endure. And when he came out he never putt off his wett and cold garments for change, but suffred them to drye and receive warmth from his Body. And when in the Winter time crusts of ice, which himself oft broke to have place wherein to plunge himself, came about him, and some who saw it said to him, It is a wonder, Brother Drithelm (for that was his name) how you are able to endure such bitter cold, He would answer simply, for he was of a simple mild nature, I have seen far colder places then this. And when they said, How is it possible you can sustain such strange austerities His answer was: I have seen much greater austerities then these. Thus to the day of his death he lived, and out of a servent desire of celestiall Happines tamed his weak aged body with Fastings and other Mortifications, and by his exhortations and pious conversation became an instru|ment of the salvation of many.]
18. This is Saint Beda's Narration, which, as appeareth, he received from witnesses of un|questioned credit Notwithstanding weigh|ing the circumstances of the Vision, wee may probably conclude that the Holy man was mistaken in thinking that he had been really dead. For this seems to have been a Vision imparted by Gods direction to his soule while he was in a deep and death-like Traunce, both for his own good and the good of others. So that wee are not to conceive that there are extant any where such Valleys, pitts and Walls, as are mentio|ned in this Story, but that God thought fitt by representing to his imagination such objects, to signify thereby the great variety of States, in which soules, according to their severall dispositions shall after death be placed Some Happy which Happines not|withstanding is greater or lesser, according to the degrees of perfection to which they had ascended in their life-time: And some painfull, but with far greater variety, the Torments of impenitent soules being inex|pressible and endles: whereas such soules as have lived sinfull lives, but yet have had the Grace of Repentance before their deaths, shall suffer most bitter anguish, yet such as by the devotion of their freinds and mercy of God may be asswaged, and shall certainly have an end: The intolerablenes of which Anguish, peircing the inmost Spirits of men, is represented here by scorching flames and bitter Frosts, the greatest tortures our bodies are capable of, yet far short of the internall Agonies of imperfect separated soules, which are altogether pure Sensation.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2. c. Queen Kyneburga, becomes a Nunne.
4. The Monastery of Dormund.
6.7. S. Kineswitha Sister to Q. Kyne|burga.
8 Of S Tibba a Virgin.
9.10. Of another S. Kyneburga: and her Son S. Rumwold.

1. ABout this time Kyneburga wife to Alfrid King of the Northumbers, by permission of her Husband forsook the world, and entred into a Monastery. That which hastned the execution of this good design might probably be the famed report of this Vision of Drithelm. Certain it is that some Writers doe from Saint Beda's Narra|tion collect that King Alfrid himself felt such compunction there from, that he took the Monasticall habit in the same Monastery of Mailros in the one and twentieth year of his Raign, as the Authour of our Martyrologe affirms: Whereas indeed his Raign lasted not so long. Whether therefore the said Vision or any other Motive wrought that effect in King Alfrids mind, is uncertain. But by agreement of all our Ancient Records his pious Queen Kyneburga about this time consecrated her self for the remainder of her life to God.
2. She was the pious daughter of Penda the most impious, cruell and Idolatrous King of the Mercians. And though she had been bred by him in Pagan Superstition, yet she was even then,Malmsbur. f 27.30. c. saith William of Malmsbury, emi|nent for her continence and chastity. Which naturall good disposition rendred her more capable and inclined to embrace the holy Doctrines of Christian Faith, when after her Fathers death, it was preached among the Mercians. For her vertue she was by Oswy King of the Northumbers, who had conquerd her Father and possessed his Kingdom, chosen to be wife to this Son Alfrid: And in ex|change the same Oswy gave to her Brother Peada his daughter Alcfleda, restoring him his kingdom to be held at his pleasure and courtesy.
3. Thus Kyneburga now a Christian was obli|ged to quitt her countrey, and follow her Husband into the Kingdom of the Northumbers to whom she bore a Son named Osred, who succeeded him in the Kingdom, as shall be declared. But the seeds of Christian Perfection sown in her mind produced so ardent an af|fection to God, that, as writeth the Authour of her life in Capgrave,Ap Capgrav. n Kneburga. she had an impatient desire to renounce a Temporall Kingdom, that she might freely submitt her neck to the Yoke of

Christ. Her Husband King Alfrid was much delighted with the devout chast mind of his Queen, and now at last suffred himself to be perswaded to comply with her desires. Yea moreover his Wives zealous affection to Chastity wrought so far upon him, that he undertook a perpetuall Vow if not of a Reli|gious, yet a continent life, so that in the ex|pression of Harpsfeild, in a short time the Kings Court was converted,Harpsf. sae. 7 c. 23. as it were, into a Monastery and Schoole of Christian Perfection and Disci|pline.
4. The place chosen by the devout Queen Kineburga for her future voluntary prison was Dormund, anciently by Antoninus called Durobriva, seated in the Region of the Girvij, or Eastern Mercians, now in the confines of Huntington and Northampton shires: a place moist and fenny, and though not propitious to bodily health, yet pleasing to her for its retirednes. There she built her self a Mona|stery, to which she gathered a chast congre|gration of devout Virgins: Though some Writers affirm that the said Monastery had been formerly built by her Brothers Wulfere and Ethelred. The place is thus described by Camden: Our ancient History affirms, saith he, that near the River Avon there was a place cal|led Dormund-caster,Camd. in Hunting. in which after that Kine|burga had built for her self a small Monastery, it first began to be called Kineburge-caster, and af|terward contractedly Caster. The said Kineburga was the most Christian daughter of the Pagan King Penda, and Wife of Alfrid King of the Nor|thumbers, who changed Royall authority into the humble service of Christ, and governed this Mo|nastery in the quality of a Mother of Holy Vir|gins.
5. Thither flowed together (saith the Authour of her Life,Ap. Capgr. ib.) to receive institution in a Religious life from her, Virgins of all sorts: Daughters of Dukes and Princes reverenced her as a Mistresse, the Poor embraced her as a companion, and all her Daughters venerated her as a Mother, who neglecting to multiply a carnall offspring, became far more happily fruitfull in Spirituall chil|dren, c. And as for the Queen her self, she was a Mirrour of all Sanctity, and no expression of words can declare the bowells of Charity with which she cherished the soules committed to her care, and which she had brought forth to Christ, how watchfull she was over their conversation, how diligent to instruct them in the Divine Law and Religious Discipline, and with what teares she implored the heavenly protection over them. She was a compassionate provider for the Poor, a pious Mother of the afflicted, and a Zealous exhor|ter of the Kings and Princes her Brethren to Alms-giving and works of Mercy.
Id. ib.6. The odour of her Sanctity invited a few years after a younger Sister of hers to em|brace a retired Religious life in the same Mo|nastery. Her name was Kineswitha a Virgin: who though by her Brethren she had been promised a Wife to Offa King of the East-Sa|xons, yet out of a desire to consecrate her Virginity to God, she not being able to resist their earnest persecutions, had recourse to Prayer, imploring withall the assistance of the Queen of Virgins, who in a Vision by night comforted her with an assurance that she should obtain her desire. Whereupon she sent Messengers to King Offa employing her most earnest Prayers and adjurations that he would not by violence bereave our Lord of a Spouse in heart consecrated to him. Vpon which the pious King not only disen|gaged her from a Promise and consent which her Brethren had extorted fro~ her, but with|in a few years after followed her example, and forsaking all worldly pomps and vani|ties, he changed his Regall authority into an humble Service of God in Poverty and Devo|tion, as in due place shall be shewed.
7. How long those two Holy Sisters lived does not appear: But their Festivity was ce|lebrated together on the day before the Nones of March in the Monastery of Peterbo|rough,Martyrolog. ngl. 6. Mar. not above two miles distant from Dor|mond-caster, the place of their Religious abode, to which place their Sacred Bodies were tran|slated. There they remained till the year one thousand and ten, in which the Danes cruelly wasting the whole Island, and espe|cially Monasteries, they were from thence translated to Thorney.
8. Together with them on the same day was celebrated the memory of Saint Tibba a Virgin and kinswoman of theirs:Id. ib. Ingulphus calls her Tilba, and Harpsfeild, Cibba. She ha|ving spent many years in a devout solitary life, in the end rendred her Spirit to God.And after her death appearing to a certain Holy man, among other things told him, I am come down from the celestiall Festivity to declare to thee the day of my happy transmigration. This is the day of the blessed Virgin Lucia, in the Night of whose Vigile I gave up my soule to our Lord Iesus Christ.
She was anciently in great veneration among the Corita, in the County of Rut|land: For,Camd in Rutland. saith Camden, near the River Wash there is a Town called Rihal, where a Saint na|med Tibba was honoured: and particularly was by Falkoners, as a Diana and Patronesse of their profession, had in veneration. Thus perversely he confounds the Honour due to Gods Saints with the Idolatrous Worship of Heathen Gods.
9. Harpsfeild writing of S. Kineburga, af|firms from Marianus and Mathew of Westmin|ster, that she founded another Monastery at Winburn. But he seems to be mistaken. For there were at this time two Holy women cal|led Kineburga: This, who was Wife to King Alfrid, and Mother to his Successour Osred and another Kineburga Sister to Ina King of the West-Saxons, a Virgin of whom we shall treat in the next Century.
10. The present S. Kineburga is said to have been Mother to another child called Rum|wold, who immediatly after he was born is reported to have made co~fession of his Faith,

and demanded Baptism: after which he pre|sently dyed.Capgrav. in Ruinvvold. Camden in Northampt. Thus writes Capgrave, whose credit though it may be questionable, yet certain it is that anciently in the Church of Brackley in Northamptonshire a child named Rumwold was had in great veneration: to which Church his Body was translated three years after his death, where his Monument remained an illustrious Mark of the peoples Love and Reverence to his Memory. His name is in our Martyrologe commemorated among the Saints on the Second of November.Martyr. Angl. 2. Novemb.


XII CHAXII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Saint Willebrord ordained at Rome Arch bishop of Vtrecht. His Name chan|ged into Clement, c.

1. BVT relinquishing a while Brittany, the affaires happily succeeding with our English Apostolick Missioners in Germany re|quire our care and attendance to them, and that wee should contemplate the wonder|full goodnes of God to that Nation. Wee have before related how, considering the multitude of Converts there, it was thought expedient by our holy and zealous Preists to compose and settle the Church there in good Order by ordaining Bishops to govern it: And how for this purpose Saint Swibert and Saint Willebrord were chosen by them as most meet to sustain so sublime and weighty an Office. For this purpose Saint Swibert was sent into Brittany to receive consecration from Saint Wilfrid the rightfull Arch-bishop of the Nor|thumbers, though at this time living in exile among the Mercians. After which Consecra|tion performed, he returned the same year into Germany, where how executed his Epis|copall charge, and how wonderfully God assi|sted him hath been declared.
2. As for Saint Willebrord, who six years before this had been at Rome, from whence he received authority of preaching Christ to the Pagans, how this same year by the coun|sell and recommendation of the Pious Prince Pipin he undertook a second voyage thither to receive Episcopall Ordination, Saint Beda in his History declares. He might have received Ordination either in Brittany or France, but New Episcopall Sees were to be erected, which by the ordinary Iurisdiction of Bishop could not be done, and therefore authority to effect that was to be obtained from the Su|preme Bishop. Now how this was performed . Beda thus elaestBed. l. 5. c. 12.3. After that the foresaid English-Preists, bad for the space of siverall years preached the Gospell in the countrey of the Frisons, by the ge|nerall consent of them all Pipin sent the Vene|rable man Willebrord to Rome, the Pontificat whereof was still administred by Pope Sergius, to the end he might be ordained Arch-bishop of that Nation. Which according to his request was fullfilled in the year six hundred ninety six after our Lords Incarnation. Now he was ordained in the Church of the Holy Martyr Saint Cecily, and on the day of her Feast: and the Pope who ordai|ned him imposed on him the Name of Clement, and presently after, to witt, fourteen dayes after his arrivall at Rome, he dismissed him that he might return to his Episcopall See.
4. The which See by the munificence of Pipin was established in his illustrious Castle, which in the old German language was called Wiltaburg, that is the Town of the Wil, but in the Gallick language was called Vtrecht. In this place a Church was built, and the most Reverend Bishop preaching the Word of Faith far and wide, and re|covering much people from their Pagan Errours, erected in those Regions many Churches and some Monasteries. For not long after the said Venerable Arch-bishop ordained severall other Bishops out of the number of his Brethren the prime Missioners who attended him at his first coming, of which some are falln asleep in our Lord: but Willebrord himself, sirnamed Clement, is yet alive (that is, in the seaven hundred and one and thir|tieth year of Grace, in which Saint Beda en|ded his History:) A Prelat he is Venerable for his old age, for this is the thirty sixth year since he was Bishop: and after manifold labours and dangers sustained in this Christian Warfare, he with his whole mind and a longing desire expects a heavenly retribution.
5. To this Narration of Saint Beda tou|ching the Ordination of Saint Willebrord, Al|binus Flaccus, who has compiled the Gests of this Holy Prelat, addes one particular very memorable, to witt, that it was not per|formed without a Prophecy Revelation from heaven preceding it: for thus he writes: On the fourth day before Saint Willebrords arri|vall at Rome the Holy Pope Sergius was in sleep ad|monished by an Angell to receive him with great honour,Albin. Place. in Act.  Willibrord. as being a man appointed by God to en|lighten many soules, who came thither to receive the supreme honour of Preist-hood, and therefore that he should deny him in none of his requests. The Pope thus admonished entertaind him with wonderfull honour and ioy, and by conversation with him observing in him great Fervour, devo|tion of Religion, and plenitude of wisedom, having appointed a convenient day, and assembled great numbers of Prelats to ioyn with him in the Ordi|nation, to which there was a wonderfull concourse of people, he publickly ordained him Arch-bishop with great solemnity, after an Apostolick manner, in the Church of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and when he was ordained, he imposed on him the name of Clement. Moreouer he vested him with his own Pontificall Robes, adding likewise the Pall, an ensign of the plenitude of Archiepiscopall di|gnity. Whatsoever he desired, whether Sacred Re|licks of Saints, or Ecclesiasticall ornaments, he with all chearfullnes bestowed upon him, and ha|ving conferred on him his Apostolicall Benedi|ction, with wholesome precepts and admonitions, he sent him back to the Work of the Gospell.



A. D. 697.
XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

i.2. c Saint Willebrord arrives at Vtrecht: Their preaching: A Synod assembled there, c

A. D. 697.1. SAint Willebrord, or Clement, having thus prosperously performed his iourney to Rome, arrived not at his Archiepiscopall See till the year following. When the News of his approach thither was divulged,Marcellin. in Act. S. Swibert. Saint Swibert (saith his companion Marcellin) at|tended by his Disciples and many other Chri|stians made hast as far as Embrica to meet him, where with much honour and ioy in our Lord they received him. And Saint Wil|lebrord having been informed that Saint Swibert had been consecrated Bishop, and that by his preaching the County of Teisterband, with almost all Bata and a great part of Lower Friseland had been converted to our Lord, he with great devotion gave infinite thanks to God. Being thus mett they retur|ned together to Vtrecht, and presently after upon the ruined foundation of the ancient Church of Saint Thomas near the Castle, they erected a Church in which they placed Cano|nicall Preists who lived in Community, Which Church they dedicated to the honour of S. Martin Bishop of Tours. There S. Willebrord Arch-bishop of the Frisons established his Cathedrall See, and together with S. Swibert and the rest of the Brethren, with their own hands consecrated it with its primitive be|nediction, having translated into it the Sa|cred Body of S. Cunera Virgin and Martyr, being one of the companions of S. Vrsula.
2. In processe of time when Radbode King of the Frisons was dead, free permission was given to Christians to preach the Gospell every where through Friseland. Wherefore the foresaid Holy Prelats with the Preists and other Ecclesiasticks passing through the coasts of Holland and Friseland instructed the rude people in the Documents of the Gospell, tea|ching them to renounce their profane Ido|latry: they baptized the Cathecumens, they confirmed the Neophyts, they dispensed Sa|cred Orders, and with great constancy and de|votion published the Gospell of Peace through all villages, ordaining Preists and Deacons every where to assist them in the Ministery of Baptism, especially in the great Town of Duerstat: where after two years preaching they brought the whole people to embrace the Faith of Christ, and by the assistance of the forementioned Noble man Gunther and his freinds, they changed the Temples of Idolls into fifty two Christian Churches.
3. Neither did they content themselves with preaching the Word of life in Friseland and Thuringia, or Hervingia, but as far as Den|mark they brought to the Orthodox Faith great multitudes, having purified them from their barbarous and Idolatious customs. Thus these Holy Prelats and Preachers having with great fervour published for the space of se|verall years the Doctrine of Christ in severall Provinces, they returned with great ioy to Vtrecht to their Brethren and fellow-labou|res, declaring to them how great things God had done by them. And though the Holy Bi|shop S. Swibert was first advanced to Episcopall Dignity, yet S. Willebrord in place and honour went before him, and is esteemed the first Arch-bishop of Vtrecht, inasmuch as he was by Pope Sergius ordained specially the Arch|bishop of the Frisons, and by the Apostolick See sent in Mission to the same people.
4. Conformably hereto writes Albinus Flaccus,Albin. Flacc. in Act S. Wil|lebrord. who likewise touching S. Willebrords preaching to the Danes addes this relation:When the Holy Arch-bishop, says he, perceiv'd that he could not with any fruit or successe endeavour the Conversion of Radbode King of the Frisons, he turned his steps and course of preaching to the Savage Danes. At that time, as the report is, there raigned a Prince called Ongend, a man of a disposition more cruell then any wild beast, and whose heart was more impenetrable then a rock. Yet this man by Gods operation treated with great honour this Preacher of Truth. Who finding the said barbarous Prince obdurate in his perverse manners, and wholly given up to Idolatry, so that he had no hopes at all to work any good change in him: He took with him thirty young children of that countrey,  returned with them to the Pro|vinces subiect to the French. But being desi|rous to prevent the cunning malice of the Devill, he in the iourney having catechized the said children, washed them in the Font of life; for fear least by some accident in so long a voyage by Sea, or the incursions o the barbarous people through which he passed, he might endanger their eternall state.
5. Now this Devout Apostle pursuing his voyage came to a certain Island in the con|fines of the Frisons and Danes, called by the inhabitants Fositesland, from a certain pro|fane Deity of theirs named Fosite, to whom many Temples were there erected. This place was held by them in such wonderfull vene|ration, that no man durst presume to touch any beast feeding there, or any other thing consecrated to the said Idoll, nor so much as draw any water from a spring flowing there, except in sign of veneration he observed an exact silence. Into this Island the man of God being cast by tempest, was forced to stay there some dayes, expecting a seasonable time to putt to Sea. But the Holy Bishop ma|king small account of the foolish supersti|tion of that place, or of the feirce disposition of King Radbode, who was wont to putt to a cruell death all those that violated such ce|remonies, he himself with the solemne invo|cation of the Blessed Trinity baptised three men newly converted: and moreover gave order to his companions to kill certain beasts fee|ding

there,A. D. 696 for their nourishment. This the Pagans beholding verily beleived that such a sacriledge would be punished either with madnes or some sudden death. But percei|ving no harm to come to them, in a great rage they went and told the King what had been done by the Christians. Who being enflamed with excessive fury against the Holy Bishop, seised upon him, and inten|ding to revenge the iniury done to his false Gods, he according to the ancient cu|stom of that Nation, every day cast lotts three times upon him and his companions, and yet never did that Lott which con|demned to death, fall upon the Bishop or his Disciples: onely one Christian of the company was designed to death by the lott, and so ended his life by Martyrdom. Now this custom of casting lotts in such cases is verified to have been very ancient among the Germans by the testimony of Cae|sar in his commentaries.
Id. ib.6. The same Authour moreover testifies, how after the return of Clement, or Willebrord, a Synod was assembled at Vtrecht, by appointment whereof other Missioners and Preachers were sent into the circumiacent Provinces.
And by oc|casion of the mentioning this ordinance of the Synod, he makes a collection of the names and most memorable Gests of those devout Missioners which either formerly, or in this present Synod, or afterward were sent to labour in our Lords vineyard, saying,Then the foresaid Holy Prelats, together with the excellent Preists and Preachers which came out of Brittany with them to Vtrecht, observing that through Gods blessing much people was converted from Infidelity to the Faith of Christ, they in the Synod assembled in this lately sprung Church of Vtrecht, de|creed that other zealous Preachers should after the manner of the Apostles and Disci|ples of our Lord be sent through the confi|ning barbarous Nations to preach unto them the Faith of Christ. Now there were in the said Primitive Church of Vtrecht at that time the foresaid Apostolicall Prelats, Canonicall Preists and worthy Preachers, which, toge|ther with the two Holy Brethren whose names were Ewald, following S. Swibert, con|stantly preached Christ to the Gentiles. After|ward likewise were ioyned to them S. Win|frid a Preist, who after he had lived thirteen years a Canon in the Church of Vtrecht, was consecrated Arch-bishop of Mentz, and cal|led by a new name, Boniface: from whence returning after the death of S. Willebrord, he was ordained the Second Arch-bishop of Vtrecht. And having spent sixteen years in preaching the Gospell through Friseland, he, together with his associats, was crowned with Martyrdom. In like manner S. Wir a Bishop of the Deiri (or rather of Iren, that is, Ireland) and S. Plechelm Bishop of the Church by S. Beda called Candida casa: Saint Orger a Deacon, with other glorious Preists and Preachers.A. D. 697.
But of these later Missioners wee shall speak more largely in due place: for they are mentioned in this place by Marcel|lus onely occasionally.
7. Hereto he adds a Summary Narration of the various successes and ends of the Prime Missionners, thus proceeding: S. Acca returning in England with S. Swibert, was by S. Wilfrid consecrated Bishop of Hagulstad and after many years spent in great purity and Holines, there rested in our Lord. S. Wigbert, as hath been declared, was crownd with Martyrdom in Fosteland. Saint Willbald going into the Eastern part of France was made Bishop of Eystat: S. Winnibald his Brother was ordained Abbot of Heyndelam: the Sister of these two Holy men was the devout Virgin Walburgis. Lebvin after he was consecrated Bishop, was crownd with Martyrdom near Gaunt. The two Brethren of the Name Ewald having preached Christ in Nabia, and thence going up into Saxony, ended their lives with a glorious Martyrdom. Saint Werenfrid a Preist and worthy Preacher was sent towards Batua, and piously governed the new-converted flock of Christ in Est and Westerwirt,  being both in his life  death illustrious through many Miracles, at Westerwirt happily rendred his Spirit to God on the Ides of September, and was miraculously buried at Elst. S. Adelbert a Deacon, son of Edilbald King of the Deiri, who was Son of S. Oswald King and Martyr, having built a Church at Egmond in Holland, after the Conversion of many Pagans, and glo|rious consummation of a most holy life, happily rested in Christ on the seaventh day before the Calends of Iuly, and was buried in Egmond, where by his intercession many Miracles are wrought to this day. He was an illustrious Confessour, and first Arch-deacon of the Church of Vtrecht. Thus writes Mar|cellinus touching his Brethren and devout companions: and concerning himself adds these words:
8. And I Marcellinus an unproffitable Preist, was sent by the foresaid Holy Bishops to the Region beyond the River Isel, and at the present have the care over Aldenseel, Trent, Tuvent, Coverdy and Daventry in which places through Gods Providence and blessing I have by preaching gained to our Lord in a manner all the people, having pur|ged them from their Superstitious Idolatry. As for Saint Willebrord he remained in his Diocese of Vtrecht, and with great fervour preached the Gospell of Christ to all the peo|ple there about. But the rest were dispersed here and there to preach the Word of God, and after the Conversion of a world of Pagans happily rested in our Lord.



XIV. CHA.XIV. CHAP.

1.2.3. Lawes of King Withred.
4. Ostritha Queen of the Mercians mur|dred.

1. THE same year in Brittany there was as|sembled a Synod also by Withred King of Kent and Brithwald Arch-bishop of Canter|bury at Berghansted, where many wholesome Laws and Constitutions, called The Iudgments of King Withred, were enacted for the regu|lating both the Church and Civill state of that Kingdom.
2. Of which Laws the first was, That pu|blick Prayers should be made for the King.Spelm. Conc. Britas. And the following regard severall Heads, as the preserving the Peace of the State and Church: The punishment of Adultery in severall condi|tions of men: Against irregular Tonsure: For|bidding working or travelling on our Lords day and the even before it: Against offring any thing to the Devill: and giving flesh to ones ser|vant on a Fast-day: Concerning the severall ways by which severall conditions of men were to purge themselves, the King and Bishops by a simple af|firmation without Oathes:Preists and Abbots in this Form, I speak the truth in Christ, I lye not;
So likewise Deacons; Inferiour Clerks with four compurgators, laying one hand on the Altar, and the other extended to the Oath; a stranger without compurgators, laying his hand on the Altar; So likewise a Thane (or Noble man) of the King; a simple countrey-man with four compurgators, and bowing down his head towards the Altar: That if any one depending on the Bi|shop be accused, the hearing of the cause belongs to Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, c. That no com|pensation shall be made by one who kills a Theife, c. And that if a stranger shall privily wander through the countrey, and neither crye aloud, nor sound with his horn, he is to be taken for a theif, and either to be killed or banished.
3. These Iudgments of King Withred are extant among the Collection of Brittish Councills compiled by Sir Henry Spelman and translated by him into Latin out of Ancient Saxon Manuscript, called The Text of Rochester (Textus Roffensis:) to whom the Reader is referred.
Hunting. l. 4.4. About this time a barbarous Act was committed by the Mercians against their Queen Ostritha (or Ostgida.Bed. in Epit.) Sixteen years be|fore this she had been given by her Brother Egfrid King of the Northumbers a wife to Ethelred King of the Mercians, as it were in compensation for the death of his Brother Elwin, and to establish a peace between the two Kingdoms. And this year saith Hunting|don, the Mercians, called South-humbers, com|mitted a base Villany: for they inhumanly mur|dred Ostrida their Queen,A. D. 698 Wife to King Edelred and Sister to King Egfrid. S. Beda particularly charges the Nobility of those Mercians with that foul crime, namely the inhabitants of Lincoln, or of Nottingham shire. What was the Motive or provocation to this inhuman act, does not appear in History.


XV. CHAP.XV. CHA.

1.2. Edfrid succeeds to Eadbert in the See of Lindesfarn.
3.4. c. Death of Adamannus the Holy Abbot of Hy: he could not perswade his Monks to the Catholick Observance of Easter.
6. The Northumbers defeated by the Picts.

1. THE year of Grace six hundred ninety eight was the eleaventh after the death of S. Cuthbert:A. D. 698. in which the Monks, in whose Church his sacred Body reposed, having hitherto privatly performed veneration to his memory, seing the frequent Miracles wrought at his Sepulcher, thought fitt to translate his Relicks to some more honoura|ble place, and expecting to have found no|thing but dry bones, they saw his Body as entire, yea and his garments as fresh, as when they were first layd in the ground Which being certified to his Successour Saint Eadbert, he caused New Vestments to be putt upon him, and the Body to be raised above the pavement: pronouncing withall happines to any to whom God would grant the priviledge to be layd by him. Which Priviledge himself obtained this same year: for rendring his devout soule to our Lord on the day before the Nones of May, his Body was enterred under the Body of S. Cuthbert, saith Bishop Godwin: And his memory is celebrated not only in the En|glish, but Roman Martyrologe also on the sameday,Martyr. Rom 6. Maij. with this Elogy, In England the Com|memoration of S. Eadbert Bishop of Lindesfarn, eminent for his learning and piety.
2. His Successour in the same See of Lin|desfarn was Edfrid, a man, saith the same Bi|shop Godwin, who from his childhood had been brought up in good letters, and in that age was highly esteemed for his eminent learning. This is that Edfrid at whose request S. Beda extolled the vertues and miracles of his Predecessour S. Cuthbert both in prose and verse, as ap|pears by his Epistle prefixed to his Book.
3. About the same time dyed S. Adaman|nus the devout Abbot of Hy, commemorated in our Martyrologe on the second of Septem|ber.Marty Ang. 2. Septemb. To him is attributed the conversion o most of the Irish and many Brittains to the true observation of the Solemnity of Easter according to the Catholick manner, though

he could not reduce the obstinate minds of his own Monks.A. D. 699. His zealous endeavours herein are thus expressed by S. Beda:4. At that time the greatest part of the Scotts in Ireland,Bed. l. 5. c. 16. and not a few Brittains in Brittany by our Lords blessing conformed themselves to the right Ecclesiastical time of celebrating the Paschal. Solemnity. For Adamannus a Preist and Abbot over the Monks lived in the Isle of Hy, having been sent in Embassage from his Nation to Alfrid King of the Northumbers, and staying a good space of time in his Province, carefully observed the Canoni|call Rites of the English Church, and moreover was seriously admonished by certain learned men that he with a few Monks hid in the utmost cor|ner of the world should not presume to live in a practise directly contrary to the custom of the whole Church in the Paschall Observance and other Ecclesiasticall Decrees: By which admoni|tions his judgment became quite changed, inso|much as he willingly preferred the Observances which he had seen and heard in the Churches of the English, before the customs of his own coun|trey. For he was a good man and wise, and more|over eminently skillfull in the Scriptures.
5. When he was returned home, he employd his utmost care to induce his Monks in Hy and all the rest depending on them, to return into the path of Truth, which he had lately found and with his whole heart approved. But all his endea|vours through their obstinacy proved vain. Whereupon leaving them, he sayled into Ireland: where by preaching and modest exhortations he perswaded in a manner all the Monks who were not subiect to the Dominion of the Monaste|ry of Hy to quitt their Errour, and return to Catholick Vnity in observing the legitimat time of Easter, which he taught them. Thus having celebrated in Ireland one Canonicall Solemnity of Easter, he returned to his Island: And again ear|nestly preached the true Observance to his own Monks, yet could by no means perswade them to conformity. Now it hapned that before the years Circle was finished, he was taken out of this world: Divine Provide~ce so mercifully disposing that this Holy man, who was an earnest lover of Vnity and Peace should be taken from hence to eternall Hap|pines before the next ashall time was come, least he should be compelled to enter into a more sharp debate and discord with those who would not be perswaded to follow him in the way of Truth.
6, The same year the Northumbers recei|ved a great defeat from the Picts:Math. West. Beda in Epi|tome. for as Ma|thew of Westminster relates, Brithric a Count of the Northumbers being desirous to avenge the death of his Master King Egfrid, invaded in a hostile manner the land of the Picts: but as his Lord before had done, he likewise felt the curses of the Irish, for he also was slain by the Pictish people. Notwithstanding as shall be shewd, ten years after this the Northumbers had a sufficient revenge upon them.


XVI. CHAP.XVI. CH.

1.2. c. The Picts reduced to the Catholick observance of Easter, upon occasion of an Epistle written to their King Naitan by the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid.

1. WHAT S. Adamannus could not ef|fect among his Scottish obstinat Monks and Islanders of Hy,A. D. 699. to take away their Errou about the Paschall Solemnity, was the next year brought to passe among the Picts by their King Naitan,, exhorted thereto and instructed by the holy English-Saxon Abbot Ceolfrid. The order and manner of this me|morable change S. Beda thus describes:2. At that time,Bid. l. 5. c. 22. saith he Naitan King of the Picts inhabiting the Northern coasts of Brittany by frequent meditation on Ecclesiasticall Writings became rectified in his iudgment, and renounced the errour which formerly himself and his whole nation had embraced and persisted in, reducin all his Subiects to the Catholick observance of the solemnity of our Lords Resurrection. Now to effe this more easily and with greater authority, b sought for help and advice from the English Na|tion, whose Religion he knew was instituted ac|cording to the pattern of the Holy Roman and Apostolick Church.
3. He sent therefore Messengers to the Venera|ble man Ceolfrid Abbot of the Monastery of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul seated in a place called Girwum at the mouth of the River Wire and near the River Tine, in the Government of which Monastery he succeeded the Holy Abbot S. Benedict Biscop: And by those Messengers the said King Naitan requested him to send in Wri|ting instructions to him by which he might be enabled more efficaciously to confute such as pre|sumed to observe the Paschall Solemnity in an undue time: He desired likewise to be informed of the true and anonicall manner of Ecclesiasti|call Tonsure. Moreover he entreated him to send him Masons and Architects to build a Church in his countrey of stone, after the Roman manner: promising that he would dedicate it to the honour of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles; and likewise that both himself and all his subiects should in all things imitate the manners and Disciplin of the Holy Roman and Apostolick See, as far as they, who lived at so great a distance from thence, and whose language was so different, could be informed.
4. The most Reverend Abbot Ceolfrid very willingly complying with desires and requests so full of Religion and Piety, sent him such Archi|tects as he dema~ded, and withall wrote an Epistle, containing an exact information in all the points proposed to him by the King. Which Epistle by reason of the prolixity of it, it will not be expedient to transcribe: the curious Reader

may have recourse to Saint Beda's History for it, who no doubt, as may appear by the stile, was either the inditer of it, or at least had a great influence in the framing it: For at this time he was a Monk living under the government of Ceolfrid, and the ame of his learning was so far spread, that the year next following Pope Sergius by letters to the said Abbot invited Saint Beda to Rome, whither he had gone, but that news of the said Popes death prevented his voyage.
Id. ibid.5. The sence of the said Epistle is summa|rily this: In the first place as touching the Paschal Solemnity, common both to Iews and Christians, wee are to observe how the Iewish Synagogue celebrated it in shadow and figure, and next how the Christian Church, in truth and reality.
6 God commanded the Iews to begin their Ecclesiasticall year in the Spring, and that the third week of the first Month beginning fro~ the Second Vespers of the fourteenth day to the one and twentieth day at evening, should be entirely co~secrated to him as a most so|lemne feast to be spent only in his Service, in commemoration of a twofold delive|rance, one from the destroying Angell which killed all the first born in every family of the Egyptians, and the other from their slave|ry under the Egyptians. The former delive|rance they celebrated by the Sacrifice of a Lamb, whose blood having been sprinckled on the upper posts of their dores was a mark for the destroying Angell to passe over them. And the Second deliverance, by put|ting away out of their houses all leaven, and for the space of seaven days together using unleavened bread only: Of which seaven dayes the first and the seaventh were to be esteemed most holy and solemne. This deli|verance was effected on the fifteenth day of the Moon, and was thus celebrated because they were urged to goe out of Egyt in such hast, that they were forced to take their dough before it was leavend. Thus did the Iews observe their Paschall Solemnity.
7. But when Christ our true Passeover was immolated, and by his Resurrection had con|secrated for ever the first day of the Week, therefore called our Lords day, Apostolick Tra|dition ordained that our Paschall solemnity should always begin on our Lords day, yet so that the said day should be inserted within the space of the Iewish solemnity, that is, on some day in the third week beginning at the fifteenth and ending on the one and twentieth day. The first Month therefore being come, and the even of the fourteenth day likewise being come, then must more|over be expected the Lords day, which of ne|cessity must fall within the third week, that is, on one of the seaven solemne days cele|brated by the Iews, beginning at the fifteenth and ending at the one and twentieth. This is the order of the Catholick Observance, prescri+bed anciently by the Church of Alexandria.
8. From which order severall sorts of Christians have swerved after severall man|ners. For. 1. Some had no regard at all to Sunday or the Lords day, but celebrated the Paschall solemnity exactly on the very day that the Iews did, whether it were Sunday or not: These were the Quarto-decimani. 2. Again others anticipated the due time, for in case that Sunday fell on the fourteenth day, they then celebrated our Lords Resurre|ction, beginning the feast on the even of the thirteenth day, which is no part of the third week, nor at all prescribed by the Iewish Law. This was the Errour of the Scotts and ancient Brittains, who thought that the seaven days of the Moon were to be reckoned from the fourteenth to the twentieth. 3. Lastly some there were who did transcend the due time, accounting from the sixteenth to the two and twentieth, and in case the Lords day fell on the two and twentieth, they then kept, the Christian Paschall Feast, not in the third week of the Moon, but in the beginning of the fourth, contrary to the prescriptions of the Law: This was anciently a mistake of the Latins, who afterward corrected them|selves, and conformed to the Alexan|drins.
9. Now it was by the Vernall Equinox that Catholicks found out what Month according to the Computation of the Moon was to be es|teemed the first Month of the year: Which Vernall Equinox according to the calculation of the holy Bishops in the Councill of Nica was to be the fixed on the twelfth-day before the Calends of April, that is, the one  twen|tieth of March. So that whatsoever Moon was full before the Equinox, it belonged to the last Month of the precedent year, and per|taind not to the Paschall solemnity. But if it was full, that is, if the fourteenth or fiteenth day of it fell either in the Vernall Equinox or after it; the first Month was to be reckoned from the first day of its New-moon, and on the first Sunday then following, the Feast of our Lords Resurrection is to be celebra|ted:
10. The Christian Paschall solemnity depen|ding on the right placing of the first full Moon there were severall Cycles instituted, as the most ancient Cycle of Nineteen years, which was enlarged by Saint Cyrill into a Cycle of ninety-fiue years, containing five of the for|mer Cycles, and in these days in Brittany ma|ny had extended it to five hundred thirty two years: The use of which Cycles were to shew, that when they were expired, the Full Moons returned again to the same order, as former|ly.
This is the substance of what the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid wrote concerning the Pas|chall Solemnity.
11. In the next place touching Ecclesiasti|call Tonsre, of which there were severall manners and fashions, though he acknow|ledged that a difference in Tonsure could not harm such as have true Faith in God and cha|rity

to their Neighbour: yet that among all the sorts, that was most to be approved which Saint Peter used, and which represented the Crown of Thorns which our Lord bore at his Passion: As on the other side that was most to be detested, which, they say, Simon Magus wore, which was so made that if a man looked him that wore it in the face, it would have some appearance of a Crown, but behind was so curtaild, that it had no such shew at all. How ever he did not deny, but that those who out of custom used even this kind of Crown and Tonsure might be good men, such was the Holy Abbot and Preist of the Columbin Monks of Hy, Adamannus, who was lately sent on a message to King Al|frid, and for this reproved by Ceolfrid him|self and whose only excuse was, That though he wore the Tonsure of Simon Magus, yet he dete|sted his Simoniacall perfidiousnes, and desired to follow the example of S. Peter whom in the secret of his heart he sincerely venerated. To which Ceolfrid replied: That it was very fitting, as he in his heart reverenced S. Peter and abhorred Simon Magus, so outwardly to imitate the habit of S. Peter, and reiect that of Simon Magus. Which Discourse so wrought upon the good Abbot Adamannus, that no doubt he would have endeavoured to correct this custom, as well as he did the Scottish Errour about the Observance of Easter, if it had been in his power.
12. To this effect was the said Epistle, which concluded with a serious exhortation to King Naitan to cause his whole Kingdom to observe such things as were accordant to Catholick Vnity and practised by the Apo|stolick Church of Christ, that so S. Peter Prince of the Apostles after the end of his Temporall Kingdom, might open him an entrance into a Heavenly.
Id. ib.13. This Epistle being sent, and publickly read in the Kings presence attended by an Assembly of prudent and learned men, and also translated into the Pictish language for the instruction of the ignorant, it is repor|ted that the King rising from the midst of his Nobles, kneeled down, and gave humble thanks to Almighty God for the present re|ceived from the English Nation, adding these words: Truly I was a good while agoe satisfyed that this was the right way of Paschall Observance, but this Epistle has so fully cleared the matter, that what I formerly understood in these matters, is not considerable. Therefore I openly here pro|fesse, and I desire you to be witnesses hereof, that hence forward my resolution is that this time of the Paschall Solemnity shall perpetually be obser|ved in my kingdom: And moreover I command all Ecclesiasticall persons my Subiects to receive this manner of Tonsure, which, as you have heard, is so rationally grounded.
14. This the King professed and decreed: and without delay by his Kingly authority putt it in execution. For publick order was given that the Paschall Cycles of nineteen years should be transcribed, learnt and ob|served through all the Provinces of the Picts, and that the formerly used erroneous Cycles of eighty four years should be obliterated: and the whole Nation greatly reioyced, seing themselves by this New Reformation re|duced under the Disciplin and protection of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

1.2. c. Of S. Edilwald successour to Saint Cuthbert in his Hermitage of Earn-Island.
5.6. c. The Gests of Saint Sexburga Queen, and Abbesse and of her holy Daughters Saint Eartongatha and Saint Ermenilda.

1. THE same year dyed S. Edilwald,Martyrolog. Ang. 23.  and is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the three and twentieth of March. He was brought up a Monk in the Monastery of Rippon,Bed. l. 5 c. 1. and afterward saith S. Beda, he succee|ded the Holy man of God S. Cuthbert in the exer|cise of a Solitary life in the Isle of Farne, having many years before by worthy and pious actions adorned the degree of Preist-hood which he recei|ved in the Monastery called Inripum (Rippon.) For a proof of his Merits and Holines I will con|tent my self with relating one Miracle, which was told mee by a Religious Monk, who was one of the persons for whose sake it was wrought. His name was Godfrid, a venerable servant of Christ and a Preist, and was afterward Abbot of the Monaste|ry and Church of Lindesfarn, in which he had had his education.
2. On a certain time, said he, I came with two of my Brethren to the Isle of Farne, out of a desire to enioy the conversation of the Reverend Father Edilwald. Afterward having been much refreshed with his pious discourse,  having asked his Benediction, as we were sayling home wards, on a sudden in the midway our former calm was in|terrupted, and so furious a storm came upon us, that neither ares nor sayles could help us at all, but we expected every moment to be swallowd up by the waves. Having a good while thus in vain stroven against the wind and Sea, we at last looked back upon the Isle from whence we were come, to see if by any meanes we might return thither. But wee found that the tempest equally threatned us on all sides, so that we were in utter despair of es|caping.
3. As we were earnestly looking toward the Isle of Farne, we perceived the most pious Father Edilwald, who was come out of his solitary retire|ment to see what became of us. For having heard the noise of the winds and roaring of the Sea he was for that purpose come abroad: And having perceived the great paines wee took, and the

extremity of our danger he fell on his knees, ear|nestly praying to God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ for our safety and escape. He had no sooner ended his Prayer, but immediatly the swelling waves grew smooth, the raging tempest ceased, and the winds favouring our voyage caried us prosperously and evenly to land. Where being arrived we had no sooner drawn up the boat to dry ground, but presently the same Tempest, which for awhile had for our sakes been interrupted, retur|ned with its former violence, and the whole day after never ceased to rage: by which we evidently saw that the short pause intervening had been procured by the Holy man of Gods prayer made for our escape.
4. The same Holy man remained in the Isle of Farne the space of twelve years, and there ended his Life: But he was buried in the Isle of Lindes|farn, neer the Bodies of the glorious Bishops Saint Cuthbert and Saint Eadbert, in the Church of the Apostle Saint Peter. These things hapned in the days of King Alfrid, who after his Brother Egfrid governed the Nation of the Northumbers eighteen years.
5. In our Martyrologe likewise wee read a commemoration of the Deposition of Saint Sexburga assigned to this year. She was daughter of Anna the pious King of the East-Saxons. From her infancy she, after the example of her other Sisters, was disposed to vertue and piety. And being come to a more ripe age, though her earnest desire was to consecrate her Virginity to God, yet by the importunat request of Ercmbert King of Kent, she was by her Parents given him to wife. And Almighty God, who shewed himself admirable in the purity of her Virgin Sister Saint Ediltrudis, was no lesse glorified another way in the piety of Saint Sexburga. The Province of Kent, of which she became Queen, stood in need of one who might be a shining light and pattern to that Sexe. For King Ercombert, though hey of his Predcessours Faith and piety, yet wanted the zeale and courage to extirpate Idolatry out of his Kingdom, in which as yet no Law had interdicted the publick worship of Idols. This defect was supplied by his vertuous Queen, whose assiduous exhorta|tions had that power upon him, that in a short time the whole nation by their united industry conspired in the worship of the One true God.
6. The Kingdom being purged from this deadly pollution, became disposed for the reception of greater degrees of Piety. Hence a Law was promulgated for the due observatio~ of Lent, which though from the beginning commanded by Ecclesiasticall Constitutions, yet for a due Observation of it stood in need of the Civill authority, and temporall penal|ties. This Act of zeale our Annals ascribe principally to this vertuous Queen Sex|burga. By whose suggestion likewise Or|naments were provided for Altars and Churches, and severall Monasteries erected by the Kings munificence.
7. One speciall place the Queen her self made choice of, which she endowed, enri|ched and dedicated to be a habitation of Religious Virgins. It was seated in that part of Kent where the River Medway disburdening it self into the Sea, makes an Island fruitfull in pastures, and which there, fore from the abundance of Sheep feeding there is called the Isle of Shepey. To this place her desire was to confine herself: but God thought  to delay the execution of her desires, that she might with no lesse merit, and far more labour in her high condition afford ex|amples of vertue and piety to all her Sub|jects. Which she performed in a most ad|mirable manner, being as the Authour of her Life describes her,p. Capgrav. in S. Sex|burga. a most reverenced Mi|stresse to the Great ones, and a kind Patronesse to the poor: The former observed her as a Princesse, and the ltter as a Mother: Those venerated her Majesty, these admired her humility: To the Nobles she was awfull, and to meaner persons she seemed equall: To all she was amiable, and to all venerable, rarely seen in throngs, but frequent in Churches.
8. Four and twenty years she raigned with her husband King Ercombert: but he dying in the year of Grace six hundred sixty four, and thereby she being left free to her self, would be a Queen no longer: but after she had seen the Commonweale settled, saith Harpsfeild,Harpsf. saec. 7. c. 24. like a bird which had been a long time enclosed in a Cage, she gladly escaped out of it, and devesting her self of all her Royall Ornaments and marks of worldly pomp and pride, she betook her self to the Society of Sacred Vir|gins in the Citty of Ely, governed then by her Sister the most glorious Virgin Ediltrdis, or Ethelreda. Fifteen years she lived under her disciplin, being therefore more assiduous in devotion, and more rigorous in mortifi|cations, because she came later then the rest to that School of Piety.
9. In the end she buried her Blessed Sister, and by the Vnanimous votes of her com|panions the Religious Virgins, was chosen Abbesse in her place, as hath been already de|clared in the Gests of the year of Grace six hundred seaventy nine. In which charge, being to afford documents and examples of all vertues to others, she was more vigi|lant over herself, more circumspect in her actions and more fervent in her prayers to God, as being to give an account to him for so many soules besides her own.
10. Having spent sixteen years more with all Perfection in this Office, at last being mind|full of her dear Sister, the constant opinion of whose Sanctity had taken deep root in all minds she thought fitt to take up her ashes, and translate them to a more honourable place. But how instead of empty ashes she found her Sisters body as entire, as fresh and sweet as if she had rested in sleep, wee have already declared. To conclude after she had

with admirable constancy and fervour per|formed the course appointed her by God, she was this year called to receive a heavenly crown: so that the day before the Nones of Iuly she followed her Sister to heaven leaving a command that her Body should be enterred together with her Sisters.
11. From so holy a roote there sprung two most fragrant and beautifull flowers, her daughters, S. Eartongatha, and S. Erminilda. Of the former we have treated already. As for S. Erminilda she was, as hath been said, maried to Wulfere King of the Mercians, whose mind she inclined to all piety. After her Husbands death, she with her daughter S. Werburga, as her Mother formerly had done, consecrated her self to our Lord in the same Monastery of Ely, where entring into the Royall path of Humility, she behaved her self more submissly then the rest, as her de|sire was more earnest to approach nearer to our Lord. This was so gratefull to all, that her Mother Sexburga being dead, she by the unanimous suffrages of her Religious Sisters was elected to succeed in her office of Ab|besse of that famous Monastery.
Martyr. Aug. 13. Feb.12. The year of S. Erminilda's death is not recorded. But her Deposition is commemo|rated in our Martyrologe on the Ides of Fe|bruary:
13. The summ of what concerns these three Holy Princesses and Religious Abbesses is thus breifly sett down by William of Malms|bury, The most happy Lady Edildrida,Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4. says he, first founded the Monastery of Religious Virgins at Ely. After her her Sister Sexburga, who had been wife of Ercombert King of Kent, and Mother of the most Holy Virgin Ercongetta, lived to her old age in the same place under the Religious pro|fession and Title of Abbesse. And there succee|ded her in the government of the same Abbey her other Daughter Erminilda, who had been wife of Wulfere King of the Mercians, and Mother of the holy Virgin Wereburga. These three in con|tinued successions were Abbesses there.
14. This only is to be added in this place, That this holy Queen and Abbesse Sexburga is different from another Queen of the same name, wife to Kenwalch King of the West-Sa|xons, who after his death in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy four governed the same Kingdom But either willingly, or for|ced thereto by a faction of the Nobility which refused to be ruled by a woman, retired to a quiet Religious life, as hath before been declared.


XVIII. CHAP.A. D. 700.
XVIII. C.

1. The death of Saint Trumwin Bishop of the Picts.
2. Also of S. Baru a Hermite.
3. c. And of S. Hildelida Abbesse.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred is recorded the death of S. Trumwin B. of the Picts:A. D. 700 who in the revolt of that Nation from the Northumbers was driven from the~ce  retired to the Monastery of Religious Virgins at Streneshalck, where he lived fifteen years with some few companions in Monasticall rigour, both to the good of his own soule, and the benefit of many other, and was with due honour buried there in the Church of S. Peter. Many centuries of years after, his Sacred Body was found and translated to a more honourable place, together with the Bodies of severall other Saints reposing there Concerning which William of Malmsbury thus writes,Malmsb. de Pont. l. 3. At Streneshalck, now called Whitby, in the Qure of the Church belonging t Religious Virgins, which is famous for the Monu|ments of Holy Bishops and glorious Kings, the in|dustry of certain devout men hath, as it were, re|stored to life the slumbring ashes of severall per|sons: For not long since there were found and trans|lated to a more eminent place the Bodies of many Saints, particularly of S. Trumwin Bishop of the Picts,Martyr. Aug 10. Feb. c. His name is commemorated a|mong Saints in our Martyrologe on the tenth of February.
2. The same year likewise is assigned to the death of S. Baruck a Hermite, whose memory is celebrated in the Province of the Silures and region of Glamorgan. He lyes buried in the Isle of Barry, which took its name from him: Concerning which we read this testimony in Camden,Camd. in lar. The most outward Isle there is called Barry, from Baruck a Holy man there buried: Who as he gave his Name to the Island, so did the Island give a Sirname to the Lords of it: For the Noble family of the Viscounts of Barry in Ireland received their originall from thence. In our Martyrologe this Holy Heremit Baruck is said to have sprung from the Noble Blood of the Brittains, and that en|tring into a solitary strict course of life, he at this time attained to a life immortall.
3. We will conclude this year, which con|cludes the seaventh Century of our History, with celebrating the Memory of S. Hildeli|da, who in the Monastery of Berking built by S. Erconwald for his Sister Edilburga,Bed. l. 4. c. 10 as Saint Beda testifies, succeeded her in the Office of Ab|besse, and for the space of twenty four years gover|ned the same in a constant observance of Regular Disciplin, withall carefully providing all things necessary for the subsistence of the Religious Vir|gins.

She by reason of the streitnes of the place in which the Monastery was built,A. D. 701 thought fitt to take up the Bodies of severall Holy persons of both Sexes there buried, and to translate them all to one place in the Church dedicated to our Blessed Lady: At which time Almighty God gave testi|mony to their Sanctity by a glorious light from heaven shining on them, by a wonderful de|lightful odour, and many other miraculous signs, as may be read in the Book relating the same, out of which wee have excerpted these particulars.
Ap. Capgrav in Hildelida.4. The Authour of her Life in Capgrave affirms that this Holy Abbesse S. Hildelida was replenished with Divine Charity, insomuch as both by instructions and actions she became a pat|tern and Teacher of all vertues in watchings, ab|stinence, benignity, clemency, and every other ver|tue becoming her profession: She was carefull that her Religious Subiects should want nothing ne|cessary for their soules or bodies, so shewing her|self unblameable both before God and men.
Mart. Angl. 22. Decemb.5. And as in her life she was a singular Example of Piety to others, so after her Death, which is consigned to the two and twentieth of December in this year, She de|served veneration and praise from all po|sterity: For thus testifies the same Authour, The Blessed Virgin Hildelitha is glorified by many glorious Saints:Ibid. For her Memory is celebrated not only by S. Dunstan, S. Ethelwold and S. Elphe|gus, but her Sanctity is also renouned by many Ancient Saints before them. To her did Saint Aldelm as yet an Abbot dedicate his Book inscribed Of Virginity, in the preface of which he highly exalts her vertues and piety.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of Offa the pious King of the East-Saxons.

1. IN the year following Offa the pious King of the East-Saxons began his Raign, eight years before this King Sebb had relin|quished the Court for a solitary retirement,A. D. 701. and exchanged his Royall Purple into an humble course Religious Habit. To whom succeeded in that Kingdom his Sons Sighard and Seofrid ioyntly raigning: and as they were associated in receiving the Crown; so were they likewise in quitting it in the beginning of this Century: Whether it was by death, or by a voluntary Secession after their Fa|thers example, is uncertain. But certain it is that in this year Offa by full right succeeded in the Kingdom: and within a few years by an hereditary piety grew weary of worldly pomps; as shall be shewd. He was the Son of Sigher, who a good while before this ad|ministered the Kingdom together with King Sebbe.
3. King Offa at his coming to the Crown was a youth of a beautifull aspect,Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4. and chearfull disposition; he was of a floride age, and tenderly be|loved by his Subiects, saith William of Malms|buay. Yet in this scarce ripe age he had a soule mature for pietyA. D. 702 insomuch as he en|tred into an inward debate whether he should expose himself to the anxiety of wordly cares and tempests wherewith, being exalted so high, he was in danger to be dis|quitted; if not overthrown, and to the en|tising snares of sensuall pleasures from which a Kingly state without almost a mira|culous Grace can seldone be secure; or after his Predecessours example, at once break through all temporall impediments, and give himself wholly to God in expectation of a far more glorious and eternall Kingdom.
4. Such a debate and irresolution argued in so tender an age a solide piety: and though his inward strength was not suffi|cient then to conquer the world so far as to forsake it; yet it was not the love of sen|suall contentments, ambition or secular Pride which induced him not to reiect a Crown, but a Hope that vertue and piety even with a Crown would be acceptable to God and rewarded by him. He might likewise esteem it an argument of a more courageous mind in the midst of pleasures to preserve himself from the infection of them, then entirely to exclude them.
5. Being thus resolved, his next care was to find an associate in his Throne: for which purpose he demanded for his Wife Kineswi|da the daughter of Penda formerly King of the Mercians, and sister to the present King Ethelred and the Holy Abbesse Kineburga. King Ethelred without demanding his Si|sters consent, readily promised her: But how she, having in resolution consecrated her Virginity to God, resisted, and by the power of her Prayers obtained the execution of her pious and chast resolution, hath been al|ready declared. And how her Example in|duced King Offa courageously to imitate her shall in due place be shewd.


XX. CHAP.XX. CHA.

1.2. c. S. Wilfrid called before an En|glish Synod: and iniuriously treated.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred and two Pope Sergius dying,A. D. 702. there suc|ceeded him in the Apostolick Chair Iohn the sixth of that name, elected the year before. He was by Nation a Grecian: which was a proof of the consent of the Eastern and Western Churches in the same Faith, since with|out any distinction of Nations or partiality the Supreme Bishop of Gods Church was thus chosen.
2. Vnder this Pope Iohn the cause of Saint Wilfrid was again ventilated, and at last deter|mind. He had lived a banished man from his See of York now eleaven years: and though Pope Sergius had decreed his restitution, yet Alfrid King of the Northumbers Brithwald

Arch-bishop of Canterbury by delayes and ex|cuses suspended the execution of the Popes commands. But now pretending a shew of piety, they assembled a Synod, to which they summond S. Wilfrid, and endeavoured with a fraudulent shew of kindnes to entangle him, whom they had expelled by violence. S. Wilfrid being secure in his own innocence, and not suspecting any deceit, presented himself to the Councill. The proceedings of which Council, and constant behaviour of S. Wilfrid therein are thus described by Wil|liam of Malmsbury:
Malmsb de Pont. l 3.[3. When Sexulf Bishop of Lichfeild in the Kingdom of the Mercians was dead, saith he, S. Wilfrid governed that Bishoprick, being both tenderly loved and cordially reverenced by all the inhabitants of that Province. In the mean time Alfrid King of the Northumbers and Brithwald Successour to S. Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury complotted many designs to his preiudice. At last it was resolved by them both that a Synod should be assembled, and that under a pretended desire of Peace S. Wilfrid should be called to it, and there ei|ther by fair words induced to a compliance with their wills, or in case of his resistance, oppressed by violence. The Holy Bishop unskillfull in guiles, and who measured other mens minds by the sincerity and uprightnes of his own, went to the Synod. But there he found far other usage then he expected. For at first they sett upon him with reproachfull speeches, and false accusations and when they had wearied him with those, at last they proposed to him this Question, Whether he would obey the Decrees of the late Arch-bishop Theodore? He perceiving their ma|lignity, defeated their design with a subtile answer saying, That he would willingly obey all such Definitions of Theodore, as were agreable to the Holy Canons. Having answerd thus, he in a long discourse confidently and truly in|veighed against them, for that they who for the space of two and twenty years had despi|sed the precepts of three Popes, Agathon, Be|nedict and Sergius, did now make choice of such Decrees of the Arch-bishop Theodore as had been made in a time of trouble and dis|sension: and when he had said this, he was silent.
4. When the King had heard S. Wilfrid thus iustifying the equity of his cause, he was not able to endure it longer, but broke forth into a speech misbecoming his Maiesty:Id. ib. insomuch as he said to the Arch-bishop, If such be your Will, most Reverend Father, I will oppresse him by violence.Id. ib. But the Bishops there present would not consent to such iniustice. Yea even his enemies did not approve, that a Bishop of so high esteem and renown, and one who out of a confidence in their iustice was come to the Synod, should suffer a ma|nifest oppression. Besides, though they could have been content that he should have been obliged to quitt his Bishoprick yet they would not suffer the Authority of the Apo|stolick See to be directly violated by the King.Id. ib.
5. Hereupon, saith the same Authour, the Bi|shops thought fitt to proceed another way. Therefore they began to sett upon him with perswasions, that since for his cause such fre|quent dissensions had hapned in Gods Church, he would willingly and of his own accord give up his Bishoprick and possessions, and confirm such a renunciation by Writing. They added, that this would highly recom|mended his fame, and be a great accumula|tion to his glory, if he would rather chuse to end his days in peace as a privat man, then for a Bishoprick to move storms of se|dition either by himself or others in his behalf.
6. The Holy Bishop easily perceived how their design was to entangle him, and therefore answered, them, That nothing could be mo|re dishonourable and infamous, then that a man should condemne himself with his own tongue. He then putt them in mind, That he was the first man who having cast out the Scotts had taught the Churches of the Northumbers the true Canonicall way of obser|ving Easter: That he had brought among them the Ecclesiasticall Song by way of Antiphons; That he had commanded the Rule of the most Holy Patria S. Benedict to be observed by all the Monks of that Province: and for all these merits and benefitts his only reward must be, that he an old man, and a Bishop of seaventy years of age should be compelled to condemne himself by his own Writing. But he would have them know, he would never be induced to do that which would bring to himself shame, to those who were under him a calamity, and to all dammage. Therefore he once more appeald to the See Apostolick to which he challenged any of his accusers to repair.]
7. When S. Wilfrid had thus appealed, the Synod was presently dissolved: for the matter being referred to the Supreme Tri|bunall of the Church, the Bishops could make no decrees about it. Neither would King Alfrid any longer interpose his Re|gall and Civill authority in a cause depen|ding between Ecclesiasticall persons. Eve|ry one therefore went to his own place. And Saint Wilfrid returned to the Mercians, to prepare for his voyage once more in his old age to Rome.



A. D. 703.
XXI. CH.XXI. CHAP.

i.2. c. The death of S. Benedict Biscop: and summ of his Gests.

1. ONE whole year was passed before S. Wilfrid arrived at Rome, at least be|fore he debated his cause with his adversa|ries sent thither by Arch-bishop Brithwald:A. D. 703. In which year S. Benedict Biscop Abbot and founder of two famous Monasteries of Wire|mouth and Girwy dedicated to the honour of the two Cheif Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, dyed. Whole Gests have been already from S. Beda related, containing his wonderfull zeale for the regulating Monasticall Disciplin according to the Institut of our Holy Patriark S. Benedict, his frequent and unwearied tra|vells to Rome for procuring Books, Vestments, Sacred Pictures and other Ornaments of his Monasteries, his prudence in uniting and governing the said Monasteries, and in chu|sing other Superiours to assist him being pre|sent, and to govern in his absence, with all other vertues becoming one who professed Perfection, and through his whole life made good that Profession.
2. Neither ought it to be accounted among the least benefits conferred by him upon his Order,. de S. Bed. Biscop. that he obtained from the Apostolick See a Breif of Priviledges by which, saith Saint Beda, the liberty of the said Mo|nasteries and Religious men living there was secured from all incursions and invasions of ex|terns, their Temporall possessions defen|ded, and all disturbance of peace prevented.
3. In consideration of these great obliga|tions received from him, the Congregation of English Benedictins lately restored, or rather continued by the See Apostolick in their an|cient Liberties and Rights, have deservedly intitled him their Patron: and particularly inasmuch as he so strictly united the two forementiond Monasteries, that they not only professed the substance of the same Be|nedictin Rule, but all the same circumstantiall observances, giving thereby such a form of Vnion as was imitated through all other Pro|vinces in Europe, to the notable advancement of Piety and Vniformity in their holy Disciplin.
4. It is wonderfull to consider how great and universall a benefitt accrewed to all the Churches of Brittany by the zeale of this Holy Abbot: for as long as those Regular Obser|vances instituted, or renewed by him, conti|nued, Heresy could haue no accesse into our Island: But those being dissolved, this our land formerly watred with showers of Divine Grace from heaven, and made a Paradice of God (as Ba|rnius observes) was presently turned (in falsugi|nem) into a brackish salt barrennesse, by the malice of its inhabitants.
5. Not our English Martyrologe only, but the Roman also celebrates his Memory on the day before the Ides of Ianuary,Martyrolog. Rom.  Angl. 12. Ian. as an alumnus of that Church,A. D. 704 where he first embraced a Monasti|call Profession, and had his former name of Biscop changed into Benedict.


XXII. CHAP.XXII. CH

1.2. c. S. Wilfrids cause again iudged at Rome: to his advantage.
8. c. His miraculous recovery from a sicknes in France.

1. SAint Wilfrid arriving at Rome the year following,A. D. 704. expected awhile his accu|sers: who being also come, they prese~ted their state of the present Controversy in Epistles sent by Arch-bishop Brithwald  other Bishops of Brittany to Pope Iohn: and S. Wilfrid declared his cause in a Petition or Memoriall which he humbly offred to the same Pope.
2. The summ of which Petition, extant in William of Malmsbury,Malmsb. de Pont. l. 3. is this:He first shewd how he had been obliged to appeal to the See Apostolick for iustice against the Vsurpers of his Bishoprick, Monasteries and other posses|sions contrary to the Decrees of the late Holy Popes Agathon and Sergius: Which Decrees he humbly desired the present Pope to confirm: yet withall professing that he was ready to suffer the severity of Ecclesiasticall Canons, in case he could not disprove any accusations layd against him. Moreover he humbly re|quested that letters in his behalf might be written from the See Apostolick to Ethelred King of the Mercians desiring him to protect in peace all the Monasteries in his Kingdom: and moreover to Alfrid King of the Nor|thumbers, requiring a restitution of all that belonged to him: Or in case that he might not be suffred to enioy his Bishoprick of York, he besought the Pope to take care that a fit|ting person might be ordained there. But as for the two Monasterses founded by him at Rippon (Ripis Hagulstaniae) in that Province, he would by no means quitt his right to them. These things being granted, he con|cluding protested all due obedience to such Decrees of Arch-bishop Brithwald, as were not contrary to to those of the Popes Predecessours.
3. This Petition being read, his Accusers were commanded to shew what they could alledge against it.Id. ibid. The principall thing that they insisted on was this, That he was guilty of a capitall crime, having publickly and contumaciously said in a Synod assembled in Brittany, that he would not obey the Decrees of Arch-bishop Brithwald. As touching this accusation, the Holy Bishop standing in the midst of the assembled cleared himself saying, That it was not true that he had answered so in|definitly but only that he would not obey such De|crees as were contrary to the Ecclesiasticall Canons: Now nothing is more contrary to them, then that a Bishop should be compelled to depose himself, no crime being layd to his charge.
4. This Answer so simple, easy and al|lowable

was by the Romans received with ioyfull applause: and his Accusers being unable to disprove it were commanded to return home, the Roman Bishops telling them, That though by the Canons it was ordred, that an accuser failing in the proof of the first point of his charge, should not be admitted to make good the rest, yet for the reverence they bore to the Arch bishop Brithwald, they would not forbear to discusse all their alle|gations in order. And so in effect they did, insomuch as for the space of four months seaventy assemblies of Bishops wee made cheifly about this Controversy: the end of which was glorious to S. Wilfrid, and igno|minious to his accusers: for the Romans ex|ceedingly admired their impudence, and his eloquence who without any study, only by the help of God and his own innocence, with the first moving of his lips dissipated and broke asunder like cobwebs, all thir obie|ctions and accusations. But especially the Roman Bishops condemned the bold rashnes of those English pleaders, in that being lay|men all of them, except one, who was a Deacon, they presumed to accuse a Venerable Prelat seaventy years old, whose Eloquence flowed like a torrent. Therefore discour|sing a long time among themselves in the Greek tongue, at last turning themselves to the Plaintives Defendant, they in Latin pronounced. That the English Messengers de|served prison, and that he who sent them was unwise: on the other side they declared S. Wilfrid innocent of any crime whatsoever.
5 I would here add (saies the same Authour) how great an advantage came to his cause by the reading of the Acts of the Synod assem|bled formerly by Pope Agathon: And after by a miracle hapning to him in his return from Rome homeward at Meaux a Citty of France, Eastward from Paris, where falling greivously sick he was restored to health in an Angeli|call Vision: but that the Venerable Historian Beda, who for the sobriety of his stile deserves cre|dit, has already recorded it. For my design is breifly to relate such particulars as have been omitted by him.
6. These two passages pretermitted by William of Malmsbury we will here adioyn out of S. Be|da:Who as touching the former thus writes: One thing there was which brought great advantage to the clearing of S. Wilfrid, which was the reading of the Synod of Pope Agathon of blessed memory: For when by command of Pope Iohn the Acts of that Synod came to be read before a great multitude of Nobles and other inferiour people, and that the Reader was come to that passage before related, to witt, Wilfrd the pious Bishop of York appea|ling to the See Apostolick, was by full autho|rity of this Synod declared innocent and ab|solved from all matters layd to his charge, certain or uncertain, c. an astonishment seised on all the hearers, and they began to ask one another, Who that Bishop Wilfrid was?A. D. 705. Then Boniface one of the Popes counsel|lors and severall others who had seen him at Rome in the days of Pope Agathon, said, That this was the same Wilfrid now again come to Rome with his accusers to be iudged by the See Apostolick. At his former coming, said they, his cause was fully heard, and the alle|gations on both sides eyamined, and in the end he was by Pope Agathon of blessed me|mory pronounced to have been uniustly ex|pelled from his Bischoprick: Moreover he was entertaind by the said Holy Pope with so much honour, that he assigned him a place in a Sy|nod of Bishops, as being a man of incorrupt Faith and probity. When these things were heard, the whole Synod together with the Pope pronounced, That a man of such authority, who for the space of forty years had worthi|ly administred the Episcopall Charge, could not with any iustice be condemned, but ought to be dismissed with honour, as innocent and free from all crimes falsly imputed to him.
7 Now before wee add the other passage for which we are referred to S. Beda, touching the Miracle hapning to S. Wilfrid in his voyage back towards Brittany, wee will insert out of William of Malmsbury what befell S. Wilfrid be|fore he quitted Rome:Although, saith he, the Holy Bishop had clearly obtaind his cause, yet he made it his earnest suit that he might be permitted to remain the short time he had to live, at Rome, that so he might breath forth his decaying Spirit at the feet of his Holines. But Pope Iohn would not yeild to his pious request, giving this reason, That such a man as he was necessary to the English hurch and Kingdom: and therefore he enioynd him to employ the remainder of his age in procu|ring the commodity of his own countrey  not spend it unproffitably in a forrain aire.
8. S. Wilfrid having been thus honourably dis|missed from Rome, in his way through France the Miracle befell him thus related by S. Beda:Bed.  sup Whilst he was travelling through France an infirmity suddenly seised on him, which day|ly encreasing brought him to that extremity that he could not so much as ride on horse|back, but by his serva~ts was caried in a hand|litter. In this ma~ner he was brought to Meaux (Meldum) a Citty of France, where four days and nights together he lay as one dead, and a faint breathing, scarce perceptible, shewd only that he was yet alive. Thus long conti|nuing without meat or drink, without spea|king or hearing any thing spoken, at last a|bout day-break on the fifth day, he awaked as from a deep sleep, and sate up in his bed. Then opening his eyes he saw about him his Brethren singing Psalms and weeping: And sighing a little he demanded where Acca the Preist was. Presently therefore he was called for, and seeing the Holy Bishop pretty well recovered and able to speak, he kneeled down, and the other Brethren with him, and gave thanks to God for so great a blessing.
9. After this they sate down together, and

entred into discourse concerning the terrour of Divine iudgments:A. D. 704. which discourse having continued awhile, the Holy Bishop commanded all the rest to leave the room except Acca, to whom directing his coun|tenance and speech, he said, A terrible Vision lately hapned to mee which I intend to di|scover to thee, but which thou must conceale till I see how it shall please God to dispose of mee. There stood before mee a certain person in a glo|rious shining vestment, who said he was the Archangell Michael, and that he was sent to recall mee from death. For, sayd he, our Lord moved by the Prayers and tears of thy Brethren and Disciples, and by the Intercession of his most Blessed Virgin Mother, has given thee life. There|fore I assure thee that thou shalt for the present recover of this sicknes: but be prepared, for four years hence I will visit thee. Thou shalt arrive safe in thy native countrey, and there receive the greatest part of thy possessions, and conclude thy life in great tranquillity.
10. The event shewed this Vision to have been no illusion: for presently the Holy Bi|shop perfectly recovered his health to the great ioy of all, who gave humble thanks to God for it, And not long after renewing his iourney, he came safe into Brittany. But because he arrived not there till the year following, wee will here interpose a Narration of the great cha~ges hap|ning in this Island in the mean time, which gave a new course to the Holy Bishops affaires.


XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2. Ethelred King of the Mercians becomes a Monk.
3. He founds certain Monasteries.
4. Conred succeeds in the Kingdom.
5.6. Munificence of King Ina: And of Bugga a Princesse, to Glastonbury, c.

1. SAint Wilfrid among other requests to Pope Iohn, had desired him to write Let|ters in his favour to Ethelred King of the Mercians,Huntingd. l. 4. which he also did accordingly. But in the Holy Bishops absence King Ethelred ha|ving been visited with the Grace and mercy of the Omnipotent, was become a Monk, saith Henry of Huntingdon. And this change all our other ancient Historians attribute to his piety and contempt of worldly glory. Whereas certain Modern Protestant Writers, not traind up in the School of Gods Spirit doe without any ground from Antiquity affirm, That King Ethelred being touched with remorse of his crimes, and a terrour in conscience for having usur|ped the Kingdom, was moved to build a Mo|nastery, and to enter himself into it, after he had held the Kingdom full thirty years.
2. As touching the place where this devout King undertook a Monasticall Profession, S. Beda thus writes, There is in the Province of Lindissi (or Lincolnshire) a Noble Monastery named Bear|danam, which was much affected and honoured by Offrida Queen of the Mercians, as likewise by her husband Ethelred.
3. The same King before he forsook the world had founded severall other Monaste|ries: one whereof he bestowed upon Egwin afterward Bishop of Worcester, of which him|self makes mention thus, Being in the prime of my age in the days of Ethelred King of the Mer|cians, I made my humble request to him, that he would vouchsafe to bestow on mee an ancient Mo|nastery called Flednburch: which he with great kindnesse granted mee. It was seated in the Pro|vince of Worcester, neer to the River Avon,  is at this day called Flatbury, a place which, saith Camden, in the Primitive Church of the English was inhabited by Religious men.Camden in Worcester|shire. The same Authour likewise ascribes to this King Ethelred the founding of the famous Mona|stery of Evesham, concerning which wee shall treat more largely e're long.
4. The Successour to King Ethelred in the King|dom of the Mercians was Conred or Kenrea son to his Brother Wulfere,Pol. Viogil. Malmsb. de Reg. l. 2. c 4 who diligently imita|ted all his vertues for as his Predecessour had done, he passed his life in great sincerity of manners, being eminent for his piety to God, and justice in administring his Kingdom Thus writes Polydor Virgil, and William of Malmsbury. And as he lived, so likewise ended he his life accor|ding to his example: for he built many Mo|nasteries, and after a few years embraced also a Monasticall Life.
5 Piety and munificence to Gods Church was the ordinary employment  busines of the Kings of this age:Idem ibid. For Ina also King of the West-Saxons by the Counsell of S. Aldelm re-in|stated the ancient Monastery of Glastenbury in all possessions and priviledges which by rea|son of former troubles had been taken from it, and settled the Monks in good order under the government of their Abbot Hemgesil. And the said Abbot dying this year, he gave to his Successaur Berwald severall Lordshps men|tioned in his Grant preserved by the said Authour: and the Tabernacles, and other Ves|sells of gold and silver given by the said King to that Monastery are of a valew almost in|credible. Also at the same time Bugga the daughter of Kentwin formerly King of the West-Saxons seemed to contend with King Ina in adorning this famous Church and Mona|stery for as Alcuin in his Pom recounts she built there a Chappell in which were twelve sumptuous Altars shining with gold and silver, and consecrated to the twelve Apostles This she did for the refreshment of her Fa|thers soule, who was there buried.
6. The same King Ina moreover built a Church in Somersetshire at a Town anciently called Theorodunum,Gdvvin in Catalog. and vulgarly Tiddington but afterwards for the abundance of springs named Welles: To which he added a Colledge for Ecclesiasticall persons to live sequestred from the world in devotion. The Church he dedicated to God  the Apostle S. Andrew:amd. in So|merset. which

shortly after,A. D. 705 saith Camden, was by Princes and Noble men enriched with large revenews. It grew in succeeding times into an Episcopall See: and Athelm is by Bishop Godwin reckoned the first Bishop of Welles in the year of Grace nine hundred and five. So that Polydor Virgil was mistaken in saying, that King Ina ere|cted it into a Bishoprick.


XXVI. C.XXIV. CHAP.

1.2. c. Saint Wilfrid returns with the Popes Letters: which are neglected by King Alfrid.
8.9. who shortly after dyes.

A. D. 7051. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred and five Saint Wilfrid arrived in Brittany, brin|ging with him Letters and Messengers like|wise from the Pope to the two Kings Ethel|red and Alfrid, giving them account of what had lately passed at Rome in debating the Controversy. What the successe was William of Malmsbury thus relates:
Malmsb. de Pont. l. 3.[2. Saint Wilfrid, says he, presently after his return presented the Letters from the See Apostolick to Ethelred late King of the Mercians, now a Monk: Which he received in an humble posture, kneeling. And ha|ving read them, he with little difficulty ob|tained from Kenred Son of Wulfere whom he had made his Successour in the Kingdom, an order that they should be obeyd. For Kenred was a Prince replenished with the fear of God, a good proof whereof he gave to the world by a voluntary renouncing his Kingly authority four years after, and embracing a Monasticall Profession. In like manner Brith|wald Arch-bishop of Canterbury shewed him|self as earnest to enter into brotherly con|cord with Saint Wilfrid. Some say he was af|frighted thereto by the Popes Messengers who denounced to him his condemnation from the See Apostolick, altough S. Wilfrid interpo|sing hindred the pronouncing Sentence.
3. Only Alfrith King of the Northumhers still persisted in his obstinacy and resistance. For when Messengers directed from Saint Wil|frid came to him, at first he gave them a mild answer: But afterward being, as is beleived, depraved by the suggestions of certain ma|lignant persons about him, favoured by him much to his dishonour, when the Messengers again presented themselves to him on the day appointed, he sent them away with sad hearts by pronouncing this his de|terminate Sentence, That for the persons of the Messengers, for the gravity of their lives and veneablenes for their age, he honoured them as parents: But as touching the subject of their message, he utterly re|fused complyance with it, since it was against all reason that upon any Letters, perhaps surreptitiously obtained, from the See Apostolick, a man who had been twice condemned by a Nationall Synod of the En|glish, should be restored to his dignity and Communion.
4. Having made frequent mention of these Letters of Poope Iohn, inasmuch as they afford great light to Saint Wilfrids cause, wee will bere sett down the tenour of them from William of Malmsbury, by whom they are recorded.They are inscribed, To the most eminent Lords, Ethelred King of the Mercians, and Alfrid King of the Deiri and Bernicians.
5. Wee doe much reioyce heing the report of the encrease of your Religious de|votion through Gods Grace cooperating, and seeing the fervour of your Faith, which, God illuminating your minds, yee at first received by the preaching of the Prince of Apostle, and doe still constantly retain. And I would to God that this our ioy might be enlarged by the good behaviour of many among you. But the incurable dissension of some Spirits there does much disquiet our minds: Which dissension wee are obli|ged to censure and correct, least instead of being observers, we be found transgressours of Apostolick Precepts.
6. For it is now a good while since that Bishop Wilfrid in the time of Pope Agathon of Blessed Memory appealed in a certain cause of his to this See: His accusers also sent from Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury and from Hilda an Abbesse of Religious memory, came hither. Whereupon Bishops from severall places were assembled in this Citty, who ex|amined the matter diligently and canoni|cally, and after Examination pronounced Sen+tence: Which Sentence the Popes his Succes|sours and my Predecessours have confirmed. And the Arch-bishop Theodore never contra|dicted the said Sentence, nor sent afterward any more accusations against him. More|over now of late more accusations having been sent against the same Wilfrid, wee took order that they should be examined in a Sy|nod of Reverend Bishops, together with his re|spective Answers and defence, which Exami|nation continued many dayes together, both from Epistles ancient and modern touching that cause, and verball allegations made by such persons as were present. So that all hath been done in the cause that can be per+formed in the absence of the principall ac|cusers: who in case they approve not the Sen+tence here given, must repaire in presence hither.
7 Wherefore wee doe hereby admonish our Brother Arch-bishop Brithwald, that to|gether with Wilfrid he convoke a Synod com|manding Bosa and Iohn to repair to the same: There let him hear and consider what the parties can say, and what proofs can be made on either side: Which being done, if he can determine the cause, he will doe a thing very acceptable to us. But in case he cannot, let him then admonish both parties to have

recourse in person hither, where the cause hitherto depending may be finally decided by a greater Councill. And let those who shall neglect to come hither, know that they shall be ipso facto suspended, and neither here nor there esteemed legall Bishops. As for your Royall Highnes, be pleased to afford your assistance that the Orders which with Christs help wee have herein given, may come to effect. And whosoever, of what condition soever, shall presumptuously con|temne our authority, he shall not remain without Gods punishment, nor escape with|out his harm and danger from the spirituall bonds in which he is tyed.]
8. This was the tenour of the Popes Letters: which were contemned by King Alfrid alone: who notwithstanding presently after found that the denunciation of Divine iudgment in the end of them was not in vain: For he li|ved but a little while after as the same Au|thour relates,Id. ibid. saying, Assoon as the Messengers were departed he was assaulted by a very sharp disease which shortly brought him to his end. But then the bitternes of his torments awaked reason, which had slumbred a long time in the Kings mind, and according to the Prophets saying, Vex|ation gave him understanding. For perceiving that this punishment had deservedly come upon him for his disobedience, he promised to make a reparation of his fault to Wilfrid, if he could be brought to his presence before his death. And the same he continued to promise as long as he had use of his tongue: withall adiuring his Successour to perform the same, in case himself could not doe it. Thus he repented too late his contempt of the Letters sent from the See Apostoick the com|minations of which he could not avoyd.
9 Thus dyed this worthy King Alfrid, who for the space of nineteen years had gover|ned his Kingdom in great iustice and peace, and against whom wee read not any accusa|tion or charge of any other crime, but this his pertinacious persecution of this Holy Bi|shop. Whosoever he was that inserted him in our Martyrologe on the twelfth of March by the Title of a Monk in the Monastery of Mailros, was surely mistaken, since neither S. Beda, who lived at the same time near the place, nor any of our Ancient Historians mention any such thing. And Florilegus expressly says that he dyed at Driffeld seated on the River Hull in Yorkshire which Camden calls the vil|lage of Alfrid the most learned King of the Northumbers, wherein his Monument is ex|ant.


XXV. CHAP.XXV. CH.

1.2. c. S. Wilfrid in a Synod in Brittany restored to his Rights: The testimony of the Holy Royall Virgin Elfleda, c. in his behalf.

1. WEE are now approching towards an end of the long continued troubles of this illustrious Bishop Saint Wilfrid. Whose restitution though it found some delay and opposition after the death of King Alfrid, yet by a Synod shortly after assembled in the Province of the Northumbers, it was fully ef|fected The manner and progresse whereof is thus declared by the same Authour:2. When King Alfrid was dead, a certain Noble man named Edulf,Malmsb de Reg. l. 3. who had a design to usurp the Kingdom, vomited likewise forth his malicious fury against Saint Wilfrid, as if he had been by oath engaged in the frenzy of King Al|frid. For when the Holy Bishop, calling to mind that the same Edulf had professed freindship for|merly to him, thought it expedient to goe to him, the senceles man fell into such a passion, that he commanded him presently to depart his King|dom, and gave order that all his goods should be confiscated, and himself cast out thence. But two months after, the Tyrant loft both his Kingdom and life: and the Nobility restored to the Throne Osred the Son of Alfrid.
3 Now among the Nobles of that Kingdom the highest both in authority and fidelity was one named Berthfrid. Him did Brithwald Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury admonish to cause a Synod to be assembled in that Kingdom for determining the cause of Saint Wilfrid: whereto he consented. And in the said Synod, to the end that contro|versy might have a peaceable end, it was ordered, according to the precepts contained in the Popes Letters, that a choice should be offred to the Bi|shops who were parties against Saint Wilfrid, that either they should resign to him his Episcopall See, or repair presently to Rome, there to iustify the cause of their refusall: And whosoever would not accept of this choice, should be excommuni|cated.
4. S. Beda notes the particular place where this Synod met,Bed. l. 5 c. 20. saying it was near the River Nid, which gives a name to the Province of Nidds-dale, now belonging to the Kingdom of Scotland, but anciently within the Domi|nion of the Northumbers. At this Synod were present Arch-bishop Brithwald with S. Wilfrid, likewise Bosa Bishop of York, and Iohn of Ha|gulstad. There came thither also the Royall Vir|gin and Abbesse of Streneshalck Elfleda Sister to King Alfrid, whose testimony was of great moment for ending the controversy. For thus writes William of Malmsbury:5. Whilst the cause of S. Wilfrid was agitating in the Synod,Malmsb. ib. and the Bishops according to their former manner contradicted his pretentions, the

Holy Virgin Elfleda Sister to the late King Al|frid, and Abbesse of Streneshalck after S. Hilda putt an end to the busines, Saying, Let these te|dious discourses little to the purpose cease: Here doe I produce the last Will of my Brother, at the making whereof my self was present, by which he declares that if God restored him his health he would without delay observe and execute the commands of the See Apostolick: or if death kin|dred him, he would oblige his heyr and successour thereto.
6. After the Holy Virgin had spoke thus, Berth|frid immediatly added these words,My sentence is that we ought to obey the Popes commands, es|pecially considering that our obligation thereto  strengthned by our late Kings will, and the solemn promise also which we our selves made in our ne|cessity: for when after his death we were besieged in the Citty of Bedda-burgh, and that the enemies inclosing us used their utmost endeavour to break into the Town, in this extremity and danger we made a Vow to God, that if we might escape, we would fullfill the commands of the See Apostolick. We had scarce ended this Vow, but presently the whole Province submitted it self to us, and every one strove who should prevent the other in run|ning to our assistance. The Royall youth Osred was acknowledged King, the Enemy was defeated and the usurping Tyrant slain. To conclude it is our young Kings will also that the Venerable Bi|shop Wilfrid be restored.
Now Berthfrid had no sooner spoke thus, but immediatly all clouds of dissension were dissipated, and a lightsome calmnes of peace succeeded. All the Bishops hast|ned to embrace one another, and passed the re|mainder of their lives in amity and concord.
7 The result of the Synod was, That Saint Wilfrid should be re-instated in all the digni|ties and possessions formerly belonging to him. Notwithstanding Bosa, who had been Bishop of York, dying presently after this Synod, S. Wilfrid permitted Iohn to remove to York, and himself being now very old, con|tented himself with the See of Hagulstad (or Hexham) and his own Monasteries.
8. Thus at last ended all the troubles of this Holy Bishop Wilfrid: Which were the more heavy to him, in that all his persecutours were persons of vertuous holy lives. The consideration whereof gave occasion to the Historian to make this complaint:Id. ib. It is hence manifest how great the misery is wherein human Nature is involved, inasmuch as those men and woemen whose sanctity is much celebrated by Antiquity, such were Theodore, Brithwald, Iohn, Bosa and likewise the Holy Abbesse Hilda, they all with utmost violence persecuted S. Wilfrid, a Bishop most highly favoured by Almighty God. Particularly as touching Bosa he is stiled by S. Beda, a most holy Prelat and beloved by God: and his Name is commemorated among Gods Saints in our Martyrologe on the ninth of March:Bed. l. 5. c. 31. Marty. Ang. 9. Mart. though his death, hapning this year, is assigned to the year of Grace seaven hundred.




THE ONE AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. S. Hedda Bishop of the West-Sa|xons dying, his Se is divided into two: Winchester, of which Saint Daniel is made Bishop: and Shirborn: of which S. Aldelm.

1. _THE same year in which de|bates were so happily ended in the Northern part of Britta|ny,A. D. 705. Hedda Bishop of Winchester dye: concerning whom thus writes S. Beda, In the beginning of the Raign of Osred King of the Northumbers, Heddi Bishop of the West-Sa|xons departed this world to eternall felicity.Id. For he was a good and iust man, and was enabled to discharge his Episcopall function in gover|ning and teaching rather by the light pro|ceeding from Charity and the love of vertue deeply imprinted in his heart, then by reading of Books. In a word, the most Reverend Prelat Pech|thelm, who then was a Deacon and Monk in the Monastery of S. Aldelm his successour, was wont to relate how in the place where the holy Bishop Heddi was buried, many miracles were wrought by his merits and intercession: and that the in|habitants of that Province were accustomed to take dust from thence, which they putt into water, and either therewith sprinckled or gave it to drink to such as were sick, either men or beasts, and thereby conferred health on them. By means of which frequent taking away the dust, a trench of no small depth and largenes was made in the place.Mart. Angl. 7. Iul. His name therefore is deservedly commemorated in our Martyrologe and the Roman likewise among the Saints on the Nones of Iuly.
2. S. Hedda being dead, the Bishoprick of that Province,Id. ib. saith the same Authour, was divided into two Dioceses: one whereof was given to Daniel, who governs the same to this day (that is, to the year of Grace seaven hundred thirty one, in which S. Beda concluded his History:) and the other to S. Aldelm, who wor|thily administred the same the space of four years. Both these men were eminently skilfull in Eccle|siasticall affairs and in the doctrine of Holy Scri|ptures.
3. S. Beda does not mention the name of the Episcopall See assigned to Daniel: but other Authours doe generally agree that it was Winchester, which he governed forty years. As for S. Aldelm, the Seat of his Bi|shoprick was Shirburn in the Province of the Durotriges, or Dorsetshire: in which a few of his Successours continued: till the Episcopall See was afterward translated to Saru~ or Salisbury.
4. These were two Prelats of eminent lear|ning, and illustrious starrs of the West-Saxon Kingdom. As touching Daniel, we shall shew hereafter how S. Boniface the glorious Apo|stle of the Germans frequently consulted him in difficulties occurring about the discharge of that sublime office. Hence it is that Bi|shop Godwin gives this Character of him, Da|niel was a man excellently learned,Godvv. in Cat. ep Wnt. and wrote many volumes, amongst others these following: Of the affairs of the Province of the South-Saxons. Of the Life of the Holy Bishop Cedda. Of the affairs of the Isle of Wight. All which are now lost.
5. As for S. Aldelm, he was fro~ his youth bred up in learning and piety by S. Madulf a Scot|tish Hermi, from whom the famous Monaste|ry of Malmsbury received its name, for many devout persons moved with the fame of his Sanctity had recourse to him in that solitude, by whom they were coenobitically governed: and a Monastery was there erected by Kenwalch King of the West-Saxons. In the year six hun|dred and seaventy S Maidulfus dying, Saint Aldelm succeeded Abbot in his place. And five years after, the said Monastery was en|dowed by the liberality of Leutherius Bishop of the West-Saxons upon the suggestion of S. Aldelm: For before that time the Monks li|ved there only upon courtesy. Thirteen years after he attended King Cedwalla to Rome, where he obtained from Pope Sergius a Breif of Priviledges and immunities to his Abbey. How in the year of Grace six hundred nine|ty two he was appointed by a Synod to write to a certain Prince of Cornwall called Gerun|tius a Book in confutation of the Brittains er|roneous observation of Easter and other miscariages, hath heretofore been declared. At last this year he was upon the death of S. Hedda ordained a Bishop of the West-Saxons, and, as hath been said, kept his Episcopall re|sidence at Shireburn.
6. Being thus made a Bishop, he gave a full and free authority to his Monks of Malmsbury to chuse their Abbot. But their duty and affection to him was such that du|ring his life they would acknowledge no other Spirituall Father: Only they humbly petitioned him to grant them the Priviledge after his death to elect their own Abbot: And that such Election should not pertain to the Bishop, as the custom was in Kent by the Or|dinance of King Withred, but descend to the Monks. This Priviledge S. Aldelm granted not only to them, but to all other Monasteries which he had founded. And moreover caused his Indult to be confirmed by the Subscri|ption of K. Ina and of Daniel Bishop of Win|chester. Authentick Copies are still extant of this Indult and Priviledge granted both by S. Aldelm and King Ina, in the Register of the said Abbey of Malmsbury. Concerning this holy Bishop S. Aldelm, more remains to be said when we come to speak of his death. In the mean time the affairs of Germany hap|pily managed by S. Swibert and his blessed companions recall us thither.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

i.2. c. Swiberts Preaching and mira|culous freeing a man possessed by the De|vill.

1. SAint Swibert after he had successfully preached the Gospell to the Inhabitants of Brunswick and other neighbouring Na|tions, directed his steps to a people called Boructuarians (or Prussians) lying more Nor|therly, and yet more savage then the former.Concerning his progresse in their conver|sion we have this account from his compa|nion S. Marcellinus.Marcel. in vit. . Suiber: [Assoon as he was en|tred that Province, saith he, he instilled the sa|ving Mysteries and precepts of the Gospell into their foolish and blind hearts, and enlight|ned their savage minds with the luster of divine Truth, being glorious among them in his preaching, and holy in his actions: So that turning them from their profane superstitions to the Faith of Christ, he con|firmed them in the same Faith by many wonderfull miracles. But the multitude o Converts encreasing, the Devils envy like|wise encreased who, enraged to see so many escape his snares, earnestly endeavoured by his malicious instruments either to kill him or expell him from that Province.
2. On a certain day therefore as he was preaching to a great multitude of Pagans, their sacrilegious Preists drunk with the Idolatrous cupp of Babylon, sett violently upon him, and after they had beaten him with their fists, rodds and stones, they endeavoured to drive him out of their coasts. But by the in|dustry of certain courageous Christians he was taken out of their hands, and for a few days was concealed by them, for they durst not kill him, out of fear least their Gover|nour should be offended. But presently after the Holy Bishop renewd his preaching among them, and dayly baptized great numbers, which despising their Idols, publickly con|fessed the Name of Christ.
3. Consequently the same Holy Writer de|clares, how by occasion of the Devills ma|lice the Faith of Christ became more illu|strious among that people:For, saith he, on a certain time in a village of the Boructua+rians a Rich and potent man, named Ethel|here was possessed by the Devill, insomuch as they were forced to bind him with chains, because he endeavoured to bite all that came near him, and tore his own cloaths. Now the same Ethelhere was one of those who had persecuted, and incited others to persecute the Holy Bishop, and was the first that had the boldnes to smite him with a staff. This man being thus dayly in a hor|rible

manner tormented by the devill, it hapned on a certain day in the presence of severall Pagan Preists and others who came to visit and condole with him, that the De|vill cryed out, Except Swibert servant of the living God and Bishop of the Christians come hi|ther, I will not depart out of this man. And when he oft more and more loudly repea|ted the same words, the Idolatrous Preists and other freinds of the Demoniack went away in great confusion and perplexity what they should doe. At last they all agreed that Saint Swibert should be sought out, and humbly entreated to visit the said unhappy person.
4. This being accordingly done, Saint Swibert moved with great compassion and Charity went to the house, attended by his Preists and other Disciples: and being yet in the way thither, the Devill presently caused the possessed person to fome and gnash his teeth, and to cry out in a far more horrible manner then before: at which all that were present were much greived and astonished. But assoon as Saint Swibert approached the house the clamours ceased,  the Demoniack lay still in his bed, as if he had been asleep.
5. Assoon as the Holy Bishop saw him lying in this posture, he commanded all us who attended him, to betake our selves devoutly to our Prayers. And he himself likewise with fervent zeale besought almighty God that he would vouchsafe to free the Demoniack from the Devills power, to the end that his Holy Name might be glorified, and those In|fidels converted to the Faith. Having thus prayed, we all rose up, and he signed the De|moniack with the sign of the Saving Crosse, saying, In the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ I command thee, O unclean Spirit, that thou de|part from this Creature of God, that he may ac|knowledge his true Creatour and Saviour. Imme|diatly hereupon the Wicked Spirit depar|ting with a noysom stink, began to crye out aloud, O thou servant of the Great God, thou shalt not abide long in this Province: for as thou hast driven mee from this my habitation, so will make thee to be driven out of this countrey.
6. As for Ethelhere who was thus freed from the Devills power, he presently arose in the sight of all, and casting himself at the Holy Bishops feet, he begged pardon for the injuries he had done him; and earnestly besought him that he might be baptized in the Name of Iesus Christ, in whose Name he had been delivered. In like manner many Pagans, and two Idoll Preists there present cast themselves at S. Swiberts feet, desiring to be instructed in the Mystery of the Christian Faith: Whom the Saint raised up and taught them how the Eternall Wisedom descended from Heaven to Earth that by his Blessed Death and Blood shed on the Altar of the Crosse he might restore life to mankind dead in sins. Thus he continued three whole weeks instructing and confirming them in the Faith, and yet baptised only two and forty of them,A. D. 706. besides woemen and children or both sexes.]
7. Two years he spent among them con|stantly preaching the faith whereby he con|verted great numbers, which with their own hands broke their Idols, and built Chur|ches, in which the Holy Bishop constituted Preists and Deacons to assist him. Many like|wise having been informed of the Miracles done by him came to see and hear him, of whom he converted and baptized not a few. He gained the affection and veneration of all cheifly by the tendernes of his love which he shewd to the poor and afflicted, whom he meekly visited in their necessities and infirmities, and these not only Chri|stians, whom he confirmed in their Faith, but Pagans also, who by his charitable assi|stance were withdrawn from their Supersti|tions and Idolatry. Notwithstanding how ater two years the Devill, by Gods permis|sion made good his threatning that he would shortly expell him out of that Pro|vince, shall hereafter be declared.


III. CHAP.III. CHA.

1.2. c. The death of S. Adelbert, and of S. erenfrid, Apostolick Missioners in Germany.
4.5. S Decumanus a Holy Hermite, mur|dred. A miracle after his death.

1. TO this year is assigned in our Marty|rologe the death of S. Adelbert, who, as hath been declared, was one of the twelve English Apostolick Missionners into Germany: Concerning whom in the Gallican Martyro|loge on the five and twentieth of Iune we read this Testimony:2. At Egmond in Holland is the same day ce|lebrated the Memory of S. Adelbert Confessour and Deacon:Martyrolog Gal. 29 Iun Who being descended from the Royall stock of the Kings of the Deiri in Brittany (for he was the Son of Edilbald, son of S. Oswald King and Martyr,) and by S. Willebrord consti|tuted Arch-deacon in the Provinces of the Bata|vi and Frisons, did notably promote the Christian Faith. For he was made choice of among the most excellent Disciples of that Holy Prelat, and sent into the utmost confines of that Diocese to preach the word of life to that pagan people in Knemaria where he gathered a plentifull harvest to our Lord. And after he had confirmed his New plan|tation in the Faith, he was called by Almighty God to receive his eternall reward. After his death he received Divine Testimonies of his cele|stiall Happines: For at Egmond, where he was buried in his own Oratory, he became illustrious by such Miracle as afforded great security and pro|tection to the inhabitants, and invited a wonderfull concourse of strangers to perform veneration

to him and to begg his intercession.
3. This same year likewise another associate in the same Mission S. Werenfrid a Preist recei|ved an eternall reward for his labours. His memory is also celebrated in the same Mar|tyrologe on the fourteenth of August with this Elogy At Elst in Gelderland is this day com|memorated the Deposition of S. Werenfrid an il|lustrious fellow-worker with Divine Grace.bid. 14. Aug. He was associated with S. Willebrord in the busines of Piety, and heaped up the gain of many soules to our Lord. Thus loaden with such precious spoiles, he was received into Glory. His body reposes honourably in a Collegiat Church consecrated to his honour and name in the foresaid town seated on the Rhene between Nimegen and the Sand. He is by others said to have dyed at a Town called Westervert, and afterwards to have been buried at Elst: And that he sowed the precious seed of the Gospel at Medemblick, Durstad, Elst and other towns in Batavian.
A. D. 706. Martyr. Angl. 27 ugust. Capgrav in vit. . De|cumani.4. The year following wee find comme|morated in our Martyrologe the Martyrdom of S. Decumanus, born of Noble parents in the South-Western parts of Wales, who forsa|king his countrey the more freely to give himself to Mortification and devotion, passed the river Severn upon a hurdle of rodds, and retired himself into a mountainous vast so|litude covered with shrubbs  briars where he spent his life in the repose of Contem|plation, till in the end he was slain by a mur|derer.
5. The place so described by the Authour of his life in Capgrave is seated in the Coun|ty of Somerset, where a Castle in after times called Dorostorum (now Dunstor) was built by the family of the Mohuns.Camd. in So|mersetsh. To this Castle, saith Camden, are adiacent two Villages, consecra|ted to two Saints, The one is called Caranton from a Brittish Saint Carantac: and the other Decom|bes from S. Decumanus, who out of Southwales ar|rived here, renouncing all wordly vanity, and by a murderer was peirced through with a sword: For which, saith he, he obtained in the esteem of the ignorant common people divine honour. Thus writes this Authour, skillfull indeed in pla|ces, but ignorant in the Faith of his Ance|stours, who never attributed Divine honour, but a Veneration infinitly inferiour thereto, to Gods Saints.
6 This veneration he probably obtained from a Miracle related by the Authour of his life in this manner:Ap. Capgrag. 16. Wee must not, saith he, leave buried in silence this prodigious wonder, how when his head was cutt from his body, the trunk raising it self up took the head, which it caried from the place where he was slain to a spring not far off, which flowed with a most Christallin water, in which with the hands it washed the blood away. Which spring in a reverent memory of the Saint is to this day called S. Decumanus his Spring. Near to which place the body together with the head was honourably buried by the neighbouring inha|bitants.


IV. CHAP.A. D. 707
IV. CHA.

1.2. c. A fearfull iudgment on a Soldier who delayed Confession and Pennance to the last.

1.A. D. 707. Westmonaster h. AMong the Gests of the year of Grace seaven hundred and seaven Mathew of Westminster relates the sad accident of a Soldier of the family of Kenred King of the Mercians, which deserves a place in this Hi|story to forewarn the Reader of the danger of delaying Confession and Pennance for sins. The Narration he receives from S. Beda, in whose words wee will deliver it, though he names not the precise year as the other does.
[2. In the days of Coenred (or Kenred) who succeded Edilred in the kingdom of the Mercians,Bed. l. 5. c. 14 there was a certain military Officer, who as he was for his industry and courage acceptable to the King, so on the contrary for the neglecting his soule he no lesse displeased him. And therefore he on admonished him to confesse and amend his wicked life, for fear a sudden death might prevent his repentance. But the unhappy man though thus frequently admonished by the King, little regarded his wholesom ad|vice, only he promised that he would take a time afterwards to doe pennance for his crimes. Not long after it hapned that a sicknes surprising him, he was forced to keep his bed, where he lay in great torme~ts. The King then, who loved him much, came to visit him, and earnestly renewd his exhorta|tions that at least then before he dyed, he would goe to confession and demand Pen|nance: but the man answered him, That he would not confesse his sins till he were reco|vered of his present disease, for fear his com|panions should upbraid him that the fear of death made him doe that, which in the time of health he had refused to doe. Now he thought this Answer argued a great courage in him, but as afterward appeared, he found that he had been miserably seduced by the Devill.
3. His sicknes then growing more violent and dangerous, the King once more came to visit and advise him: but assoon as he was entred the chamber, the sick man cryed out with alamentable voyce, What would you have, Sir? Why come you hither? It is not now in your power to give mee any comfort or assistance. The King replied, Doe not say so: I fear your sicknes distracts you. No Sir, (answerd he) I am not mad: but I have before mine eyes a foul and mi|serable conscience. What means this, said the King His reply was, Awhile since there entred into this chamber two beautifull young men, the one of which sate down at my head, and the other at my feet. And one of them brought forth a Book curiously garnished, but extreme little, which he

gave mee to read: and there I found written every good action which I had done in my life but alas, the number was very small, and the worth of them not at all considerable. When I had read it, they took it from mee without saying a word.
4. Then there presently came toward this house a vast army of wicked Spirits, horrible to be looked on, which both surrounded it without, and filled all the rooms within. Assoon as they were sate down, one of them, who by the more horrid dark|nes of his face and preference in sitting seemed to be the principall among them, brought forth like|wise a Book of a dreadfull shape, an enormous greatnes and insupportable weight: This Book he gave to one of his attendants, bidding him to bring it to mee that I might read it. Assoon as I had looked into it, I found there all the crimes which ever I had committed in deed, word and even the slightest thoughts, all this plainly descri|bed in hideous letters. Then he said to the two young men in white garments who sate there, why doe you stay here, since you manifestly see that this man is ours? They answered, It is true: take him, and make him partaker of your damnation.
5. Assoon as they had said this, they presently disappeared: and two of the most wicked among those Spirits of darknes arising, with forkes in their hands, smote mee, one on the head, and the other on the feet. And now they are to my most horrible torment creeping through my inward parts, and assoon as they shall meet together I shall dye, and be hurried by them into Hell. Thus pake this unhappy despairing man, and pre|sently after dyed: and now being for all eter|nity tormented, he practises repentance without any fruit, which he neglected to do in his life time, when a short Pennance might have procured him pardon.
6. Now, as S. Gregory writing of the like case, observes, wee are to iudge that this man had these apparitions, not for himself, to whom they proffited nothing, but for our good: that wee, knowing his unhappy end, may fear to delay the time of Pennance now allowed us, least being prevented by unloo|ked for death, wee may dye impenitent. And as touching the Book of a fashion so diffe|rent which he saw presented to him by the good and by the evill Spirits, this was done by Divine dispensation to putt us in mind that our deeds and even our thoughts doe not vanish into aire, but are reserved to the exa|mination of the Supreme Iudge, and shall be presented to our view in the last day either by our good or evill Angells And whereas in this Vision the Angells brought forth a white Book, and afterward the Devills, a Black one, the former a very small one, and the latter one of an enormous bignes: that signified that in his youth e had done some few good actions, all which notwithstanding had been obscured by the sins of his riper age. But on the contrary, those who in their ripe age doe endeavour to hide from the eyes of God the sins committed in their child|hood, may be associated to those concerning whom the Psalmist saith, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,  whose sins are covered. This Story, (saith S. Beda) as I received it from the Venerable Prelat Pecthelm, I thought fitt simply to commit to writing for the spiri|tuall benefit of those who shall read or heare it.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP

1.2. c. S Egwin Bishop of Worcester: is by calumny eiected: goes in Pennance to Rome: and is miraculously absolved.
8 9. c At his return upon an apparition of our Blessed Lady he builds the Monastery of Evesham.

1. IN the occurrents of the year of Grace six hundred ninety three,Godvvin in Ep. Worcest. Capgrav. in Egvvino Malmb. de Pontif l, 4. we have declared how upon the death of Ostfor Bishop of Worce|ster, there succeeded him in that See Egwin, a man in high esteem for his Sanctity, born in the same Province of a Princely extraction: who in his tender age, bing prevented by Divine Grace, conceived an aversion from se|cular pomps and pleasures, and consecrated himself to the service of God in an Ecclesiasti|call state: In the which having regularly pas|sed the inferiour degrees, he was exalted to Preist-hood: and afterwards, that See being va|cant, he was by the earnest petition both of the Laity and Clergy demanded for their Pa|stour and Bishop: Which charge notwithstan|ding he very unwillingly, and not without the forcible perswasions of King Coenred at last accepted.
2. But in the execution of this sublime Office he incurred the generall disfavour of that Province, insomuch as he was forced to forsake his countrey: God so disposing it for the tryall of his piety, and to render him more illustrious in his Church. That which made him obnoxious to the displeasure of worldly men was his zeale and constancy in reproving vice, and particularly in opposing himself to many unlawfull customes which that people, lately converted to Christianity, would not be perswaded to forsake, cer|tain heathenish Superstitions, incestuous ma|riages, and other noxious errours to which they had been accustomed.
3. Persons who are sick of such incurable diseases ordinarily become more enraged by Physick: whereupon these men not only refu|sed all correction and reformatio~, but com|bined seditiously to raise a fuious persecu|tion against the Holy Bishop, and to drive vio|lently out of the Province. To effect which, they spread abroad many calumnious accu|sations against him, by which they induced not only the vertuous King Coenred but the Holy Arch-bishop Brithwald also to declare an enmity against him.
A. D. 7084. The holy man assured of his own innoce~ce as to any of the crimes layd to his charge, yet behaved himself as if he had been guilty: for he undertook a laborious and painfull Pilgrimage to Rome, thereby to satisfy for the offences of his people, and withall, as some Ancient Authours have written, to doe a rigorous Pennance for some faults for|merly committed in his youth. And to ren|der his Pilgrimage more painfull, he in the presence of a great multitude bound about his leggs certain iron-chains, and cast the key which locked them together, into the River of Avon, publickly protesting that he would never esteem himself secure of the pardon of his sins, till either the key were re|stored to him, or the chains unloosed by a power Supernaturall. Withall he vowed, that if God would vouchsafe to make his iourney prosperous, he would build a Church to his honour.
5. Having performed this voyage with great incommodity and painfullnes, he at last arrived at Rome, where whilst he was per|forming his devotions in the Church of Saint Peter, his servants going to the rivers side to buy provision for their Master, they found in a fishes belly the key which had formerly locked the chains about his leggs, which being brought to him, he in the presence of a great multitude unlocked the said chaines, perceiving that such was the Divine Will and mercy. An event so miraculous was imme|diatly spread through the whole Citty inso|much as he who before was looked upon as a miserable enormous sinner, was afterward honoured as a Saint and servant of God highly favoured. Thus writes the Authour of his life in Capgrave: Whereas William of Malmsbury relates, that it was in his return as he passed the Sea between France and Brittany that the Key was found in a fishes belly ta|ken by the Marriners.
6. Notwithstanding this variety as to the circumstances of this miracle, certain it is that S. Egwin at his return recovered with advantage King Coenreds esteem, and also great veneration among the people for his Sanctity,A. D. 708. the fame whereof was largely spread in the world.
7. Now to what year precisely we ought to ascribe this his first iourney to Rome (for he undertook afterwards a second voyage thither) not any Ancient Writers doe afford us sufficient Light to determine But it seems to have been in the year of Grace seaven hundred and eight that he built the famous Monastery of Evesham in the Province of Wor|cester: for as himself declares in a Writing pre|served by the Authour of his life in Capgrave, the said Monastery was founded a little time before the death of the Holy Bishop Aldelm, which hapned the year following.
Ap. Capgrav. in vit. S. Egvvin.8. The same Authour from Brithwald a Monk of Glastonbury relates a wonderfull apparition which occasioned the building of the said Monastery: In those days, says he, there was in the territory of Worcester a certain place wholly uncultivated, and almost unpassable by reason of thorns and bryars thick growing there: This place formerly called Homme, was in succee|ding times named Evesham for the reason which I will now declare. S. Egwin had appointed four Shepheards to feed their flocks about the said wood for the sustenance of his Monks. Now on a certain day it hapned that one of the said Shep|heards, named Eoves, entring deeply into the midst of the wood, there appeared before him a certain most glorious Virgin, attended by two others, her splendour darkned that of the Sun it self, and her beauty incomparably exceeded al wordly features: She held in her hand a book out of which she with the other two Virgins, sung hym|nes of praise to God. The poore man dazeled with this splendour upon which he durst not fix his eyes, stood awhile silent and trembling, and presently after in great fear retired home, and repairing to the Bishop acquainted him with this vision.
9. The Holy Bishop considering the matter ad|visedly with himself, on a certain day after he had fasted and prayed, taking three companions with him, went toward the place described by the Shepheard, walking all the way bare-foot praying and singing Psalms: And commanding his atten|dants to step at a distance, he himself passed fur|ther into the wood, and being come to the place, be fell prostrate on the ground, where with many sighs and teares he remained a good space implo|ring a mercifull regard from our Lord. After which he rose up from prayer, and immediatly there appeared to him the three Virgins, with the same maiesty and glory as before: among whom she who stood in the midst, seemed more tall and res|plendent then the othe, in pure whitenes infi|nitly excelling lillies, and in freshnes roses, and from her proceeded a celestiall and inestimable odour: She held in her hand a Book, together with a golden Crosse casting forth bright beames of light.
10. Now whilst he thought within himself that surely this was the Mother of our Lord, the said glorious Virgin as it were approving such his in|ward pious cogitation, stretching forth the said Crosse gave him a Benediction with it, and pre|sently with that farewell disappeared. The Holy man with great ioy rendring thanks to God for this favour, understood thereby that it was Gods will that the same place should be consecrated to his service, and dedicated to the honour of the Blessed Virgin Mother of our Lord. For during his former afflictions and persecutions he had made a vow, that if God would vouchsafe to give a prosperous end to his desires, he would build a Church to his service. Hereupon without delay be cleansed the place, began the work, and shortly brought it to perfection. The fidelity of this Narration is ve|rified by a writing or Charter of S. Egwin himself which shall shortly be produced.



A. D. 709
VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. Two Kings, Coenred and Offa, un|dertake a Pilgrimage to Rome: where they dye.
7.8. c. S. Egwin obtains great Priviledges to his Monastery of Evesham from Pope Constantin.

1. TO this miraculous vision of S. Egwin we may in part impte the devout pilgmage o King Coenred, or Kenred King of the Mercians to Rome, to visit the Sacred Mo|numents of the Apostles: In which Pilgri|mage he was also attended by the same Saint Egwin. Other encouragements thereto like|wise he might have from the example of his Predecessour King Ethelred, whose Sanctity was at this time in high esteem. Moreover the sad and horrible death of his impeni|tent servant, mentioned before, probably incited him not to delay the securing of his future everlasting condition: for that might teach him that sins are with ease com|mitted, but with great difficulty cleansed away. Which of these, or whether all these Motives concurred to induce this devout King to free himself from those encom|brances with which a Crown was attended, which made the way to heaven far more dangerous and painfull, it is uncertain But certain it is that at this time, This pious King, as Saint Beda saith,Bed. l. 5. c. 20 having for the space of four or ive years with great dignity and renown go|verned the Kingdom of the Mercians, with far greater dignity and Noblenes relinquished that Scepter, to become an humble suppliant at the Sepulchers of the glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. And by the advice of S. Egwin he con|stituted his Successour in the Kingdom Coenred the son of Ethelred, from whom himself had received the Crown.
2. How much more efficacious good Ex|amples are then Words, was at this time also in an eminent manner declared to the world. For the generous Act of King Ethel|red, who out of Love to Christ exchanged his Purple into an humble Habit of Religion, was so far not only imitated by his Succes|sour King Coenred, but also by Offa the pious King of the East-Saxons, that he also at this very time resolved in his company to quitt his Throne after a raign of eight years, o un|dertake a tedious iourney, that he might dye as it were in the Society of the same Blessed Apostles.
3. We have already declared how in the beginning of his Raign he demanded for his wie, Kineswida daughter of Penda King of the Mercians, a Lady adorned with all the em|bellishmets of Nature and Grace. This pro|position was readily accepted by her freinds, who without consulting her, confidently promised him a successe to his desires: for they doubted not but she would esteem it a condition to be accepted with willingnes and ioy.
4. But the devout Virgins ambition lay a quite different way. She had lately seen her Sister Kineburga descend from a Royall Throne into a Monastery: and from thence by the Ministery of Angells called to their So|ciety in Heaven.Sup. l. 20. c. 11. Such a spectacle raised her thoughts and desires above the earth: and notwithstanding the earnest opposition of her freinds, those desires were effected by the intercession of the Quuen of Virgins to whom she had recourse, as hath been alrea|dy related.
6. It is not to be doubted but King Offa,A. D. 709. though perhaps afflicted with the refusall, yet by her example learnt to disesteem worldly pompes, which he saw she trodd under her feet: And thereupon would not neglect the present opportunity to accom|pany his neighbour King Kenred in his de|vout Pilgrimage to Rome.
6. These two devout Kings together with Saint Egwin Bishop of Worcester arrived there the year following, Pope Constantin then sit|ting in S. Peters chair. Where having per|formed their publick Devotions, each of them receiving the Monasticall Tonsure, en|ded their dayes in an humble Religious Pro|fession.
7. As for the Holy Bishop Egwin, the Motive of his iourney thither, was not only to attend these pious Princes, but also to obtain from the See Apostolick a Confirmation and Priviledges for his new ere|cted Monastery at Evesham: Which by the intercession of the two Kings he easily and effectually obtained.
8 Moreover to the endowing of the said Monastery King Kenred and Offa, before their quitting the world, munificently con|tributed severall Mannors and villages con|taining sixty six Manses, the names of which are contained in a Charter yet extant made by the same Kings, the Title whereof is,Ex Regist. de vesham in B blith. Cot|ton Ibdem vid. Monast. vo|lu 2.. p. 145. 46. A Charter of Kenred and Offa Kings, con|cerning the Lands in which the Blessed Virgin Mary is said to have appeared to Bishop Egwin, together with many other possessions conferred on the Monastery of Evesham, all which were con|firmed by Pope Constantin in the Church of La|teran.To the same effect there is likewise still remaining another Charter of Bishop Eg|win in which he relates the substance of the forementioned Story concerning the appearing of our Blessed Lady to him: and likewise setts down the names of the severall Lordships and villages given to the said Monastery by the Kings Ethelred and Kenred, as likewise by a young Noble Gen|tleman called Atheric, and a Venerable Preist named Walterns: So that in a short time there

were conferred on his Monastery one hundred and twenty Manses. All which possessions, saith he, were by Apostolick authorities and priviledges, and by Regall Edicts exempted from all exactions by any power whatsoever: to the end that the Monks serving God there according to the Rule of S. BENEDICT may passe their lives in quiet|nes without any disturbance.
6. Pope Constantin being a Witnes of these Kings munificence,Id. ib. and having been in|formed of the wonderfully gracious Visita|tion by which our Blessed Lady had vouch|safed to dignify the Province of the Mercians, admonished the Holy Arch-bishop Brithwald to publish the great wonders of our Lord, and for that purpose to assemble a Synod of the whole Kingdom, in which he should in the name of the sayd Pope denunciate to all Princes, Nobles, Bishops and other Ecclesiasticks the Confirmation which he had given to the endowments of the said Monastery made by the said Kings, together with many Pri|viledges and Exemptions by himselfe bestowd upon it, to the end, saith he, that there should be restored a Congregation of Monks, who should incessantly serve our Lord according to the Rule of the glorious S. Benedict, which Institut as yet is rarely observed in those parts. Moreover he enioyned him and his Successours with the assent of Egwin Bishop of that Diocese to take into their care and protection the said Monastery, and in case any Tyrants or oppres|sours should invade the rights or posses|sions of it, to smite them with the rodd of Excommunication.
10. S. Egwin being returned with these Charters and Letters, the Arch-bishop accor|dingly assembled a Synod at a place named Aln-cester, so called by reason of its situation on the banks of the River Alne: it being a place commodious for the present purpose, by reason of its vicinity to Evesham, from which it was distant about seaven miles: it was also a remarkable place, because there was a Palace of the Kings of the Mercians. And it is observed in the Life of Saint Egwin, that this was the place where he ordinarily preached and exhorted the people.
11. The onely busines in this Synod of Alne, was the reading and confirming the ayd Charters and Priviledges: Which being one, the said Arch-bishop sent Saint Wilfrid Arch-bishop of York, who was there present, o Evesham, to consecrate the place.


VII. CHAP.VII. CHA.

1.2. c. The death of S. Wilfrid: with his preparation thereto.
8.9. c. S. Acca succeeds him in the See of Hagulstad.

1. THIS was the last publick action that we read performed by S. Wilfrid. For now were finished the four years, ac|cording to a promise of the Holy Archangel S. Michael, added to his life, after his great sicknes in France. The which sicknes retur|ning presently after this Synod, he prepared himself for his last hower: The manner of which preparation is thus described by Wil|liam of Malmsbury:
[2. S. Wilfrid, saith he, having for the space of four years enioyd an undisturbed tran|quillity,Malmsb.  Pon. l. 3. according to the promise of the Archangel Michael, was again assaulted with the same infirmity which formerly had sei|sed on him at Meaux (Meldis) in France: and now it was so violent, that it suddenly de|prived him both of his senses and speech. Whereupon his Disciples who assisted him made their prayers unto God that he might at least recover his speech, to the end he might dispose his affairs, then not well sett|led. After which Prayer his speech was im|mediatly restored to him, and a few days after he recovered likewise so much strength that he was enabled to visit all the Monaste|ries and other places depending on him. Thus being, by his frequent sicknesses, ad|monished that death approached, he took care to accomplish those good designs in the administration of which he formerly had not been sufficiently diligent.
3. He ordained Abbots and Superiours over all his Monasteries: and as touching his Treasures, he divided them into four parts: Of which one portion, and that was the greatest, he bequeathed to the Roman Church, by whose authority he had been exempted from all injuries, and restored to his ho|nours: And this part he intended himself to present, notwithstanding his great age, if he had not been prevented by death. A se|cond part he gave to the poor. A third he delegated to the Superiours of his Monasteries, to the end that therby they might be enabled to purchase the freindship and favour of Great men,  consequently secure themsel|ves from the violence of their adversaries. The fourth part he bestowed on those who had been his attendants and companions in his travells, and who as yet had not received possessions for their Sustenance.
4. Having performed these things, he took leave of his Disciples at Rippon, whom

he especially loved, and in other parts of the Northumbers, and took a iourney to a con|ference with Ceolred King of the Mercians, to which he was invited (namely to the fore|mentioned Synod, and consecration of the Monastery of Evesham:) And being there he provided carefully for the security  peace of his Monasteries in that Region, which through the indulgence of Princes, he had founded in great number.
5. After he had made a progresse through them all, and procured great advantages to them, in which care he spent a year and a half, immediatly after he was by a renewing of his infirmity again admonished of his approaching death. This hapned to him when he was in the Isle Inundule (or as Saint Beda calls it, the Province of Vndule, a region in Northamptonshire at this day called Oundale, corruply (saith Camden) for Avondale, or the Vale of Avon.) Perceiving then that his last hower was come, he made a short exhorta|tion to his Disciples and children, for his weaknes would not permit him to speak much, and having bestowed on them, his Be|nediction, he, for ought appeard, without any pain at all finished his life, whilst the Monks there present reciting the Psalier were come to those words of the Psalm, Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be created, c. He dyed on the fourth day before the Ides of October, saith S. Beda: and in the seaventy sixth year of his age, having been Bishop the space of forty six years.
6. He was a man who for iustice sake had been exposed to many dangers, and who in the places to which he was banished did not spend the time unproffitably, but was very diligent in erecting Monasteries, and founding Bishopricks. He was naturally qua|lified so as easily to ingratiate himself with Stranger Princes in whose countreys he lived an exile: and on the other side by reason of his inflexible love to iustice he was exposed to the hatred of his Naturall Princes. No man ever lest so many Monasteries behind him, which he distributed to many Successours. From the Monastery of Oundalo where he dyed, and over which he had appointed a certain, Abbott called Cudbald, his Body was caried to Rippon, where it was buried with great ho|nour. These wonders attended his death:
7. In the hour of his expiration there was heard a sweet melody of birds, and clapping of their wings as if they were flying up to heaven, but not one bird could be seen. And the same thing hapning severall times during the solemne Procession when his body was transported, certain devout and prudent persons then present inter|preted it to be an assembly of Angells, which according as had been promised him, were come to conduct his soule to heaven. For, as hath been already declared out of Saint Beda, the Archangell Michael appearing to him in France, said to him these words, I doe as|sure thee that for the present thou shalt recover from this sicknes. But be prepared, for after four years I will visit thee again.Bed. l. 5. cap. 20. His Body was buried in the Church of the Blessed Apostle Saint Peter in Inrhypum (Rippon,) neer the Altar toward the south; and on his Tomb was inscribed an Epitaph recorded by the same Saint Beda; and importing, how he had founded the same Church and richly adorned it: how he had erected there a rich Crosse of silver: how he had left there the four Gospells written in Letters of gold, enclosed likewise in a golden case: How he had educed his countrey to the Catholick observation of Easter: How he had founded great numbers of Monasteries, instructing them in the an|cient Rules of the Holy Fathers: And lastly how during the space of forty five years in which he exercised the Episcopall charge, he having been exposed to many dangers both at home and abroad, at last attained to his eternall happy rest in our Lord.Martyrolog. Angl. 2. Octob. His Memory is celebrated among the Saints by the Church on the twelfth of October, the day on which he dyed. How his Sacred Relicks were trans|lated from Rippon to Canterbury two hundred and thirty years after his death, we shall in due place declare.Bed l. 5. c. 21.
8. His Successour in the See of Hagulstad (or Hexham) saith Saint Beda, was Acca, formerly one of his Preists: a man of admi|rable magnificence: for having founded a Church to the honour of Saint Andrew the Apostle, he richly adorned it, and having gathered many Relicks of the Apostles and Martyrs, he raised therein severall Altars in which he placed the said Relicks. Moreover he built in the same a most Noble Library, furnished with a vast number of volumes He provided also for his Church all manner of holy vessels, Lamps and other ornaments. And for a more solemne performance of the Divine Office he sent for out of Kent a famous Cantour named Maban, who had learnt Ecclesiasticall modulation of the Suc|cessours of Saint Gregory there: Him he de|tained the space of twelve years to instruct his Monks both in such Song as they either had never learnt, or by disuse had forgot|ten.
9. The devout Bishop Acca also himself was very skilfull in Church-song, and more|over learned in Holy Scriptures, untainted in his Confession of the Catholick Faith, and perfectly versed in Ecclesiasticall Discipline. For from his infancy he had been brought up among the Clergy of the Holy Bishop Bosa, Bishop of York: And afterward aspiring to Religious Perfection, he adioynd himself to Saint Wilfrid, in whose attendance he con|tinued to his death. Whith him also he went to Rome, where he learnt many things pertaining to Ecclesiasticall institu|tion, which he could not have learnt at home.]
10. Wee find in Saint Beda, that Saint Acca, before his exaltation to the Episcopall

degree, had been an Abbot: for under that title there is an Epistle directed to him,d in Prefat. ad Hexame|ron. de|claring how by his instinct and order Saint Beda had written his Treatise called Hexa|meron, touching the Creation of the world. And how after he was made Bishop, he wrote oftimes to the same Saint Beda, and exhorted him to write his Commentaries on Saint Luke, c. shall be declared here|after.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Death of S. Aldelm Bishop of Shirborn.
5.6. c. Elogies given to him: even by Pro|testants.
8.9. c. Forther succeeds him: To whom an Epistle from Arch-bishop Brith|wald.

1 THE same year in which Saint Wilfrid dyed, our Island lost another Star like|wise of the first magnitude, the Holy and most learned Bishop Saint Aldelm, Bishop of Shirborn: concerning whom frequent men|tion hath been already made.
Ap. Capgra|vium in S. Aldelmo.2. As touching his death, thus writes the Auhour of his life in Capgrave: S. Aldelm in a good old age, full of vertues and Sanctity de|parted to our Lord on the eighth day before the Calends of Iune, in the seaven hundred and ninth year after our Lords Incarnation, and the fifth year after he had been promoted to the Epi|scopall charge, and the thirty fourth after his being instituted Abbot. He was buried in his Monastery of Meldun (or Malmsbury) with great honour.
3. His death was by divine revelation fore|known to Saint Egwin, who in a certain Treatise thus writes, Two years after the foundation of the Monastery of Evesham the Holy Bishop Aldelm departed to our Lord: whith being made known to mee by revelation, I called together she Reli|gious Brethren to whom I declared the decease of that Venerable Father: and presently after with great speed I took my iourney to the place where his Sacred Body reposed, above fifty miles distant from his Monastery of Malmsbury: Whither I con|ducted the same, and there buried it very honou|rably. Moreover I gave command, that in every place in which the said Body dayly rested during the Procession, there should be erected Sacred Crosses. All which Crosses doe remain to this day, neither hath any one of them felt any injury by time. One of the said Crosses is yet to be seen in the Cloister of that Monastery.
4. Two hundred and forty years after his death, to witt, in the year of Grace nine hundred forty nine (saith the foresaid Authour) his Sacred Body was taken up out of his Tomb and placed with great honour in a Shrine. His Memory is yealy celebrated by the Church on the An|niversary day of his death, which was the twenty fifth of May.Martyrolog. Rom. 25. Maij
5. This glorious Bishop is never mentio|ned by any of our ancient Historians with|out high praises: Yea even our late Protestant Writers are very large in his commendations. Bale,Bale Cent. 1. cap. 83. though ordinarily rude and uncivill towards Catholicks, yet of S. Aldelm he testi|fies that he was so diligently studious in all lear|ning, Divine and Humane, that he far exceeded all the Ecclesiasticall Writers of his time. And that both in verse and prose he was wonderfully learned, both for Latin and Greek: for his witt, sharp: and for his stile, elegant. He happily depar|ted to our Lord in the year of his Incarnation seaven hundred and nine. Camden likewise thus writes of him: He is truly worthy that his Memory should for ever flourish, not only in re|gard of his Sanctity, but learning also. He was the first of the English Nation who wrote in the puri|ty of the Latin tongue: and the first who taught the English to compose both verse and prose as well in the Greek as Latin stile. This Aldelm after he was dead was reclamed by the Great King Athel|stan as his Tutelar Saint. The like Elogies doe Bishop Godwin, D. Iames and the Centuriators of Magdeburg make of him.
6. Yet after all this, there is scarce one Point in which they condemne the Roman Church, as an Errour iustifying their Separation from it, but was held by him. And particularly touching the Supreme Vniversall authority of the Pope,Vid. sup. l. c in the heretofore mentioned Epistle of his to Gerontius King of Cornwall,Aldelm Ep. ad Gre. u~ Regem. he in the name of the whole English Synod writes: That S. Peter merited by a happy and peculiar Priviledge to receive from our Lord the Monar|chicall Power of loosing sins both in heaven and Earth. Moreover, That the foundation of the Church, and bullwark of Faith was placed princi|pally on Christ,  consequently on Pee, c. And that Christ who is Truth it self did thus establish on Peter the Priviledge over the Church, Thou art Peter, and on this Rock I will build my Church. Yea Flacius Illyricus writes that S. Aldelm maintained,Illyr. l. 7. Te|stium p. 611. That the Confession of the true Faith, wholesome Doctrine and a life otherwise unreprocheable would nothing proffit him who li|ved in separation from the Vnity of the Catholick Roman Church. This is the Faith taught then in the English Church: and the Teachers of this Faith the Protestants, now esteem Saints: Yet neither their Sanctity nor learning could se|cure their Lives from the present sanguinary Laws now in force.
7. Some Writers affirm that S. Aldelm was a Scott: but his name, meerly Saxon, does dis|prove them, which signifies an ancient Helmet:Capgrav in S. Aldelm. Godvvin in Epise. Saisb Tvvin. in Hol. Acad. Oxon. l. 2. sct. 110. Malmsb de Reg. l. 2. And generally our Historians ac|knowledge him to have been of the English-Saxon progeny. Capgrave, B. Godwin and others affirm that he was Brothers son to King Ina. Brian Twine says he was son to King Ina himself: And William of Malmsbury, that he was from is ancient Progenitours nearly allied in blood to King Ethelstan.
8. There succeeded him in the Episcopall See of Shirborn a devout Preist, named Forther, who by the testmony of Saint Beda, his con|temporaney, is described to have been a man well versed in the study of Divine Scrip|tures. Little more is extant concerning him in our Ecclesiasticall Monuments: Onely Bi|shop Godwin relates of him that almost thirty years after this he attended a Queen of the West-Saxons in her pilgrimage to Rome.
9. Probably this is the same person to whom Brithwald at this time Archbishop of Canterbury wrote an Epistle extant among those of Saint Boniface the Apostle of Ger|many,Bonifac. Ep. 58. with this Inscription, To the most Reve|rend and most Holy our Fellow-Bishop Fortherey, Berthwald a Servant of the Servants of our Lord, sendeth health in our Lord. The Epistle it self, because it gives some Light to the practise of that age, wee will here adioyn as fol|loweth:Ibidem.10. Since the request which in your presence I made to the Venerable Abbot Beorwald took no effect, which was that he would sett at liberty a young captive mayd, whose kinred dwell near to this Citty: being importuned by them I thought fitt to direct once more these Letters to you by a Brother of the same mayd, whose name is Eppa: Hereby therefore I doe earnestly entreat you that you would by all means obtain from the foresaid Abbot that he would from this bearers hands ac|cept three hundred shillings (solidos) for the ransome of the sayd young mayd, and consign her into his hands to be brought hither to the end she may spend the rest of her age in ioyfull freedome among her freinds. This affaire if you will bring to good effect, you will not fayle to receive a good reward from God, and many thanks from mee. Be|sides this, I conceive that our Brother Beorwald receiving this money will be no looser. I ought to have made my first request, that you would be mindfull of mee in your dayly Prayers. Our Lord Iesus Christ preserve your Reverence in health many years.
11. The slavery of this young mayd men|tioned here denotes the ancient custome of the Saxons, continued a long time after by the Normans, of buying slaves and annexing them to certain Mannors or Lands, which were therefore called Villains: which with|out a ransome could not be restored to free|dome.
12. As for Beorwald, mentioned in this Let|ter, he was probably Abbot of Glastonbury, who succeded Hemgisle, in the year of Grace seaven hundred and five: as the Antiquities of that Monastery declare. And he it was who wrote the life of the Holy Bishop Egwin, and not, as some mistakingly affirm, Brithwald Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who sate above four and twenty years in that See before S. Egwin died.


IX. CHAP.IX. CHA.

1.2. c. The Martyrdom of S. Indractus an Irish Prince: his murder miraculous|ly discovered.

1. ABout this time hapned the Martyrdom of a son of a certain Irish King, who returning from a Pilgrimage to Rome by Brit|tany, in his way from Glastonbury towards Ireland, was together with seaven of his companions barbarously murdred by rob|bers. His name was Indractus, and his Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the fifth of February.Maryrolog. Angl. 5. Febr. Ap. Capgrav. in S. Indract.
2. Concerning him thus writes the Au+thour of his life in Capgrave,[After that Saint Patrick had converted the Irish Nation to the Faith of Christ by many signs and wonders, he passed over the Sea thence into Brittany, and at Glastonbury he happily ended his days in a good old age. For this cause many de|vout persons of Ireland have accustomed in devotion to visit the sayd Monastery. Now there was in Ireland the son of a certain King, his name was Indractus, a young man well imbued with learning, adorned with vertues, and favoured both by God and man. This young Prince aspiring only to heaven|ly ioyes, for a more secure obtaining them resolved to despise, yea to fly from all the snares of Princely palaces and delicacies. Ta|king therefore with him nine companions, together with his Sister named Dominica (our Martyrologe calls her Drusa) he in devo|tion undertook a pilgrimage to Rome. Ha|ving therefore a prosperous passage by Sea, he arrived at a Haven in Brittany, named Tamerunt: And there this devout assembly built an Oratory, and spent a long space of time in the service of God and mortification. At length leaving his Sister there, he with his other Companions pursued their pil|grimage to Rome.
As for the frequent Miracles wrought by the Holy man, in Brittany or in his iourney, I omitt them: the curious Reader may have recourse for them to the Authour: who thus prosecutes his Story:3. Returning after some time from Rome into Brittany,Idem. ibid. he had a resolution to goe to Glastonbury, and there at the Monument of Saint Patrick to pour forth his Prayers to God. Now at that time Inas King of the West-Saxons held his Court neer that place in a town called Pedret: in the villages round a|bout which many of his Servants and atten|dants were dispersed. Among whom there was a certain son of iniquity named Hona. This man curiously observing Indractus and his companions in their way from Glastonbury,

that their baggs and purses were well stuffed with money.
Whereupon the Minister of Satan with his complices following them, over|took them at a Village named Shapwick, and violently breaking into the house while they were sleeping, there murdred them all. Which ha|ving done, they took their Sacred Bodies, and cast them into a deep pitt, to the end no man might find them.
4. Now it fortuned that King Inas (whose abode was near that place) on a certain night being afflicted with great pain in his bowells, to assage the same, went abroad into the open aire, and looking towards heaven, he saw a pil|lar as it were of fire, issuing out of the place in which the sacred bodies were hidden, the splen|dour of which was always in his eyes which way soever he turned them. The same spectacle offred it self to him three nights consequently, where|upon taking some of his Courtiers with him, he went to the place, and having found the bodies of the holy Martyrs, he took care that they should be buried at Glastonbury with great honour. The Body of S. Indractus was placed on the left side of the Altar, opposite to the Monument of S. Patrick, and his companions under the pave|ment round about. As for the Murderers, they having the impudence to be present at the bu|riall, were visibly seysed on by Devills, and so horribly tormented, that they tore their own flesh with ther teeth, and shortly after with ter|rible roarings miserably ended their lives.
5. Thus writes the sayd Authour: a sum|mary of which relation may be read in Wil|liam of Malmsbury, collected out of the An|tiquities of the Church or Glastonbury. The village where they were murdred still keeps the same name, Shapwick, and it is seated near unto Glastonbury.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. Geruntius King of Cornwall over|come by King Ina.
5.6 The Picts overcome by the Northum|bers.

1. THE year of Grace seaven hundred and ten was spent in Brittany in great preparations and turmoyles of warr:A. D. 710. For one way the Picts, and another the Brittains invaded the Saxons and English, endeavou|ring to recover some part of their former losses.
2. Gerontius King of the Brittains in Corn|wall, was the first who brought his army into the feild, against Inas King of the West-Saxons. This is the same Gerontius, to whom S. Aldelm wrote the Epistle before cited, in which he endeavoured to quality the inve|terate rancour still burning in the hearts, es|pecially of the Brittish Clergy, against the Sa|xons, though now Christians and their Bre|thren.A. D. 710.
3. What was the particular ground of their quarrell, not any of our Historians doe declare. It is probable that Gerontius, seeing King Inas so employed in works of piety, building of Churches and settling affairs both of State and Religion, imagined that by a sudden invasion finding him unprepared, he might gain some considerable advantage against him. But he found himself deceived, for King Inas shewd himself as courageous in warr, as devout in peace.
4. The combat fought between them, and the time of that combat is thus descri|bed breifly by Huntingdon:Hunting. l 4. The next year after the death of S. Wilfrid, saith he, King Ina and his kinsman Nun fought against Gerente King of Wales. In the beginning of which combat Hige|bald a Saxon Duke was slain. But afterward Ge|rente with his army and associates was compelled to fly, leaving their arms and other spoiles to their pursuers.
5. At the same time, saith the same Au|thour, Berfrid,Id. ib. who was Consul, or Generall of the Kingdom of the Northumbers, resisted and quelled the Pride of the Picts. That which be|gott and nourished this pride in them was the good successe which twelve years before this they had against Brthric, or Berthred Captain of the Northumbers, who desiring to avenge the death of his Master King Egfrid slain by them,Wstmin. ad A. D. 700 made an hostile invasion upon their countrey: but as his Lord, upon whom the curses of the Irish, cruelly treated by him, lay heavy, fell by the swords of the Picts: so did Brithric also, saith Mathew of Westminster, who yet places this story two years too late: which mistake in Chronology is usuall with him. Since that time till this present year no mention is made of any debates between those two Nations, which it seems the Picts attributed to the weaknes of the Northumbers, and thereupon now attempted an invasion of their countrey.
6. But they found not the same successe as before,Hunting. l. 4. for Berthfrid Captain of the Nor|thumbers coming to a battell with them between Here and Cere, putt them to flight, and slew great multitudes of the Picts, so avenging the death both of King Egfrid and his Consul Bri|thric.



XI. CHA.XI. CHAP.

1.2. Death of Saint Adrian Abbot of Canterbury.
3. His Successour Albinus: different from Alcuinus.

Bed. l. 5. c. 21.1. THE same year, saith S. Beda, which was the fifth of the Raign of Osred King of the Northumbers, the most reverend Father Adrian Abbot (of the Monastery of S. Augustin in Can|terbury) dyed, and was buried in his Monastery. He was a faithfull assistant in preaching the Word of God with Theodore Arch-bishop of Happy Me|mory. This was the one and fortieth year since he had been appointed by Pope Vitalian to attend Theodore, and the nine and thirtieth since he ar|rived in Brittany. Among other proofs of the learning and great endowments of this holy Ab|bot, as likewise of S. Theodore, this is one, that Al|binus his Disciple, who succeeded him in the go|vernment of the sayd Monastery, was by his care so perfectly instituted in learning and the study of Holy Scriptures, that he had more then an ordi|nary skill in the Greek tongue, and for the Latin, he was as perfect in it, as in his Native language.
Matyr. Angl 9 Ianuar.2. Our Island preserves a gratefull memo|ry of this holy Abbot Adrian, for in our Martyrologe his name is recorded among the Saints, and anniversarily recited on the ninth of Ianuary. It was not by his learning that he purchased this honour: for, as the Au|thour of his life in Capgrave testifies, his San|ctity was testified by many miracles.
3. As touching his Successour Albinus, there is a great controversy among our Mo|dern Historians whether he was the same with Flaccus, sirnamed Albinus or Alcuinus, the Instructour of the Emperour Charlemagne, and founder of the Vniversity of Paris. But the proofs demonstrating that they were different persons seem unanswerable. For this Elder Albinus was of Canterbury; the other of York. This was the Disciple of his Predecessour Adrian and the Holy Arch-bi|shop Theodore; The other had for his Masters Hechbert Arch-bishop of York, a Disciple of S. Beda, and Egbert his Successour: This was an Abbot: the other only a Priour during his abode in Brittany: Lastly This Albinus dyed and was buried at Canterbury in the year of Grace seaven hundred thirty two,Weaver Mon. G Thorn in Chron. An. l. 32. as Weaver in his Monuments testifies, as likewise our an|cient Chronicler William Thorn; but the youn|ger Albinus or Alcuinus dyed and was bu|ried at Cormorac in France in the year of Grace eight hundred and four, or rather eight hundred and nine. So that a whole age in|tervened between them.


XII. CHAP.A. D. 711.
XII. CH.

i.2.3. An Episcopall See established among the South-Saxons at Selsey.

1. IT hath been declared in the occurrents of the year of Grace six hundred eighty one, how S. Wilfrid being driven from York, and retiring into the Kingdom of the South-Saxons, did in a wonderfull manner convert them to the Faith of Christ. After which he received from their King the Isle of Selsey for a quiet and setled habitation. Which Isle, saith Malmsbury, he filld with Monks,  with|all transmitted it to posterity dignifyed with an Episcopall See. Notwithstanding hi|therto not any one since his departure from thence, had succeeded him in that Bishoprick, but the Churches there were governed by the Bishop of Winchester. The first therefore who sate in that peculiar See after S. Wilfrid was Eadbert: concerning whom Mathew of West|minster thus writes:2. In the year of Grace seaven hundred  eleaven a Synodal Decree was made in the Province of the South-Saxons,A. D. 711. Westmonast. ad An. D. 711. that whereas the said Province had hitherto pertained to the Diocese of Winchester, at this time administred by Daniel Bishop thereof, it should afterward enioy its own Bishop. Now the first Bishop ordained there was Eadbert, who had been Abbot of a Monastery built by S. Wilfrid of happy memory, and called Selsey: Where the said servant of God after his banishment from York remained the space of five years, and obtained of the King of the same Province a possession of eighty families, in which he might receive and main|tain his companions in banishment. Now S. Wil|frid, assoon as he had received that land, he built upon it a Monastery, in which he placed and in|structed in Monasticall Disciplin many Monks, especially such as had accompanied him in his ba|nishment. But when he was restored to his See of York, first of all Cedwalla, and afterward his Suc|cessour in the Kingdom of the West-Saxons, In a invaded the said Province, subdued and killed the Kings of it, and annexed it to their own king|dom. And hence it came to passe that all that time the South-Saxons had no peculiar Bishop of their own, but were subiect, as hath been said, to the See of Winchester.
3. As touching the forementioned Synod by the Decree whereof a New Bishoprick was erected in the Province of the South-Saxons: Where it was assembled, what Bishops sate in it, or what other Decrees were made in it, no mention is made in any of our Ecclesiasticall Writers. Neither doth Sir H. Spelman take any notice of it. Wee may therefore so in|terpret the foresaid Historian, as likewise S. Beda who affirms also that the South-Saxons received a Bishop by vertue of the Decree of a

Synod, that this Decree has relation to the Synod of Hartford assembled thirty years be|fore this time,Sup. A. D. 673 in the ninth Chapter of which was ordained, That the number of Bishopricks should encrease proportionably to the multiplying of New Converts.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of Saint Cungar a Hermite.

1. TO this time we must refer what our Historians write concerning S. Cun|gar a holy Hermit,Ap. Capgrav.  S. Cungar. who (as the Authour of his Life testifies) was Son to the Emperour of Constantinople: who~ when his Parents intended to engage in a Matrimonial state, he despi|sing worldly pomp and glory, and aspiring to an eternall heavenly Crown, withall pur|posing to preserve his Virginal Chastity in|violate, stole privatly in a mean habit from the Imperiall Court, without discovering his intentions to any. Neither would the holy and humble young man settle his abode in any place near his parents, for fear, in case he should come to be discovered, they might recall him home. In this regard therefore, as likewise by the encourage|ment of an Angel he passed the Sea into Italy: from when he travelled over the Alpes into France, and out of France sayled into Brittany. For all his thoughts and en|deavours were employd in finding out a seat proper for a solitary life: In his iour|neys therefore he diligently enquired after such a place.
2. Saint Cungar at last being arrived in Brittany, and still earnestly pursuing his good intention inspired by Almighty God, directed his iourney towards a Province thereof, named Somerset: where by the ad|monition of an Angel he came to a place perfectly agreable to his mind; a place com|passed about with waters and reeds, and which from his name, was afterward called Cungresbury: (Concerning which place, which to this day keeps its name, thus writes Camden, Vnder the hills of Mendipp towards the North, says he, is seated a small village called Congersbury,Camd. in So|sitsh. so named from a ter|rain person of great sanctity called Congar, who lived a Hermit there.)
Ap. Capgr. ib3. S. Cungar much delighted with the pleasant situation of the place among Wa|ters and woods, sayd thus to himself, This is the place I have so long sought after, here shall be my abode, here I will spend the rest of my life in serving the Blessed Trinity. Thereupon he presently raised up a little habitation for himself: and afterward measured out a Church yard: Which having done, he built there an Oratory to the honour of the most Holy and undivided Trinity. In this place therefore this devout servant of God conti|nued, being cloathed with Sack-cloth, and without any distraction leading a most in|nocent devout life in fasting  prayer. Early every morning he entred into the cold water, where he remained for his mortifi|cation till he had thrice repeated the Pater noster. This being done, he came shivering with cold into his Oratory, where he spent a great part of the day in devout prayers to God. At three of the clock after noon he did eat a small portion of barley bread, never using other sustenance, nor this to satiety. By this means his body became so very lean, that all that beheld him, iudged that he was sick of an age. This Eremiticall life was most delicious to him, who aspired to the imitation of the actions of Saint Paul the first Hermit and Saint Anthony.
4. To this relation the same Authour annexes an account of severall Miracles wrought by this servant of God,Idem ibid. which I willingly omitt. After which he proceeds thus: Such miracles, says he, being published abroad, Ina the magnificent King of the English, liberally bestowd upon the venerable Hermit all the little territory lying about that village, assuring him that the same place should be to him a secure and undisturbed refuge, and that as long as himself raigned, no soldiers or any other should hinder him from his devotions. The same King after he had bestowd this land upon Saint Cungar, abstained ever after from visi|ting him, because he would not molest the holy man, nor interrupt his prayers.
5. Thus writes the sayd Authour, to which he adds,Id. ib.How Saint Cungar in the same place instituted twelve Canons, who lived a Regular life: and how afterward passing over the River Severn into North|wales, he there erected another Oratory where he assembled a Congregation of Monks. Lastly how he undertook a pilgrimage to Rome, and from thence to Ierusalem: where he dyed and his Sacred body was brought back to Congersbury. But as touching the year or day of his death, he affirms no|thing.



XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Swibert by reason of warrs, leaves the Boructuarians.
6.7. c. Prince Pipin gives him the Isle of verda: where he builds a Monastery.

1. BVT the glorious Exploits wrought in Germany by S. Swibert and our other Missioners from Brittany, doe require our at|tention to them. These we will relate in the words of an irrefragable witnes S. Marcel|lin (cited by Baronius) who was an eye|witnes and fellow worker in the Gospell with S. Swibert; beginning with the occur|tents hapning three years before this time, which avoyding distraction wee thought fitt to ioyn together.
Rom. ad. A. D. 70. .[2. Two years being passed (saith Baronius) since a dore had been opened to the Holy Apostle of the Boructuarians, S. Swibert, for preaching the Gospell to that Nation, there fell out a bloody war between them and their neigbouring Saxons: Which war was contri|ved and raised by the malice of the Devil, as himself before had threatned to the Holy man.
The Narration of which matter is thus made by S. Marcellinus.
3. Although the Devil be a lyar and the Father of lyes, saith he, notwithstanding he made good his threatning to S. Swibert when he was cast out of a person possessed by him, That he would take a course to drive him out of the Province. For two years after that, an il|lustrious man called Bruno one of the prin|cipall Nobility among the Saxons coming into the Province of the Boructuarians with a great retinue, took up his lodging in a vil|lage named Ratigen: Where being enter|tained by one of principall authority there, there hapned a quarell between them, after they had been inflamed with drink: and in this dissension the Saxon through the Devils instigation, killed the other with two of his servants. Which being known through the village, the freinds and kinred of those who had been slain betook themselves to rms, and to revenge their death putt to the sword the said Noble man of Saxony, and al|most all his followers.
4. A true report of this being spread through Saxony, presently the Saxons, in great rage with a powerfull army entred the bor|ders of the Boructuarians, where they killed great numbers with the sword, besides other horrible mischeifs which they did to the rest:  as for the village of Ratigen, they with an implacable fury utterly destroyd it. On the other side the Boructuarian, and principally such as had relation to the men who had een slain there, having likewise assembled strong forces of armed men, with fire and sword demolished many towns and forti|fications of the Saxons.
5. Such violences and depopulations on both sides having continued a long time, the Boructuarians and specially such Chri|stians among them as had been converted by Saint Swibert, considering that they were not able to resist the power and insolence of the Saxons, they took leave of Saint Swibert, and having received his bene|diction, they were forced to remove them|selves into remoter Provinces, to the end they might there with more security serve our Lord.
6. In the mean time the glorious Prelat S. Swibert perceiving his flock to be disper|sed up and down, and that no truce could be procured between the two Nations, nor any fruit by his preaching, by reason of the stony hearts of the Saxons, he made his prayers earnestly and assiduously to God that he would please to shew him some conve|nient place, where he might dwell quietly in his old age. At last by the admonition of an Angel he was commanded to goe to Colen, where the Noble Duke Pepin and his wife Plectrude, would bestow on him a fitt place for his habitation.
7. Now, saith Baronius, how when the Holy Bishop came to Colen, he was there kindly and respectfully entertained by Ple|ctrude the Wife of Pipin: how likewise after he had done many things beseeming his Apostolicall Office, and by her recommen|dation obtained from her husband a vil|lage called Werda, seated in an Island of the Rhene, where he built a Noble Monastery, is at large recounted by the same Marcellinus. That establishment proved a strong bulwark to expugne the infidelity of the Saxons. And thus it hapned that wheresoever this Apostolicall Bishop went, his presence pro|ved advantageous and healthfull to soules: and that dispersion of Christians became a mean for the further spreading of the Gos|pell, as it hapned in the Primitive Church, when by occasion of a violent persecution of Christians at Ierusalem, the dispersion of the Disciples round about became prof|fitable to the salvation of infinite multi|tudes.
8. Thus writes Baronius out of Saint Mar|cellin:S. Marcell. ibBut let us heare the relation from the Holy mans penne. The Noble and devout Princesse Plectrudis (saith he) with great devotion received the Holy Bishop in the Palace of the Dukes of Colen and Lorrain, a great part of which she had changed and consecrated into a Cloister of Religious Virgins, intitled the Church of the glorious Virgin, Ad Capitolum. And awhile after she directed the holy man attended by a Noble person of Ardenna na|med Gerald, who had been healed by Saint Swibert a little before of a pestilent disease,

with commendatory Letters to her husband Prince Pinpin, earnestly requesting him that he would bestow on the holy Bishop the vil|lage of Werda, seated in an Isle of the Rhene, to the end that there he and his Disciples at|tending him might take care and doe good to the soules of the Pagan Saxons living near. Pipin, being at that time well stricken in years, received S. Swibert with great ho|nour, detaining him a good space of time with him. In the end with great chear|fulnes, as one who thirsted after the Con|version of the Infidell-Saxons, he with a Re|gall magnificence, not only bestowed on him the said village, but withall out of his own copious Treasure offred and added great store of gold and silver to enable him for the building a Church and Monastery to the glo|ry of God, and the nourishing with the word of life that barbarous people utterly ignorant of the Faith.]
9. Now this Pipin was not the younger Pipin, who was son to Charles the Great: but Pipin firnamed de Herstallo,Magdb. Father to Charles Martel, who was founder of this Monastery: So that the Centuriators of Magdeburg relating otherwise, doe shew great want of exactnes in distinguishing times; and great ignorance in citing Saint Beda for a witnes, who was dead above forty years before the younger Pipin raigned, who was so far from being a founder of the Monastery of Werda, that he changed into a Castle and fortifi|cation against the Saxons. But let us re|turn to S. Marcellins Narration.
S. Marcell. ib.10. The holy Bishop, saith he, ha|ving taken leave of the Prince, returned to Colen to Saint Plectrudis. By whose assistance and authority he being atten|ded by many Masons and other workmen went to Werda, where he presently be|gan to found a Monastery near the Rhene to the honour of the glorious Virgin Mary, and there he collected a Congregation of Monks devoutly serving our Lord. After which it can hardly be expressed with what humility, devotion and reverence he preached the Faith of Christ to that rude Pagan people, and especially with what purity of mind and body he ce|lebrated Masses and performed all other Ecclesiasticall duties.


XV. CHAP.A. D. 712.
XV. CA.

1.2. c. Saint Swibert raises to life a dead man, c.

1. AFter two years preaching there,Bar  A. D. 71. saith Baronius, the foundations of the Sa|xon-Church began to be layd by the most ho|ly Apostolick Bishop S. Swibert, who came to them in abundance of benedictions, with signs and Miracle, raising a dead man to life, being powerfull in all things, both deeds  words.
Let us attend therefore to what S. Mar|cellinus has delivered co~cerning these things.
2. In the seaven hundred and eleaventh year of our Lords Incarnation,S. Marcell.  saith he, when S. Swibert not only in Werda, but also in the towns and villages preached the Gospell of Christ with great fervour to the profane Sax|ons, it hapned on a certain day, being Teus|day, that he went into a certain neighbour-village attended by a venerable Preist called Willeic, to celebrate Masse: and a certain rich|man (who had been a Pagan called Henger, but was afterward converted, and being ba|ptized on the Feast of S. Peter and S. Paul, was named Peter) this man out of a great servour of Faith, devotion and Humility himself took care of conducting a Cart loden with sand, stones and other materials convenient for building the Monastery and in the way, by the malice of the Devill an Enemy to all good works, the said Peter fell from the Cart un|der the wheeles, and was taken up dead, ha|ving his head and other members greivously wounded in severall places. By occasion of which there being assembled a great con|course of people, who with greif beheld so sad a spectacle: When preparation was ma|king for his buriall, the Holy Father, S. Swibert with his devout Chaplain Willeic came to the place: Where being informed of the manner of the death of the said Peter, he having great co~fidence in our Lords goodnes, commanded the dead body to be carried to his Cell. Which being done, he in the presence of a great multitude expecting the issue, with many sighs  abundance of teares kneeling down, powrd forth his prayers most earnestly to our Lord to restore to life the said Peter, who was a servant of his Monastery. And having a good space multiplied such prayers, he rose and kissing the body, immediatly the dead man revived and rose up perfectly whole, insomuch as there was not left on his body the least marks of any wounds, nor no settling of blood. Which the people seeing, with great ioy gave thanks to the Mercy of our Saviour.
3. The fame of this wonderfull Miracle being spread in the Province, many Neophytes were confirmed in Faith, and Infidels converted

which were regenerated by Baptism. Now the same Peter lived a long time after in per|fect health, till the building of the Church was quite finished, and after the Holy Bi|shop departed to our Lord. Notwithstanding this, he did not reap that fruit, which might reasonably be expected, among that hard|hearted peogle, for though many both of the common people and Nobles were con|verted, yet the greatest part remained in their Infidelity.


XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

i.2. c. A fictitious pretended Synod of London introducing the Veneration of Images Which was in use from the be|ginning.

A. D. 7.7 1. FOR want of matter to furnish the year of Grace seaven hundred and twelve, Bale the Apostate, and the Centuriators of Magdeburg have invented a fiction of a cer|tain Synod pretended to have been held at London decreing the introducing of Sacred Images into Churches  veneration of them: as if before this time either Images had not been seen in the Churches of Brittany, or no respect had been given to them.
Hpsf. saec. 8 cap. 5. pelman n Cocil. p 20.2. This assertion of theirs Harpsfeild de|servedly calls a false and sencelesse fable. Yea Sir H. Spelman, though no freind to Images, acknowledges that the Centuriators report this without the least testimony of any ancient Writer. And whereas the occasion of this fiction was taken from the Apparition of the most Blessed Virgin Mary to S. Egwin, upon which he founded the Monastery of Evesham the same Sir H. Spelman confesses that neither in the Charter of King Coenred nor of S. Egwin,Id. ib. neither likewise in the Letters of Pope Con|stantin, nor in any other Monuments recorded by him any thing is to be found concer|ning the introduction or adoration of Images.
Id. ib. p. 217. Bed. l. . c. 20  l. . c. 20.3. He grants indeed that our Apostle Saint Augustin made use of the Crosse and Image of Christ, because Saint Beda expressly affirms the same. But he resolutly denyes that before these times the Saxons did ever adore the Crosse or Sacred Images. Indeed if by Adoration he mean that worship is due only to God, wee agree with him that nei|ther then, nor before or since the Saxons, or any Catholick allowed it to the Crosse or Images, as appears in the seaventh Occumeni|call Synod. But if he will by Adoration under|stand a worship or veneration Superiour to a Civill respect, but infinitly beneath the Worship due to God it is most apparent that both S. Augustin and the Saxons after their Conversion did allow and practise Veneration to Crosses and Images.
4. For S. Gregory who was S. Augustins Ma|ster expresly calls the Crosse Venerable (Vene|randam:Greg. M. 7 Ep. 5.) and commands that the Image of our Blessed Lady and the Crosse should be taken out of a Synagogue of the Iews with that veneration that becomes them.. Ep 53. And again I know, saith he, that you doe not therefore desire the Image of our Saviour to the end you may adore it as a God. And wee likewise prostrate our selves before it, but not not as before a Divinity. Mar.. n oc. C. t. de Imagin. Hence Peter Martyr treating of Images, sayes concerning him,Gregory the Roman Bishop was a Patron of Superstition, for among his Prayers this is one: Grant unto us, O Lord, that those who come to adore thy Holy Crosse may be freed from the chains of their sins.Bale Cent . c. 68.
Yea Bale himself the inventour of the forementioned fable, acknowledges that Gregory admis of adoration of the Crosse,  Masses for the dead.
5. Again Saint Beda praises Saint Oswald for erecting a Crosse and praying before it:Bed. l 3. c. 3. and moreover he addes:Idem ib. To this day many devout persons are wont to cutt off slices from the wood of that most Holy Crosse, which putting into water and giving that water to be drunk either by sick men or beasts, they are presently restored to health. All which particulars are manifest signs of a Religious Veneration. Hence it is most appa|rent, not only that the Saxons did from the beginning use the Crosse and Image of Christ (and this Sir H. Spelman confesses:) but like|wise religiously venerate them. And that be ore the Saxons time the Christian Brittains did the same, hath been upon severall oc|casions demonstrated in the former part of this History.
6. As touching therefore this mentioned fictitious Synod of London wee will only add that which B. Parker writes:Antiq Brta n Brth|vvald Ar|chiepisc. What was decreed in that Synode, is not come to light. And whereas some Writers affirm that the worship and oration of Images was permitted by it, how truly they affirm this, I will not interpose my iudgment.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH

1.2. c. Another pretended Synod: cen|sured.

1. AFTER that Sir Henry Spelman had abated the authority of the foresaid Synod of London,Spelm. in Con l f. 219. he adioyns another Synod which he affirms to have been celebrated under King Ina about these times, and which he calls a great Councill of all Bi|shops and Princes, Nobles, Counts and a Sage Counsellors and Senatours as likewise the Commons of the whole Kingdom, which Coun|cil was assembled by the cmmand of King Ina.
2. Now what was transacted in this pre|tented Council he thus relates out of the Appendix (Auctarium) to the Laws of King Edward the Confessor: King Ina took to wife a Lady named Guala, for whose regard that coun|trey was named Wales, which formerly had been called Cambria: For the said King had two wives. And with this his last wife he had posses|sion of Wales, Cornwall and the happy Crown of Brittany. Likewise generally the English at the same time took to themselves wives of the stock of the Brittains: The Brittains also took wives of the illustrious blood of the English, that is, Saxons. For this was performed by a common Council and assent of all Bishops, Princes, No|bles, Counts, sage Counsellors, Senatours and Commons of the whole Kingdom, and by the com|mand of the foresaid King Ina.
3. Moreover not a few English took wives of the blood and stock of the English of Germany: Thus all the inhabitants of Brittany at that time became of one flesh and blood: and the Laws of Matrimony were well ordred, fornication and all uncleannes being quite banished out of the Realm. Moreover great diligence was used that for the establishment of the Kingdom and secu|rity of the people iust iudgments should be given. And by this means through the Divine mercy all the inhabitants of Brittany were made one Nation and one people. The Kingdom it self likewise was by all named England or the King|dome of the English, which before was called Brittany.
4. Such an Vnion being established among the inhabitants of this Island, formerly much divi|ded, they all unanimously stood together for the common proffit of the kingdom, and courageously fought against the Danes and Norwegians, un|placable Enemies of the same, with whom for a long time most furious warrs and battells were fought. For the foresaid King Ina was a Prince magnificent, liberall, wise, prudent, moderate, courageous, iust and warlick; and upon occasion shewd himself illustrious in his skill in Divine and secular Laws, and magnificent works: and he governed, united and established his kingdom in peace and unity by his great Wisedom and pru|dence, and when occasion was, by power and ar|med force. Thus far the Appendix to the Laws of King Edward sirnamed the Confessour concerning this pretended Great Council, which truly for the many ungrounded cir|cumstances in it, well deserves to be ioy|ned to the foregoing Synod of London.Id. ib.
5. The observation and censure which Sir H. Spelman therefore gives of it, de|serves to be here annexed: Among our an|cient approved Authours, saith he, there is not any mention of a second mariage of Ina King of the West-Saxons with Guala, as is presumed, the daughter of Cadwallader last King of the Brit|tains, nor of the change of name of Cambria into Wales upon that occasion, or that King Ina had any more then one wife which was Ethelburga (whose name shews her to have been of an English extraction) who manifestly was his last wife.A. D. 713. For when he undertook a Mona|sticall Profession at Rome, she became a Nunn in England, and was afterward Abbesse of Bar|king: and both of them continued in their Re|ligious habit till death. Likewise concerning the time and authority of this Council I can give no resolute iudgment. For some Writers af|firm that Cadwallader raigned only three years, others five, and Geffrey of Monmouth allows him twelve, so that it is utterly uncertain at what time King Ina should get possession of the Kingdom of Wales or Cambria. Again Geffrey makes King Inas the Nephew of Cadwallader, Henry Lluid his Son, and this pretended Council, his Son in Law.


XVIII. CHAP.XVIII. C.

i.2. c. S. Cathburga Sister to King Ina: builds the Monastery of Winburn. Of her Sister S. Quenburga.

1.A. D. 713. TO the year of Grace seaven hundred and thirteen is referred the founda|tion of a Monastery of Religious Virgins at Winburn in Dorsetshire by S. Cuthburga and S. Quenburga Sisters to Ina King of the West-Saxons. The town where this Monastery was built, had been anciently called Vindoglade, but the Saxons changed the Name into Winburn. It is a Town (saith Camden) seated upon the side of a Hill,Camd. in Dor|sesh. and in the Saxons time was very large and populous, and of great renoun. In the year seaven hundred and thirteen Cuthburga a Sister of Ina King of the West-Saxons, who had been maried to the King of the Northumbers, but upon discontent was divorced from him, built here a Monastery of Virgins.
2. The name of the King of Northumbria to whom Saint Cuthburga had been maried, is by Mathew of Westminster call Egfrid, by Florentius, Alfrid: but Chronology in the opi|nion of F. Alford demonstrates that it was Osred: and the cause of the divorce was the Kings shamefull intemperance: For saith William of Malmsbury,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3. he raigned twelve years and lead a most filthy life, frequently offring violence to consecrated Virgins.
3. Certain indeed it is, that if she built this Monastery presently after her divorce, it must needs be Osred who was her hus|band: for it was founded in the eighth year of his raign. But Malmsbury, as like|wise Florentius expressly affirm that King Alfrid was her husband,Florens. A. D. 718. Malmsb. de. Reg. l. 3. and Saint Cuth|burga having promised her Virginity to our Lord, by earnest prayers and teares ob|tained of him permission to perform her vow: and retired her self into the Mona|stery of Barking, where she lived under the Discipline of the Holy Abbesse Hildelida.

But afterward (how long afterward is uncer|tain) she her self became the Mistresse of a Mo|nastick Rule,A. D. 714. and built the Monastery of Winburn, where she spent the remainder of her days in quiet devotion. And this is the more probable, because in the Missal and Breviary of Sarum her Office is prescribed of a Virgin, and the Prayer imports the same. So that it is not likely that so licentious a Prince as Osred would suffer himself to be perswaded to per|mitt her the accomplishing of her pro|mise.
4. Here then wee have an example not to be paralleld in all the History of Gods Church, Of three Kings of the same King|dom, to witt, the Northumbers, almost im|mediatly succeeding one another, and as some Writers affirm, sons of the same Father, (King Oswy the Brother and Successour of Saint Oswald) who having received three Queens Virgins, were content to dismisse them all untouched. The first was Alcfrid the eldest son, who took to wife Saint Kineburga daughter to King Penda, who by his leave became first a Nunne, then an Abbesse of Dormancester, afterwards called Kineburg-Castle, and now contractedly Caster, about two miles distant from Peterborough. The next Brother, Egfrid who maried Saint Ethel|reda, who with his consent first took the veyle at Coldingham; then became Abbesse at Ely: And the third this Alfrid (or Osred) who espoused S Cuthburga; and resigned her to her heavenly Bride-groom.
5. Saint Cuthburga having built her Mo|nastery, and therein a Church to the Queen of Virgins (saith the Authour of her life in Cap|grave) there macerated her body with almost continuall watchings and fastings.Ap. Capgr. in S. Cuth|burga. She was hum|ble both to God and men, and mild to all. Many Virgins she assembled in the same place. She permitted her Body to enioy no rest, but im|portunatly day and night her Prayers sounded in the mercifull ears of God. She happily ended her dayes in the year of Grace seven hundred twenty seaven:Martyrlog. Angl. 31. Au|gust lb 22. Sept. and her memory is celebrated by the Church on the last day of August. Her Sister dyed three years after, and is commemorated on the two and twentieth of September.
6 A great proof of the perfection of Monasticall. Disciplin observed after her death in her Monastery,Rudolph. in viz. S. Liobae. A. D. 790. is this. That Saint Boniface the glorious Apostle of the Germans having founded a Monastery in those parts made choice of her Disciples above all others and particularly of Saint Lioba, to plant Religious observance there. This is testified by Rodul|phus, Disciple of Rabanus Maurus in the life of S. Lioba written by him.
Idem ibid.8. The same Writer also affirms that in the same town of Winburn there was ere|cted likewise a Cloyster of Monks, either by Saint Cuthburga, or her Brother King Ina: And that from the beginning a Law and Decree of Religious Disciplin had been made, That excepting Preists who were to serve at the Altar, no men should be permitted to enter the Monastery of those Religious Virgins: Nor any woman into that of Religious men: And that among the other obligations of the Virgins at their Profession, this was one, never to step out of their Cloyster, except upon a necessary cause to be approved by Superiours.
9. Among the Epistles of Saint Boniface there is one inserted from one Aldhun an Abbot, and two Abbesses called Cnenburg and Coenburg (which were probably these two Princely Sisters, Saint Cuthburga and Saint Quenburga) desiring a devour Preist cal|led Wietbert an attendant of Saint Boniface, to recommend to God in his Prayers two Religious woemen Quoengyth and Edlu, both which dyed the same day; being the Ides of September.


XIX. CHAP.XIX. CH.

1.2. c. The death of Prince Pipin: to which S. Swibert endeavoured in vain to prepare him.

1. THE death of Duke Pipin hapning about this time,A. D. 714. since the holy A|postolick Bishop Saint Swibert was employed in preparing him to it, which charge he performed with great zeale, though with small effect, it will not be iudged imper|tinent to give an account of what passed between them, from the relation of S. Mar|cellin, a witnes whose authority cannot be questioned. Thus therefore he writes.
[2. It hapned,S. Marcellin in Suiverto. sayth he, in the year seaven hundred and fourteen after our Lords Incarnation, that Pipin of Herstall a ma|gnanimous Prince and Mare of the King of France his house, sell fick of that disease which endred with his life. Hereupon the illustrious Bishop Saint Swibert was earnestly desired by certain Noble persons to visit him: But he thought fitt first to goe to Co|len attended by his two Disciples Willeic and Theodorick; there to demand counsell of Plectrudis the illustrious Duchesse of Lorrain or the Austrasians, how he should cary himself in that affaire. She with great de|votion received and entertaind him, at last for her own consolation retaining with her the pious Preist Willeic, she dismissed Saint Swibert, accompanied by Agilulf Archbi|shop of Colen and other Prelats, giving them charge seriously to advise her husband Prince Pipin, that in case he should dye he would take care not to disinherit his illu|strious lawfully begotten children, Drogo Duke of Champagne and Grimoaldus Maire of the house to Childebert King of France, by substituting in his Will as his Heyr, Charles

Martell a bastard by Alpaide his Concubine which injustice he could not doe without the losse and damnation of his soule, besides the stain that he would bring upon his name in the sight of the whole Church, and Scandall of his Nobility and Subjects.
3. This was an employment which not long before had cost the Holy Bishop Lam|bert very dear, for because he had repre|hended the same Prince for his unlaw|full cohabitation and mariage with the same Harlot, he lost his life and was deservedly esteemed a Martyr.
4. The foresaid Bishop, therefore being arrived at Ioppilta (a Town upon the River Mosa) where the sick Prince lay, were kind|ly received by him. They therefore to comfort and encourage him to suffer with patience temporall afflictions or infirmities, told him that Almighty God in his wisedom and goodnes made the way to heaven rough and unpleasant to his Elect, least being delighted in the way they should forget or disesteem the happines which they expected in their countrey.
5 After such like discourse often repea|ted, at last having found a convenient and opportune season, among other spirituall advices which they gave him for the good of his soule, they with great affection and zeale discovered to him the speciall motive of their iourney, sharply reprooving him for his unlawfull mariage. But they had no sooner touched upon this argument, but they were with great indignation repulsed by the Prince. And the harlot Alpaide ha|ving diligently enquired into and found the occasion of these Prelats iourney, rudely commanded them presently to be gone: And withall was so importunate with the Prince in behalf of her Son Charles Martel, that she obtained of him whatsoever she requested. And accordingly Pipin dying the same year, left Charles Martel heyre of all his Principalities.
6. This being seen by the foresayd Pre|lats they were forced to return to Colen with greif and dishonour: where they made known to Plectrudis all things which had passed at Ioppilia with Pipin, withall com|forting and exhorting her to sustain such crosses with patience.


XX. CHAP.XX. CHA.

i.2. c. The Birth education and Gests of S. Guthlac: Of his Disciple Bertelins in|tention to murder him. Of Ethelbald a banished Mercian Prince comforted by him, c.

BVT in Brittany a far more comforta|ble and happy death befell a Hermit of admirable Sanctity, named S. Guthlac, who, as in this life he enioyd a familiar conversa|tion with Angels, so in the next he was made their companion in blessednes for ever. His Gesis we have thought fitt to re|mitt till this time when he dyed, because having lived a solitary life, they were scarce at all involved with the common occurrents of the Church in his time The story of his life may require from us a more then ordinary attention  credit, because written by Felix a devout reist of the same age, and dictated to him by Bertelin a Monk of Croyland his companion in Solitude. The Authour dedi|cated his Writing to Elwold King of the East-Angles, which is a sufficient warrant to rectify the Chronology of some of our Histo+rians, who place the death of this Elwold in the year of Grace six hundred and ninety. By the generall account S. Guthlac lived forty seaven years, and being twenty four years old he undertook a soldiers Profession, in which he lived eight years, and fifteen years after in the Solitude of Croyland: so that his Birth must fall in the year of Grace six hun|dred sixty seaven. The wonderfull circum|stances of which is thus recorded by the foresaid Authour Felix:
[2. In the dayes of Ethelred King of the Mercians,In vit. Saint Guthlac p. uv. 11. Aps. saith he, a certain Noble person of Royall offspring, named Penwald, had by his wife Tecta the holy servant of God Guthlac. At the hower of his birth his future Sanctity was miraculously designed: For from heaven there appeard the hand as it were of a man, of a red colour and a splendour inexpres|sible, which marked the outward dore of the house with the Sign of the Crosse: thereby happily prefiguring, that the infant then ready to be born should constantly cary in his body the Crosse of Christ. A great multi|tude of neighbours there present being astonished with the strangenes of this Mira|cle, concluded that some great unknown Mystery was represented by it: when pre|sently one of the Midwives issuing forth, pb|lished the birth of the infant. When he was baptized, he had the name Guthlac given him, which in the Saxon language signifies, A good gift: And indeed he was given to his parents by God, to the end he might coura|geously

fight against their oppressours, both carnall and spirituall, and victoriously triumph over them He was of a counte|nance chearfull and mild, so that he be|came gratefull and beloved by all.
3. When he had attained to the four and twentieth year of his age, seeing the Ene|mies of his countrey grow strong, he began to aspire to military honours, and raising soldiers he feircely invaded them, broke into their Citties, subverted their Castells and by many warlick exploits gaind to himself immortall fame. Yet even in the midst of his fury he shewd mercy to his enemies, and restored a third part of all the spoiles gotten by him.
4. But at last calling to mind the sad and earfull deaths of many Princes from whom he had descended; and considering how all secular pomp is but a smoke suddenly passing away; that life is short, death ter|rible, a dreadfull Iudge, and the pains to be suffred for sins incomprehensible  endles: Therefore calling his soldiers together, he told them, That having hitherto fought for vanities, he would spend the remainder of his life in our Lords warfare: That they should chuse themselves a Captain, but for his part he would follow the Crosse of his Captain, Christ. And when by no perswasions he could be drawn from this resolution, quitting his arms, he went to Rependon (or rather, Rippon) where there was a famous Monastey, in which receiving the Clericall Tensure, he submitted himself to a strict Monasticall Discipline, wholly abstai|ning from any drink which could inebriate. He was very diligent in learning the Psalms and Church Hymnes, and in the space of two years he with great facility advanced him|self in the knowledge of Srcred Scriptures. He had a pleasing aspect, was humble in his ge|sture and gate, religiously shewing great fear of in God his actions, firm in Faith, patient in hope, profuse in Charity, kind and mild to all, provident in counsell, and circum|spect in his words.
5. Having spent two years in a Coenobiticall conversation, he aspired to greater austeri|ties in a solitary. Anachoreticall life. Now there is in Brittany a vast fenny countrey which beginning from the River Grone ex|tends itself Northward along the Sea coast for a very great space, and it is variously divi|ded by fens, woods, and serpentine rivers. Thither did he repair, having fist obtained leave of his Religious Brethren: and was told by the inhabitants of the place that the Ile was named Coyland: where severall persons having had a desire to dwell, were forced to fly away by terrible apparitions of Devills. This report not discouraging him, he passed over into it in a fishers boat, on the Feast day of S. Bantholmew the Apostle: in whose inter|cession having a speciall confidence, he re|solved to make his abode there in that place of horrour and vast solitude, having with him only two young men which had fol|lowed him.
6. Whereupon he built himself a small cottages his cloathing was only raw skins of beasts, and his nourishment barley-bread with muddey water, and this never till Sun|ett, and with great parsimony. The Enemy of mankind therefore envying the Humi|lity of this Man of God, did suggest to his mind so vehement a tentation, that he had falln into the pitt of despaire, had not our Lord mercifully regarded him by the inter|cession of the Blessed Apostle S. Bartholmew. For when he being in great disturbance of mind was upon the point to desert his De|sart, S. Bartholmew visibly appearing to him, encouraged him to co~stancy, by discovering that such Tentations were permitted by our Lord for the tryall of his Faith, and to the end that distrusting himself he might place all his confidence in God, who would never forsake him. After such like exhortations, the Apostle vanished out of his sight, and from that hower the Devill never had the boldnes to tempt him with the spirit of De|spair.
7. Consequently the devout Authour re|counts severall other particular Tentations, horrible apparitions of Devills in severall shapes; sometimes perswading him to im|moderate and indiscreet fasting, thereby to destroy his health: sometimes insulting upon him, whipping, binding and carrying him through those fenng places, c. all which he despised, and triumphed over.
8. Now, as hath been sayd, there were at|tending him two youn men, the name o one of them was Bertelin: he had received the Clericall Tonsure, and served our Lord in Spiritual Exercises under the direction of the Holy man. Now the Wicked Spirit perceiving that he could not by any tentation subvert the Saint, raised in the heart of this young man so violent a passion against him, that he took a firm resolution to murder his Master and Teacher, that he being dispatched out of the way, his house and furniture in it might descend as by right upon him. But the pious servant of our Lord by revelation of the Holy Ghost was acquainted with all these malicious designs of Bertelin therefore on a certain day calling him to him, he plainly and distinctly told him all his thoughts, when, and where, and in what manner and with what intention he had designed his murder. The young man per|ceiving that he was deprehended, with great remorse cast himself at his feet, begged and easily obtaind pardon. And from that hower he shewed all fidelity to him, and continued with him to his death: after which he had the honour to assist at his bu|riall This is the same Bertelin who dictated all these particulars to Felix the Writer of his Life.
9. Hereto the Authour addes severall mi|aculous

signs wrought upon severall occa|sions by the man of God: which the Reader at leasure may have recourse to. Moreover he relates how he was visited by a certain Bi|shop named Hedda; who, being a witnesse of his piety testified by his discerning the thoughts of a Preist, called Wilfrid (who at|tended the Bishop and promised to explore whether he was not an Hypocrite, such as he had seen many in Scotland, who pretending a solitary life, gave themselves to idlenes and excesse) Hereupon the Bishop forced the Holy man against his will to receive the degree and honour of Preist-hood.
10. One particular more we will add, breifly mentioned by the foresaid Authour of his life, but more fully related by Ingulfus Abbot of Croyland; who writes the History of his Abbey, beginning it with this story of the Conversion of a certain Prince of Mercia called Ethelbaldus by the good advice of S. Guthlac.
11. In those days (saith he, that is, in the year before the death of this Holy Hermit) Prince Ethelbald great grandchild of Alwy the Brother of King Penda was banished out of the kingdom of the Mertians. He was of an elegant stature, strong of body and war|lick of mind, but (which was to be beway|led) he was high-minded, and apt to any rash attempt against the King. For which turbu|lent spirit of his (as we may iustly imagine) he was exposed to many dangers, and for a long space debarred all medling with State-affaires. And not only so, but King Coelred did violently persecute him every where, inso|much as being in great danger, and wholly destitute of freinds and all means to resist, he would oft come privatly to the man of God Saint Guthlac, who was his Confessour to seek for spirituall counsell, when all world|ly assistance fayled him: and to him he hum|bly made his complaints.
12. The Holy man having heard him, kind|ly and mildly comforted him: and withall, as one to whom future things were by divine revelation known, he distinctly and parti|cularly discovered to him what should suc|ceed afterward, promising him that he should be King of his Nation, and subdue all his Enemies. Yea moreover he bad him be confident that all these things should hap|pen to him without any combat or effusion of blood, only by Gods power and Providence over him.
13. But to these comforting promises he added serious admonitions, that he should fear our Lord God above all things, and shew ll subwission and respect to his Holy Church: That he should often deplore his former crimes, and constantly make good his pur|pose of amendment: For he told him that if he would be carefull to obey the Divne Law he might with confidence expect Gods help and favour. By such exhortations and com|forts the mind of the afflicted Prince was exceedingly refreshed, insomuch as in the presence of his holy Father Saint Guthlac, and others then standing by, he expressly promi|sed, that assoon as God should sett him pea|ceably in the Throne of the Kingdom, he would found a Monastery in the same place, to the honour of God and memory of his sayd Father: And this promise a short time after he effectually accomplished.]


XXI. CHAP.XXI. CH.

1.2. c. The death of Saint Guthlac: and wonderfull occurrents. Of his Sister Saint Pega.

1. AFter a life spent with such austerity, holines and devotion, there must needs follow a death conformable to it: which is thus related from the mouth of his companion and Disciple, Berthelin.
2. When the day of his departure approa|ched, he called to him his Disciple Berthelin,In vit. Sanct. Guthlaci ap. Sur 11. April. to whom he sayd, My son, I am now going to reap the fruit of my Labours:I desire to be dissol|ved and to be with Christ. And after other words to the same effect, he enioynd him to goe and with great affection in his name salute his Sister Pega, desiing her to take care of his buriall. Withall he bid him tell her, that therefore he had avoyded the seeing and conversing with her in this present life, that they might for ever enioy each others company in the life to come.
3. Then his sayd Disciple took the boldnes to say thus to him, I adiure you, Holy Father, that you will not refuse to tell mee plainly what the matter was, that every morning and evening since I dwelt with you I heard you speak to, and sometimes seem to answer some body: Who was that person with whom you conversed? Your spee|ches I heard, but could never understand with whom you spoke. To this question the Holy-man answered, My dear son, My last hower is now at hand: It is not therefore expedient for mee now to lye, who all my life have abhord it. Know therefore that from my first entrance into this wildernes, every morning and evening I have enioyd the conversation and comfort of a heavenly Angell, who by his celestiall consolations refreshed mee in all my labours and tentations. He foretold to mee things future, discovered such as were absent, and acquainted mee with hidden Mysteries, which it is not expedient nor lawfull for mee to make known. But now, My son, be carefull to seal up in silence these things: and presume not to discover them to any but my Sister Pega, and the devout Anchoret Egbert.
4. When he had sayd this, such an odort|ferous fragrancy came from his mouth, that it seemed as if one had strowed roses, or pourd forth balsam in the place. And from mid|night

till morning a Light of inestimable brightnes shone through the whole house.
And assoon as the Sun was risen, he sayd to his Disciple Bertelin, My Son, now is the mo|ment that I must goe to Christ: Having said "this with hands stretched forth toward hea|ve, he fell asleep in our Lord, on the third day before the Ides of April. And the same Brother saw as it were a tower of fire rea|ching from the earth to heaven, the splen|dour of which was so wonderfull, that in comparison the light of the Sun at midday was pale and obscure. A while after Blessed Pega the holy Mans Sister coming into the Island, found the whole house replenished with a sweet fragrancy infinitly exceeding all odours which either art or nature could produce. Then having decently buried her Brother S. Guthlat in his Oratory, she returned to her own dwelling.
5. About a year after his death, his sister and other Preists came to his Oratory with a resolution to bury his body more honoura|bly, and they found it entire without the least corruption, as if he had been asleep. The ioynts likewise of his arms and fingers were as easily flexible, as if the humours and spirits were yet running through his veyns,  his sinews had lost nothing of their former vigour. Moreover the garments in which his sacred body had been wrapped preserved stil their primitive freshnes and glasse. With great ioy and exaltation therefore they again reposed the Sacred Body once more in a Tombe expressly made for it.
6. Now Prince Ethelbald in his exile ha|ving heard of the death of the Holy man, was overwhelmed with greif, and coming to his sepulcher, he cryed out with many tears,O Father whither shall I a poor banished man goe? to whom shall I have recourse? Now indeed I per|ceive that I am a miserable exile. Dear Father Guthlac, doe not you forsake him who is abandond by all, and exposed to all miseries and torments.Having spoken many such words with ex|treme greif and bitter sighs, towards mid|night he saw the Oratory wonderfully enlight|ned with an inexpressible brightnes, and the Holy man himself appeard to him with a celestiall splendour, saying to him these words, My dear Son, our Lord has a regard to thee, be comforted and assured that within two years all thy travells shall have an end and thou shalt recover thy throne with great glory.
Besides this, the Holy man expressly discovered to him how many years he should live, and many other things which should befall him. And when the Prince desired some sign to as|sure him that these things should be accom|plished, the Holy man added,Let this be a mark and sign to thee, that to morrow before nine a clock in the morning the inhabitants of this place, now in want, shall be beyond their hope sup|plied with abundance of provisions. Now when the Prince saw this really fullfilld, his mind before wavering, was confirmed with great hope and confidence.A. D. 715.
And indeed a short while after Almighty God took out of the way King Ceolred his persecutor, and dis|persed all his enemies, so that within the ne promised, the Royall dignity was restored to him, as shall shortly be declared: and likewise how Ethelbald gratefully and ma|gnificently accomplished his Promise.


XXII. CHAP.XXII. CH.

1.2. The Death of the Royall Virgin Saint Eanfleda, c.
3. The death of Waldhere Bishop of London: to whom Inguald succeeds.
4. Beorna King of the East Angles after Elwold.

1. THE same year the Royall Virgin and holy Abbesse S. Eanfleda likewise left this valy of tears to goe and enioy the eter|nall embraces of her heavenly Bridegroom, to whom she had been consecrated from her infancy.Vid. sup. l. c. We have already declared, how she being born immediately before her Father Oswi King of the Northumbers was ready to ioyn battell with the bloody King of the Mer|cians, Penda, he made a vow that in case God would give him the Victory he would devote her to his service in a Religious life: And the Vi|ctory ensuing, he gave her to the care of S. Hilda Abbesse of the Monastery of Heortsig, and afterward of Steneshalch: in which S. Ean|fleda lived some years in obedience, and afterward became Abbesse thereof: Where, (saith S. Beda) having accomplished threescore years in great devotion and purity,Bed. l. 3. c. 24. she was tran|slated to heaven to celebrate her mariage with our Lord, to whom she had been all her life espoused. In the same Monastery both she and her Father Oswi, her Mother Eanfled, and her Mothers Fa|ther Edwin, and many other Noble personages were buried, in the Church of S Peter the Apostle: and her name is anniversarily recited among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the eighth of February.Maryrolog. Angl. 8. Febr.
2. Among the Epistles of S. Boniface there is one which seems to have been written by this Holy Virgin to an Abbesse named Adolana, who lived in forrain parts some|where in the way to Rome: for therein she recommends to her care and charity another Religious woman formerly brought up in her Monastery, who in devotion to the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul had undertaken a pilgrimage to Rome to visit their Holy Se|pulchers.
3. The year following Waldhere Bishop of London dyed,A. D. 715. who had succeeded the glo|rious Bishop S. Erconwald in that See, and who, as S. Beda testifies, gave the Habit of Monasticall Profession to Sebbe the devout King of the East-Saxons a little before his

death. His Successour was Inguald, who go|verned the same Diocese about thirty years, and is reckoned the sixth among the Bishops of London.
4. About the same time also hapned the death of Elwold King of the East-Angles, in whose place his Brother Beorna raigned, who was the youngest son of Ethelhere.


XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2 Warr between King Ina and Ceolfrid.
3. Horrible crimes of Ceolfrid.

1. THE same year there arose great trou|bles in Brittany by reason of a bloody war between Inas King of the West-Saxons and Ceolred King of the Mercians. These were both in power and extent of Dominion, the most puissant Kings among the Saxons. An equality therefore bred a mutuall emula|tion and desire in each of them to advance themselves by the ruine of the other. King Ina was the invader: Neither did he find Ceolred unprepared: so that they quickly came to a battell. And the place of their combat was a Town in Wiltshire called Wo|densbury, from Woden the Idol of the Pagan-Saxons answering to Mercury. It is seated near Wansdike, and is the same place where in the year of Grace five hundred ninety one Ceau|lin King of the West-Saxons fought his last battell, which having lost, he dyed pre|sently after.
2. In this place did Inas and Ceolred meet to decide their controversy whether should be Master: And (saith Huntingdon) the battell was fought on both sides with such horrible obsti|nacy,Huntingd. l. 4 that it could scarce be determined  we|ther part the destruction was greater.
3. Ceolred esteemed it as a victory that he could resist so powerfull a King as Ina, from whom he little apprehended a second inva|sion, considering the great deminution of his forces by the last combat. So that he esteemed himself secure, and freely gave himself up to his lusts and abominable sa|criledge. By which he filled up the measure of his sins, and felt the year following in a terrible manner the avenging hand of Gods justice. His lusts he extended even to Reli|gious Virgins consecrated to the immortall God, who therefore ought to be exempted from the touch of any mortall man. And as for his Sacriledge in inringing the pri|viledges of Religious houses and invading their possessions, our Historians doe not par|ticularly exemplify in any: So that it is pro|bable that it was the late-built Monastery of Evesham which was violated by him not|withstanding the great Priviledges and Exem|ptions conferred on it both by the Papall and Regall authority, and notwithstanding the solemne maledictions denounced by the founder thereof Saint Egwin, yet alive, who in consecrating it is recorded to have pro|nounced these words, If any King, Prince or other shall be incited by the Spirit of avarice so as to diminish the Rights of this Monastery (which God forbid:) Let him be judged before the Tribunal of God, and never come into the memory of Christ: but let his name be for ever blotted out of the Book of the living, and him|self bound with the chains of eternall torments, except he repent and satisfy for his crime in this life.
4. But before we relate the effect of this Curse upon this unhappy King, it will be ex|pedient to recount the story of a wonder|full vision hapning about this time to a certain man who was restored from death to life, on purpose that by relating the wonders of the other world he might deterr sinners from the obstinacy of their rebel|lion against God. By which vision it appears, that this King Ceolred was some time before his death destined to eternall torments. It is not without some scruple that I am mo|ved to insert in this History Narrations of this Nature: But the unquestionable au|thority and Sanctity of the Relatur obliges mee not to omitt it, though the Centuriators of Magdeburg without any shew of a ratio|nall disproof of it, doe voluntarily and at adventure condemne it as a fable.


XXIV. CHAP.XXIV. C.

1.2. c. The Narration of a terrible Vision of a man, when his soule was separated from the body and afterward restored: related hy S. Boniface.

1. THIS wonderfull relation is extant in an Epistle written by Winfrid, af|terward called Boniface, the glorious Apo|stle of the German Nation, and happy Martyr of Christ. Which Epistle was directed to Ead|burga Abbesse sister to S. Editha or Edgitha and daughter of Frewald a Prince among the East-Angles. And probably it is the same Eadburga concerning whom we read in the life of Saint Guthlac,Ap. Caper. in S. Gutl. acs. that the sent to that holy Hermit a coffin of lead, and in it a linnen sheet, in which she desired that after his death he would permitt his body to be enclosed. Her name is commemorated among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the eighteenth of Iuly.Martyrolog Angl. 18. Iul.
2. Concerning these two devout sisters we read thus in Camdens Description of the Province of the Catechleum or Buckingham|shire:Camden in Buckingham. The Town of Ailsbury in that county (saith he) was anciently illustrious by the Me|mory

of Editha born and brought up in it: Who having obtained from her Father Frewald this Town for her portion, by the perswasion of Preists presently quitted all pretentions to a husband or the world, and taking the Sacred veryle of Reli|gion was, together with her Sister Eadburga, illu|strious for holines in that age, wonderfully aboun|ding with Saints. From her name there remains to this day a village seated among the hills near ad|ioyning, called Eburton. Now the enour of S. Boni|face his letter to S. Eadburga is as followeth:
Bifac. pist. 21.[3. Most dear Sister,Your request to mee is that I would carefully send you in wri|ting an account of the Visions shewd of late to a certain man in the Monastery of the Abbesse Milbrga, who was restored from death to life, according as I was particu|larly informed by the Venerable Abbesse Hil|delida. I thank God I can now more fully and clearly through his help fullfill your desire, for I my self have discoursed with the revived person himself in these transmarine parts, who perfectly informed mee of all those wonderfull visions, which he in Spirit, and separated from his body, saw.
4 For first of all he told mee that by a vio|lent and mortall sicknes he was delivered from the weight of his lumpish body, and presently became in a state resembling that of one whose eyes having been clowded with a thick veyle was on a sudden freed from that impedime~t, for all things, which former|ly had been in darknes, became clearly vi|sible to him. So himself having cast off the thick veyle of his body, the whole world was at once represented to his sight, so that with one glance he saw all creatures.
5. Assoon as he was thus escaped from his body, certain Angels so bright  shining that they dazeled his sight, received him, and they with a melodious harmony sung these Words of the Psalm, O Lord, rebuke mee not in thine anger, neither correct mee in thy fury. They rai|sed mee up aloft into the aire, an  aw the whole earth compassed with fire,  whence issued a flame upwards vastly spread and most terrible to behold and it seemed as if the fire would have consumed all things, had not the Angels, asswaged it by the impression of the sign of the holy Crosse: Which assoon as they had done, the flame presently settled, and the paine which my eyes had felt by the ardour of it became much qualified, though by rea|son of the splendour of the Angels accompa|nying mee it was not wholly taken away, till one of the principall among them with his hand covering my head, protected mee from all danger and incommodity.
6. Moreover he told mee that whilest he was out of his body, he saw such an innume|rable multitude of soules, that he thought there had not been so many since the Crea|tion: A like troop of wicked Spirits likewise there was, as also of glorified Angells,  these were in a continuall earnest dispute together about soules assoon as they were issued out of their bodies: the devills accusing and ag|gravating each ones sins, and the Angels qualifying and excusing them.
7. Yea all his own sins and offences which from his infancy he had committed, and not confessed either through negligence, forget|fullnes, or ignorance that they were indeed sins, all these he heard with his own voyce earnestly crying out against him and accu|sing him, every vice setting itself distinctly before him,  upbrading him severally, one saying I am thy o~cupiscence, by which thou didst desire things unlawfull, and contrary to Gods Law I am thy vain glory, by which thou didst boast thy self before men: I am Lying, with which thou hast oft offended: I am idle speech, oftimes practised by thee: I am vain and wanon on Seeing I am contu|macy and disobedience to thy Superiours: I am Spi|rituall sloath in holy Exercises I am wandring and curm cogitation, to which thy mind almost every day yeilded in the Church, or elsewhere: I am Drowsines, which hindred thee from rising to praise God: I am an idle iourney which thou tookest for thy vain pleasure: I am negligence and want of care in study about divine matters. And many other vices like these which in the days of his flesh he had committed, and neglected to confesse: yea beside these, many sins cryed out terribly against him, of which he had no suspicion that they were sins. In like man|ner the Wicked Spirits ioynd with his sins in such clamours and accusations, fiercely testi|fying to him he times and places where he had committed all his sins.
8. Particularly he sayd he saw there a certain man whom whilst he was as yet in a secular state he had wou~ded,  who was yet alive: this man was brought to ioyn in testimony against him by those Wicked Spirits, and his bloody ga|ping wound seemd to have a tongue which loudly upbraided him with his cruelty Thus all his Sins in a great heap being counted, his terribly malicious Enemies cryed out confidently, that he belonged to them, and therefore they had a ight to torment him.
9. On the other side those few small virtues, said he, which I poor wretch had with great imperfection practised in my life time, they likewise lifted up their voyces to excuse mee: One sayd, I am Obedience which he shewd to his Superiours Another, I am Fasting, with which he motyfied the unlawfull desires of his flesh: A third, I am Psalmody, exercised by him in satisfaction for idle speeches. And thus every vertue cryed out in my behalf to excuse mee against the cla|mours of the opposite Sins. And with these vertues did those gloriously shining Angels ioyn themselves in my defence, so exalting and magnifying them, that they now seemed to mee far more excellent then before, and much exceeding the strength I formerly had.
10. Besides this he told mee, that in the lower part of the world he saw a great number of pitts vomiting flames, and that in some parts the earth would break asu~der,  there would issue terrible flames. Now among those pitts

he saw many wretched soules like birds of a black colour, weeping and howling in the flames, bewayling their demerits which had brought them to such torments; which soules would sometimes sitt on the brink of the pitts in some refreshment, and anon with great wayling fall into the flames again. And one of the Angells told him, that such a short vicissitude of rest did signify that God after the last iudgment would give perpetuall rest to those poor soules.
11. Now under those Pitts there were others infinitly lower, whence, said he, I heard a most dreadfull and inexpressibly horrible groning and shreiking of soules, such as to which our Lord would never extend his mercy, but everlasting flames shall torment them.
12. He saw likewise a place of admirable deliciousnes, in which there was a glorious multitude o persons wonderfully beauti|full, and reioycing with inexpressible ioy, who invited him, if it were possible, to come to them, and partake of their happines: And from that place there was exhaled a most odoriferous fragrancy, which was nothing but the breath issuing from those happy and ioyfull soules. This place the Angells sayd, was that so much spoken of Paradise of God.
13. And not far from this delicious place he saw a terrible River, which flowed with fire and pitch: over which there lay a narrow plank instead of a bridge, towards which those happy soules made great hast, to the end that passing over it they might arrive on the other bank to another place infinitly more glorious and happy then the former. And some of them without any wavering or difficulty soon passed over: but others slip|ping aside, fell into that horrible River, some only to the knees, others to the arm-pitts,  others quite plunged over head: yet every one of them came out much more beautifull and glorious then before they fell in. And one of the Blessed Angells said, These are such oules as when they ended their mortall life were staind with some not very heynous sins and there|fore stand in need of Gods mercy, that they may be perfectly purified before they be admitted to his presence.
14. Beyond that River he saw the walls of a Citty of an unmeasurable length  height, shining like the Sun: and he heard the An|gells saying, This is that Holy and glorious Citty, the Heavenly Ierusalem, in which those pure soules shall reioyce for ever and their glory there|in shall be so immense that for the incom|prehensible splendour no eye can look upon them.
15. The man likewise told mee, that among others he saw the soule of a certain Abbot lately dead, which seemed of great beauty: which notwithstanding was seised on by the Wicked Spirits: crying out earnestly that he belonged to them. But one of the Angells sayd,A. D. 716. O you wicked wretches, I will presently shew you that you can have no power ovrr him. Then immediatly there appeared a great multitude of white shining soules, which cryed out saying, This man was our Teacher and Instructour, and by his exhortation gained us to God, by the merit of which charity he is rescued from you, and therefore manifestly can not belong to you. And with these soules the Angels ioynd in their contention with the other infernall Spirits: by which assistance of the Angels that soule was delivered. Then one of the Angels shrply rebuking the Devills, sayd, Take notice that without any right or title at all you have layd hold on this soule: therefore be gone from hence into everlasting fire. Assoon as he had sayd this, immediatly those Wicked Spirits with grei|vous houling cast themselves into those horrible pitts. But a while after there came out others which renewed the contention about the merits or demerits of soules.
16. He sayed moreover that at that time he could discern the different merits and condition of men yet alive. And that those who kept themselves free from crimes were manifestly in Gods favour, and defen|ded from all danger by Angells to whom they were united and in a sort allyed by Charity. But to those who polluted them|selves by heynous sins there was continual|ly associated a Wicked Spirit always initing them to sin: And after every sin committed by them in thought, word or deed, this Wic|ked Spirit would make it known to other Infernall Spirits, at which they would reioyce: and immediatly the former Evill Spirit would return to his Office o tempting.
17. Particularly he told mee that he then saw a mayd yet alive, who grinding in a mill saw near her lying a new distaffe curiously carved, which belonged to another woman: and this distaffe because it pleased her, she stole. Then those wicked spirits with ioy de|clared this theft to their companions, bid|ding them take notice of it.
1. He added saying, I saw the soule of a certain Brether, newly dead to whom I gave assistance during his sicknes and assisted at his buriall: and he at his death charged mee to require in his name of his brother that for the comfort of his soule he would give freedom to a certain captive mayd. But his Brother through avarice refused to per|form his request: for which the foresaid soule with greivous sighs complaind of his brothers hard-heartednes.
19. He likewise testified concerning Ceol|red, King of the Mercians, who at the time of these visions was certainly alive. Him he saw defended from the violence of Devills by Angells, who held over his head a certain Vmbrella like a large book: But the Devills panting with earnestnes besought the An|gells to take away that defence, and give him up to their fury, for they layd to his charge a multitude of most horrible crimes, for

which, sayd they he is designed to everla|sting torments in Hell. Then the Angells with sad countenances sayd. Alas, alas, this wret|ched sinner can be defended no longer, neither can we afford him any further assistance, so great and unpardonable is his guilt and impenitence: Having sayd this they removed the defence from over his head: and immediatly those infernall spirits more in number, then all creatures now alive in the world, with shou|tings and ioy layd hold on him  tore him incessantly with severall sorts of torments.
20. At length the Angels commanded the person who being rappd from his body, saw and heard all these things in a spirituall vision, that he should without delay return to his own body: and that he should con|fidently manifest all these things to such as with a good intention asked him, but by no means to unbeleivers or deriders. They likewise charged him to discover particularly to a certain woman dwelling a great way off, all her sins committed by her; withall signifying to her that if she would, she might yet by Pennance and satisfaction recover the favour of Gtd. But in the first place they commanded him to reveale all these visions distinctly to a certain Preist named Buggan, and according to his in|structions declare them to others. That he should also confesse to the same Preist all those his own sins of which he had been ac|cused by the Vnclean Spirits, and according to his iudgment correct and amend them. And for a proof that it was by an Angells command that he had recourse to him, he should tell the Preists that for the Love he bore to God he had worn the space of many years an iron girdle about his loyns: a thing which no man alive knew of.
21. To conclude, he told mee that whilst he was separated from his Body he had such a horrour and hatred against it, that in all his Visions he saw nothing so odious to him, or so contemptible, and that evaporated so filthy a stink, except the Devills and the flame in which they were tormented, as his own body. Yea seeing the care and kindnes which his brethren and fellow-servants ex|pressed to his hatefull body, he had a hor|rour therefore to approach to them. Howe|ver being commanded by the Angells he was forced to return to his body, and this he did at break of day, having left it a little after mid-night.
22. After he was restored to life, it was a full week before he could see any thing, for his eyes were full of Blisters, and blood issued out of them. And afterwards all proved to be true which had been told him by the An|gels, touching the devout Preist, and sinfull woman. Likewise the sudden death presently following of the wicked King Ceolred confir|med too well the truth of those things which were seen touching him.
23. Besides these, there were many other like things represented to him in his vision, which he could not distinctly call to mind:Greg. M. Dialog. l. 4. c. 36. and indeed he professed that his memory afterward was nothing so retentive, as for|merly. Now all these particulars which at your earnest request I have here written were related by him, not to mee alone, for there were three Religious and venerable Monks present with mee, who doe here ratify by their subscriptions the truth of this Writing. Farewell, truly holy Virgin, c.
24. Such is the tenour of S. Boniface Epistle: and, accordingly as S. Gregory observes, thus does the Divine Goodnes in his great mercy dispose, that some even after their death doe return presently to their body, to the end that by seeing they might be induced to fear the torments of Hell, which having heard from others they would scarce beleive.


XXV. CHAP.XXV. CH.

i.2. c. Death of King Ceolred: to whom Ethelbald Succeeds: who according to his promise to S. Guthlac, builds the Mona|stery of Croyland.

1. IN the year seaven hundred and sixteen after our Lords Incarnation Ceolred King of the Mercians by his incestuous lasts,A. D. 716. sacri|ledge and other crimes having filled up the measure of his sins by his fearfull death too well confirmed the truth of the foregoing Propheticall Vision concerning him. William of Malmsbury only writes in generall concer|ning it, saying, Ceolred miserable in his im|mature death after a raign of only eight years, was buried at Lichfeild, leaving his wife Queen Wereburga a widow, who became a Religious woman, and afterward an Abbesse: His heyr and successour in the Kingdom being Ethelbald grandchild of Alwi brother to King Penda.
2. But Saint Boniface writing to this New King Ethelbald, and deterring him from im|piety by the sad example of his Predecessour, thus describes his miserable death: Colred, says he, thy Predecessour a ravisher of Consecra|ted Virgins, and infringer of Ecclesiasticall privi|ledges, whilst he was splendidly feasting with his Nobles, the infernall Spirit seised on him, and forced from him his soule without Confession or any Sacrament, as he was talking with the De|vill, and blasphemously detesting God and Di|vine Law. By which expression that learned and famous Saint reckons among the most heavy and terrible punishments of a soule, to depart out of the world not purified by Confession, nor armed with its last Via|ticum, the Sacrament of our Lords Body.
3. The Successour of Ceolred in the King|dom of the Mercians was, as hath been sayd, Ethelbald, to whom Saint Guthlac had promised it not long before. And he like|wise delayd not the same year to perform

the promise he had made to the Saint by building and richly endowing the Monaste|ry of Croyland. Concerning which, Ingul|phus a Monk and Abbot of the same Mona|stery thus writes: King Ethelbald perceiving that his dear Father and comforter Saint Guth|lac became glorious by many Miracles,Ingulph. hist. with great ioy and devotion went to the place of his buriall, and having now gott the kingdom pro|mised by the Holy-man, he entirely accomplished whatsoever he had promised him whilst he was alive. For presently sending for a Monk of Eve|sham named Kenulph, a man of noted piety, he gave unto him the whole Isle of Croyland, that he might there build a Monastery and gather a Con|gregation of Monks to serve God for ever: Which Monastery he entirely freed from all secular char|ges and customes: Of which Grant he made them a Charter signed and subscribed by his Bishop  Nobles. A Coppy of which Charter is there by the same Authour recorded.
4. In the ame Charter is containd a mea|sure of the Land by him given: for the Isle of Croyland is there described to be four leagues in length and three in breadth: To which were added two adiacent Marisnes, the one being two leagues in length and one in breadth: and the other, each way two leagues. Moreover for the building of the Monastery he gave out of his treasury the first year three hundred pounds, and for ten years following one hundred pounds yearly.
5 But this devout King thus far only was able to accomplish his vow this first year,Idem ibid. that he assigned the place for building the Monastery, together with the lands and pos|sessions annexed to it. But to erect so vast a building on a soyle so fenny and yeilding, required strange industry and labour. Which how it was performed, the same Authour thus describes: Because Croyland was a fenny soyle, as the name imports (for it signifies a crude muddy ground) and therefore could not sustain a stone-building of any considerable bulk, the fore|said King took order that innumerable vast piles of oak should be forcibly driven deep into the earth, and that solide earth should be brought in boats from a place called Vpland, nine miles di|stant from thence, which Ne earth was mixed with the morish soyle and layd over the said piles And thus, whereas S. Guthlac had formerly con|tented himself with a woodden Oratory, the King began and consummated a magnificent Church of Stone, thereto building a Monastery which he en|riched with possessions and all sorts of ornaments: and during his whole life loved that place most tenderly. And since this first foundation that Monastery never wanted Religious persons to in|habit it to this day (that is, till the Norman con|quest at which time the sayd Authour lived.)
6. The first Abbot of that Monastery is in the forenamed Kings Charter called Renulphus, sent for out of the Abbey of Evesham. But besides the Monastery, there was a little Her|mitage in which S. Guthlac lived. Who being demanded who should succeed him therein, answered, That it was a person who when that question was asked, was a Heathen Ido|latour. His name was Cissa: who being after|ward converted, betook himself to an Ana|choreticall Life, and succeeded S. Guthlac in his solitude.


XXVI. CHAP.XXVI. CH

1.2 3. The unhappy death of Osred King of the Northumbers.

1. IN the kingdom of the Northumbers the same year dyed King Osred after he had raigned eleaven years. And as he resembled the Mercian King Ceolred in his life, so he did in his unfortunat death likewise. Therefore S Boniface in his Letter to King Ethelbald, who notwithstanding his good beginning fell afterward into the crimes of incest and sa|criledge, to deterre him from pursuing such sins, makes use not only of the unhappy end of his Predecessours Ceolred, as hath been de|clared but likewise of this King Osred his neighbour: The words of his Epistle are these:2. Since the time,S Bnifa.  Ethel|bald. R. saith he, that Saint Gregory sent from the See Apostolick Preachers of the Catholick Faith into Brittany, the Priviledges of Churches have remaind unviolated to the times of Ceolred King of the Mercians and Osred of the Deiri and Bernicians. These two Kings by the De|vills instinct not only practised, but by their example taught others publickly to practise in this kingdom these two horrible sins, the vila|ting of consecrated Nunns, and infringing the Priviledges of Monasteries: For which by the iust iudgment of God they have not only been cast down head-long from the height of Regal autho|rity, but being prevented by an immature and ter|rible death, they are separated from everlasting Light, and plunged deeply in the bottom of Hell. For first as touching your Predecessour Ceolred, c. (as before.) And Osred who likewise was a Sa|crilegious adulterer and avisher of holy Virgins, the infernall Spirit never ceased to agitate and impell him from one excesse to another, till he made him loose his kingdom, youthfull life and soule likewise by a dishonourable death. To these may be added a third exa~ple: for Charles the late King of the Franks, who was an invader and con|sumer of the revenews of Monasteries, was at last consumed by a tedious tormenting sicknes, and fearfull death following it.
3. As touching the manner of King Osreds death all that we can find in our Ecclesiasticall monuments is,Huntingd l. 4 that in a combat near unto Mere he was unfortunatly slain by the treason of his kinsman Kenred the son of Cuthwin, who suc|ceeded him in the government of the king|dom: but enioyd the price of his impiety only two years.



XXVII. C.XXVII. CHAP.

1.2. The happy death of the holy King Ethelred
3 And of Saint Egwin Bishop of wor|cester.

1. BVT there were two illustrious per|sons in Brittany whose deaths this year were as precious and happy as those of the two forenamed Princes were mise|rable. These were Ethelred who had quitt the throne of the Mercian Kingdom to spend the remainder of his Life in the solitude and austerities of a Monastery: And Egwin the famous Bishop of Worcester, founder of the Noble Monastery of Evesham.
Wigon. hic.2. Concerning the former, Florentius of Worcester thus breifly writes: Ethelred late King of the Mercians after he had been Abbot of the Monastery of Bardeney built by himself, this year departed this life, and entred into the ioyes of eternall felicity, tranquillity and Light. He was buried in the same Monastery, cal|led Bardeney by William of Malmsbury,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. who affirmeth that many ages it was famous for the Sanctity of the Religious Monks living in it, and its plentifull endowments, especially after that King Ethelred there took the Crown of Monasticall Tosure. In the Church of the said Monastery his Monument is seen to these times. Wee doe anniversarily celebrate his Memory among Saints on the fourth of May.Martyrolog. Angl 4. Maij
3 In the next place the happy and holy death of Saint Egwin Bishop of Worcester is from the Authour of his life thus described by Harpsfeild:rp. saec. 8 c. p 15.When Saint Egwin  come to the extremity of his mortall life, he cal|led together his Monks and children whom he had begotten to God, and said to them, My Brethren, I have lived thus long amongst you, and I am not ashamed that I have so lived: for I have done what good I was able, though all I have done is very small. What you are to doe, and what to avoyd, I have frequently and in all the manners which seemed to mee expedient, informed you. Having there|fore shewed you the only right way, I beseech you to walk in it, and let not any vain shadow of present felicity seduce you out of the way: for it quickly vanishes, and never remains in the same state. Our Lord who is the way, Truth and life, remove from you the way of iniquity and instruct you in the way of his iudgments. Thus being full of vertues he departed to our Lord on the third day before the Calends of Ianuary, in the seaven hundred and twentieth year of Grace.
(leg. 16) And he was buried in the Monastery of Evesham founded by himself. After his death God was pleased to work many Miracles by his intercession. His Successour in the See of Worcester was Wilfrid, or, as he subscribes his name to the Charter of King Ethelbald given to the Monastery of Croyland, Winfrid. He was elected this year, but not consecra|ted till the next.


XXVIII. CHAP.XXVIII. CHAP.

i.2. c. The Scottish Monks of Hyredu|ced to the due Observation of Easter, c. by S. Egbert.

1, A Great accesse was made to the luster of this year by the Conversion of the  of Hy in Scotland, and all the Mona|stries and Churches subject to them to the Vnity of the Catholick Church in the Obser|vation of Easter and the Ecclesiasticall Tonsure: Which pious work was perormed by the Hly Monk Egbert, of whom we have severall times treated. How this was done by him S. Beda thus relates:2. Not long after (saith he) those Monks of the Scottish Nation inhabiting the Island Hy,Bed. l. 5. c. 23. together with other Monasteries subiect to them were brought through Gods Providence to the Observance of the Catholick rite of Easter and the Canonicall Tonsure. For in the year seaven hundred  sixteen after our Lords Incarnation, in which Osred King of the Northumbers being unhappily slain, Coenrea (or Kene:) uner|took the government of the same, the most Ve|nerable Father Egbert Preist (of whom we for|merly made mention:) came to them out of Ireland, and was with great honour and ioy re|ceived by them He being both a winning, Tea|cher, and a devout practiser of the dutyes he taught, was willingly hearkned to by them all, and by his pious and diligent exhortations wholly changed the inveterate Traditions which they had received from their Fathers (to whom might be applyed that saying of the Apostle, That they had the Zeale of God, but not according to knowledge) and taught them the Celebration of the Paschal Solemnity, and the right Ecclesiasti|call Tonsure or Crown, after the Catholick and Apostolick Manner.
3. And truly herein was visible an effect of Divine dispensation and goodness that whereas that Nation had formerly with great charity communicated to the English people the know|ledge of Divine Verities as far as they had carn them they in succession of times should be in|structed by the English Nation in those things which they had not so well learnt, and be brought to a perfect form of living. As on the contrary the Brittains who refused to make known to the English that knowledge of Christianity which they had, when as afterward the English became by other means perfectly instructed in the Rule of Christian Faith and Discipline; they remain in

their old errour, and irregular practises, nei|ther admitting the ancient Catholick Tonsure on their heads, and observing the Christian solem|nities contrary to the Orders and practise of the Catholick Church.
4. Now these Monks of Hy by the instruction of Saint Egbert received the Catholick Rite when Dunchad was their Abbot: about fourscore years after they had sent Aidan their Prelat to preach to the English Nation. This Dunchad was the tenth Abbot of Hy after Saint Colomba: and the Annals of Vlster observe that he admit|ted the Roman Rites of Easter in the year of Grace seaven hundred and sixteen, on the fourth day before the Calends of September being Saturday, and that he dyed the year following.
5. As touchinh S. Egbert, S. Beda addes, that he remained thirteen years in the sayd Island, which by a new Grace of Ecclesiasticall Commu|nion and peace he had consecrated to Christ. Con|cerning his happy death we shall speak in due place.




THE TWO AND TWENTIETH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. The Gests of the Holy Abbot S. Ceolfrid: He resigns his Office and in travelling toward Rome, dyes at Lan+gres in France.

1. _THE year of Grace seaven hundred and seaventeen is illustrated by the deaths of two glorious English Saints, the great S Swibert Apostle of the Germans, and Saint Ceolfrid the worthy Successour of S. Benedict Bscop in the government of the Monasteries of Saint Peter and S. Paul at Wire|mouth and Girwy in the Kingdom of the Northumbers.
2. Treating above of the occurrents of the year of our Lord six hundred eighty three, we then out of a History of Saint Beda lately published concerning the Abbots of those two Convents, related the memorable Gests and happy deaths of Easterwin, Sigfrid and S. Benedict Biscop, who had been Abbots of the same before this S. Ceolfrid, to whom S. Benedict at his death recommended the care of them both, and by whom Saint Beda himself received his education in learning and piety. Now therefore it will be requi|site to pursue his Narration concerning this his devout, carefull Master and Benefactour: Which is as follows:
3. S. Ceolfrid (saith he) was a man in|dustrious in all things,Bed. Hist. Abm Wim  Givvy. sharp of witt, dili|gent in busines, ripe in iudgment and fer|vent in his zeale for promoting Religion.He as hath been already declared, by the assi|stance of S. Benedict Biscop in the space of seaven years founded, perfected and go|verned the Monastery of S. Paul the Apostle: and afterward became Abbot both of that and the other Monastery also of S Peter, which considering their mutuall charity and pro|pinquity were to be esteemed as one Mona|stery: In which Office he continued twenty eight years, carefully and prdently accom|plishing the worthy design begun by his Predecessour S. Benedict. For he added seve|rall new built Oratories, encreased the num|ber of Sacred Vessels and Vestments for the Altars and Church and also much enlarged the Libraries of both the Monasteries, former|ly well furnished by his Predecessour. Parti|cularly he added three Pandects of a New

Translation,A. D. 717 to a former one of an old, of which one he took with him in his last voyage to Rome, leaving the others to each Monastery one: he gave likewise a large Book of Cosmography of an admirable work, which S. Benedict had bought at Rome.
4. Moreover he purchased of the devout and learned King Aldfrid a peice of land of eight families near the River Fresca, for a possession to the Monastery of S. Paul: which land had been taxed by S. Benedict, but he dyed before he could acco~plish the purchase. But afterward in the raign of King Osred, Saint Ceolfrid made an exchange of this land for other land of twenty families near a town called Sambue, (from which it tooke its name) because it lay nearer and more con|veniently to the Monastery: for the effecting of which exchange he added a considerable Summ of money. And having done this, he sent certain Monks to Rome who obtained of Sergius Pope of happy memory a Priviledge for the security of the Monastery, as S. Bene|dict before had received from Pope Agathon: and this latter likewise, as the former, was confirmed in a Synod by the subscription of the Magnificent King Aldfrid and the Bishops there present. In his time also a certain ser|vant of Christ learned in Scriptures and se|cular knowledge, called Witmer underta|king a Monasticall Profession in the Monastery of S. Peter, which he afterwards governed, gave for a perpetuall possession to the same Monastery a peice of land of ten families, which had been given him by King Aldfrid.
5. But S. Ceolfrid after a long and exact practise of Regular Observance, instructions for which he had received partly from his Father Saint Benedict, and partly himself had collected from the ancient Fathers; after an incomparably skillful exercise of Prayer and Psalmody, never omitted by him; after a wonderfull fervour showed by him in cor|recting the disobedient and irregular, as likewise an equall mildnes in comforting and strengthning the infirm; after a spa|ringnes in eating and drinking not usuall in governours, as likewise a coursenes and vilenesse in cloathing, at last seeing himself full of dayes, and by reason thereof incapa|ble of continuing the due Office of a Spiri|tuall Superiour in teaching and giving good example to his Monks, having seriously and a long space meditated on these things at last it seemed to him most expedient to give order to his Monks that, according to the Priviledge given them, and according to the Rule of the Holy Abbot Saint Benedict, they should chuse to themselves an Abbot (as himself had been chosen young by his Pre|decessour then going to visit the Sepulchers of the Apostles) that by this means himself night have the opportunity before his death to attend to his own soule in solitude and exemption from secular cares; and they under the conduct of a younger Abbot more perfectly observe the instituts of a Regular life.
6. Now having made this proposall, though all the Monks at first opposed them|selves with sighs, tears and prostrations, yet at last he obtained his desire. And so earnest he was to begin his iourney, that the third day after he had discovered his purpose se|cretly to his Brethren, he began it towards Rome. For he was afraid least he should be prevented by death before he could come thither, as in effect it fell out: and indeed he was desirous to avoyd the importunity of his freinds, men of quality in the world, who, he knew, would interpose delayes: and lastly he apprehended that some freinds would present him with gifts, which he should not be able to require on a sudden: For this had been always his custom, that whensoever any presents were made him, he would not fayle either presently, or in a competent time to return some thing as valuable.
7. On the day therefore before the Nones of Iune being thursday, Masse being solemnly sung very early in te Church of the most Blessed Virgin and S. Peter, at which all who were present communicated, he immediatly prepared himself fo his voyage. All the Monks therefore being assembled in the Church of S. Peter, he having incenced the Altar and made his Prayer before it stan|ding upon the steps with the Censer in his hand, gave his benediction to them all whilst they were singing Litaries, which they interrupted with their sighs and tears: Then from thence they went into the Ora|tory of the Holy Martyr S. Laurence, which is in the Dormitory, there giving them his last farewell, he admonished them all to pre|serve mutuall Charity and peace, and not to omitt, on occasion, brotherly Correption, as the Gospell enioyns: after which he imparted to all who had any way offended him his pardon and love, desiring all to pray for him, and to pardon him if he had shewd too much severity in reprehending any.
8. This being done, they went to the Sea shoare, where once again kneeling, he recited a Prayer, and having given them all the kisse of peace, who wept all the while, he took ship with his attendants. The Dea|cons of the Church likewise lighting their Tapers, and carying their golden Crosse, he passed over the River, adores the Crosse, mounts on horse-back and so departed, lea|ving in his Monasteries allmost six hundred Religious Brethren.
9. When he was gone the Brethren went to the Church, where with weeping they commended themselves and all their affairs to our Lord. And awhile after having recited Tierce, they assembled againe, and consulted what was to be done, and resolved that by Prayer, Psalmody and fasting they should without delay demand a Superiour and Father

of God,A. D. 719. and wthall by sending some of their brethren they declare to the Religious Monks or Saint Paul what they had deter|mined o do, who willingly give their assent theeto: So that ll became of one mind, all their hearts and tongues were lifted up to God.
10. At length on the third day after, being Whitsunday, they mett tgether again, and to them came not a few of the elder Monks of Saint Paul. Then with an una|nimous consent they elected for their Ab|bot, Whetbert, wo from his childhood had been brought up in the Monastery, and well instructed not only in Regular Obser|vance, but in the skill of writing, singing, reading and teaching. He likewise in the dayes of Pope Sergius of happy memory had been at Rome, where continuing a good space he learnt, wrote and brought back with him whatsoever things he iudged ne|cessary.
11. This man then being by the gene|rall consent of the Monks of both the Mo|nasteries chosen Abbot, took with him some of his Brethren, and with hast went to the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid who expected a wind proper for his voyage, and to him he si|gnifyed the Election which the Monks had made, whose answer was, God be thanked: and presently confirmed the Election. Then he received of the new Abbot Letters com|mendatory to Pope Gregory, in which with great tendernes they besought his Holines to extend all requisite Charity to their most beloved and most carefull Father, whose corporall presence though they were deprived of, yet they were assured that whether he were alive or dead, they should ever find him an intercessour with God and Patron to them.
12. Now when Abbot Whetbert was re|turned home, Bishop Acca was desired to come to the Monastery, who with the ac|customed form of Benediction confirmed the Abbot in his Office. And he among innumerable actions performed to the common aduantage of the Monastery, ad|ded this which was very acceptable to all, that he took up the bones of Abbot Ea|sterwin which had been buried in the porch entring into the Churh of Saint Peter, as likewise the bones of Abbot Sigfrid, who had formerly been his Master, which had been reposed without the Sa|cristie, and putting them into one Coffin, yet so that there was a partition between them, they buried them within the Ora|tory of the Blessed Father Saint Benedict. This solemnity was performed on the eleaventh day before the Calends of Sep|tember, being the Anniversary day of Ab|bot Sigfrid: on which very day also by a strange Providence of God the Venerable servant of Christ, Withmer, mentioned before, departed this world, and was buried in the same place with the sayd Abbots, the example of whose vertues he had carefully imitated.
13. But to return to the servant of God Ceolfrid: he pursuing his iourney towards the Monuments of the Apostles at Rome, before he could approach thither, he was seised on by a sicknes of which he dye For being come as far as Langres in France about nine of the clock before noon, at four in the after noon he departed to our Lord: and the day following was ho|nourably buried in the Church of the three Twin-brethren and glorious Martyrs Speu|sippus, Eleusippus, and Meleusippus, who as they were born at the same birth by one Mother, so they were regenerated together in the same faith of their Mother the Church, and on the same day together with their Grand-Mother Leonilla, they left to that place a worthy Memory of their Mar|tyrdom.
14. At the buriall of the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid there was vehement weeping not only by those of the English Nation attending him in his iourney, who were no fewer then fourscore, but likewise the inhabitants of that Citty, who much bewayld the retarding and fayling of the desire of the Reverend Old man. Neither could any one without difficulty contain his teares seeing the dispersion of this good Abbots Disciples and followers, for some of them, notwithstanding the losse of their Father, continued their devout iourney to Rome: and others thought fitt rather to return home and give notice of his death: Lastly some there were who out of an unquencheable affection to their beloved Father would continue at his Tombe, amongst a people whose language they understood not at all.
15. He was when he dyed seaventy four years of age, he had been a Preist forty seaven, and had executed the Office of Abbot thirty five, (or rather three:) for from the time that Saint Benedict began to build his Monastery to the Honour of the Prince of the Apostles, he was his in|separable companion, and assisted him not only in that labour, but also in the care of Monasticall Institution. In the pra|ctise of which he was so sedulous, that notwithstanding any occasion of age, in|firmity or iourney, from the day that he left his Monastery till his death, that is from the day before the Ides of Iune to the sea|venth before the Calends of October, which was one hundred and fourteen days besides the Canonicall howers he recited the whole Psalter twice a day, and this when he was so sick that he could not tide on horse-back, but was forced to be caried in a Litter: every day, ex|cept that on which he passed the Sea, and three days before his death he sung

Masse and offred the Saving Sacrifice to God.A. D. 717.
16, He dyed on the five and twentieth day of September, in the year after our Lords Incarnation seaven hundred and sixteen, upon a Friday after three of the clock in the after noon, in the feilds of the foresaid Citty of Langres, and was buried the day following in the Monastery of the three Twin-Martyrs about a mile distant from the Citty toward the south, there being present no small army, partly of English who attended him, as likewise inhabitants of the Monastery and Citty adioyning, all which with loud voyces sung Psalmes at his en|terrment. Thus far writes S. Beda.
Suppl. Mar|tyrolog. Gal. lic. 25. No|vemb.7. It seems his body did not remain at Langres: for in the Supplement of the Gal|lican Martyrologe on the six and twentieth of November we read celebrated the Tran|slution of Saint Ceolfrid an English Abbot, who at his return from his pilgrimage to Rome dyed at Langres in France, and was buried in the Church of the three twinn Martyrs. Afterward his countrey-men demanding his Sacred Body, which had been glorified by many Miracles, it was with great veneration caried back to his own Monastery. The day of his deposition is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the five and twentieth of September.Martyrol. Angl 25. Sept.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. The death: Buriall and Miracles of S. Swibert.

1. THE same year, as hath been sayd, Saint Swibert the glorious Apostle of the Germans and Frisons ended his mor|tality. [This was the third year after he had visited Prince Pipin and was returned to Werda (saith Marcellin.S. Marcellin. in S. Sbt.)At last Almighty God who is himself the great reward of his faithfull servants, and who by a temporall death of the flesh translates the living Stones of his Church from earth to his hea|venly building, was pleased to call the valiant Champion of his Faith, Saint Swibert, to receive his Crown in his eternall king|dom. Therefore in the said year Saints Swi|bert replenished with all Divine Graces, and inflamed with a cordiall desire to See God; after he had celebrated the Divine Mysteries on the Feast of Saint Peters Chair in his Monastery, a languishing sicknes took him, so that he was forced to confine himself to his bed.
2. And when he saw that his disease every moment grew more violent, he called all his Brethren and Disciples togeher, to the number of twenty, and in the first place admonished them to follow our Lords foot-steps, and to be carefull to preserve peace and charity with one ano|ther, and with all of the house-hold of Faith. Likewise that with all care they should observe the Instituts of Regular Dis|ciplin, which he had taught them by Word and example. Then he told them expressly that the day of his death was at hand: whereupon they all began to weep bitter|ly. But the Holy Bishop said to them: My beloved Brethren, doe not weep, but rather reioyce in my behalf, for now I shall re|ceive the recompence of all my labours. Ex|tend your charity to mee at this time of my retiring out of the world, and protect mee with your prayers. After he had said this, he much reioycing in our Lord, exhorted them to a contempt of this present world, and an earnest desire of heavenly rewards,  again putt them in mind by their watch|ings, prayers and good works to pre|vent the hour of his death, which was un|certain. And having added other words to this effect, and bestowed his Benediction on them, by his command they went out to the Church with great sadnes.
3. But he retained with him the Superiour of his Monastery Saint ieic, with whom he ioynd in most devout Prayer to God and meditation of Divine things. And when the day of his departure and repose was come, of which he had before been in|formed by an Angel, causing his foresaid Brethren to be once more assembled, he commanded that Masse should solemnly be celebrated in his presence. Then ar|ming himself with the Communion of our Lords Body, and making the sign of the Crosse on all that stood about him, he quietly slept in death, and his blessed soule was caried by Quires of Angels to the eternall happy Society of the Saints. And immediatly his face became of a shi|ning brightnes: his Cell likewise yeilded an odoriferous fragrancy, which wonder|fully refreshed all that were present. Thus this most Holy Prelat Saint Swibert Bishop of Werda happily dyed in the sixty ninth year of his age, on a friday being the first day of March, on which day the Church every where celebrates his Memory.
4. In the same hower that he dyed his soule with great glory and ioy appeared to Saint Willebrord his beloved companion,Martyrolog. Angl. 1 Mat. S. Marcellin. ibid. Bishop of Vtrecht then in his way retur|ning from Epternac to Verona, requesting and admonishing him that he would be present at his Funeralls in Werda and com|mend his body to the Sepulcher. This being declared to us by Saint Willebrord with much greif, he presently took boat, and made great hast to Werda. There was then present with him his illustrious Spirituall daughter the Duchesse Plectrudis with certain Pre|lats, who blessed God for the merits of

his holy Confessour Saint Swibert. All these the day following, being Saturday, as they were according to custom singing the Vigile of the Dead, a young man was brought among them, who had been made blind by lightning, and with his cla|mours interrupting the Psalmody, and cal|ling to the Saint to have his sight restored, assoon as he had touched the Coffin, he im|mediatly recovered his sight, to the astoni|shment of all. Besides another who was raging mad being brought in, and kissing the cover of the same Coffin, was presently restored to his senses: A third also who was possessed by the Devill by the same means was perfectly freed from the Wicked Spirit.
5 At last on Sunday after all the solem|nity of the funerals had been devoutly full|filld, the Sacred Body with hymns and Lauds was reverently committed to the ground by Saint Willebrord Arch-bishop of Vtrecht, Saint Willeic a Preist, the glorious Princesse Pectrud Duchesse of the Austrasians, and many others his Brethren and Disciples.
6. And I Marcellin Preist, who have writ|ten this History, and had been formerly a Disciple and companion of the Holy Bishop S. Swibert, I was also present at the Buriall with Saint Willebrord: after which at the earnest request of my dear Brethren Willeic, Gerard, Theodoric and others we remained with them in the Monastery of Werda fifteen dayes for their consolation. I will therefore here relate among many some few testi|monies of Miracles, which I saw with mine own eyes, and many other with mee, so that it not only deservedly may, but ought to be beleived, that the said Holy Bishop is great in the sight of God, and that his glory is wonderfull in heaven, since he has made him so resplendent by miracles on earth. For after his death he ceases not to cure the sick, c]
Thus Writes the Holy Apostolick Preist Saint Marcellin, adding moreover a Narration of severall stupendious Miracles of which himself was an eye witnes: and which the devout Reader may find in his Life for I am unwilling to swell this History with such like Relation.


III. CHAP.III. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Monastery of Theokesbury founded.
7. The death of Saint Egwin Bishop of Wor|cester.

1. TO the same year is by our Historians assigned the foundation of the Mona|stery of Tewksbury, though in the Chronicles of that Monastery the Erection thereof is sayd to have been made two years sooner. And there we find this account of it:2. In the raigns of the illustrious Kings of the Mercians Ethelred,Chron. de Tvvkbury in Bblioth. Cotton. Kenred and Ethelbald there lived two Dukes in great estimation, Oddo and Doddo, men of high descent, much regarded for their vertues, but (which most crowns their me|mory) persons who with sincere devotion loved almighty God, and sought his honour: Which they made good by their charitable actions, for they and their Progenitours magnificently built and endowed many Monasteries. These foresaid Dukes about the year of Grace seaven hundred and fifteen gave order for the building a Mona|stery in their own Territory near the Severn, seaven miles distant from Claudiocester (or Glo|cester) at place called Theokusbury from a cer|tain Hermit named Theocus who anciently had lived there.
3. This Monastery they built to the honour of God and the glorious Virgin Mary: and conferred upon it a Village called Stanwey with all its de|pendances, and some few possessions besides, for the sustenation of Monks, not many in number, for at first there were but four or five which under the Obedience of a Priour served God according to the Rule of our Holy Father S. Benedict.
4. Now after that these two Dukes were for their devout actions translated to heavenly ioyes (as we firmly beleive) their Bodies were buried in the Church of Persora (Parshur) in which Duke Doddo had taken the Habit of a Monk and which they had enriched with ample possessions.
5. These foresaid Dukes had a certain Brother named Almaric, whose body was buried at Der|hurst in a little Chappell over against the Gate of the Priory there, which Chappell had formerly been a Royall place.There to this day is shewd his Sepulcher, where in the wall over the dore is this Inscription, This Royall Hall did Duke Doddo cause to be consecrated into a Church to the ho|nour of the Blessed Virgin Mary, for love which he bore to his Brother Almaric.
6. Thus we read in the said Chronicle: Where consequently is related how by rea|son of the great troubles and warrs hapning both in Mercia and other parts of the King|dom till it was reduced to a Monarchy under King Althelslan, the said Monastery was often spoyled, and twice burnt: But afterward ree|dified,

and annexed to the Abbey of Cranborn:A. D. 718 and in conclusion for the commodious and pleasant situation of the place, it was it self erected into an Abbey, and the Monastery of Cranborn depressed into a Priory, and made subject to it. The great Patron and enlarger of it was Robert the Son of Hamon in the be|ginning of the Norman times,Malmb. de Pont. l. 4. as William of Malmsbury testifies: Who by mistake affirms that the Name of Theocksbury did seem to desti|ne it to a Religious use, being so called as if the Title were Theotocosbury, or the Court of the Mother of God. But Camden according to the forementioned Chronicle more genuinely de|rives the name from Theocus a devout Hermit formerly living there
7. To this year is assigned the death of Egwin Bishop of Worcester, after he had ad|ministred that See the space of twenty four years: To whom succeeded Wilfrid, who go|verned the same seaven and twenty years. Scarce any thing concerning either of them, besides their names, is recorded.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2. Kenred King of the Northumbers dying: Osric succeeds.
3. The Piety of Ethelbald the Mercian King.

A. D. 718.1. THE year following Kenred King of the Northumbers after two years pos|session of the Throne, to which he mounted by Treason and murder of Osred his Kinsman and predecessour, dyed: and in his place succeeded Osric, his associate in the same crime.
2. Concerning these Kings, William of Malms|bury thus writes:Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c 3. Kenred who raigned only two years, and after him Osric eleaven, have left this one mark upon their memories, that shedding the blood of their Master (how well soever deser|ving such an unhappy end) they defiled the aire with their shamefull deaths. Yet Osric before he came to that Crown, seemd to have had more sence of piety, for it is said that he built about the year seaven hundred a Monastery for Reli|gious Virgins at Glocester.
3. But in the Kingdom of the Mercians King Ethelbald,Ingulph. hist. saith Ingulphus, having perfected his Monastery of Croyland, employd his mind to pro|mote Holy Church through his whole Kingdom, granting immunities and Priviledges to other Monasteries also of Religious men and woemen. For which purpose in the third year of his raign, he pubished a generall Statut to that effect, recorded there by the same Authour.


V. CHAP.A. D. 719.
V. CHAP.

i.2. The Birth: and first radiments of Saint Boniface, Apostle of the Germans.

1. THE great losse which the New-plan|ted Churches of Germany sustained by the death of their glorious Apostle S. Swi|bert,A. D. 719. was quickly repaired with advantage. For in the year seaven hundred and nine|teen God provided for them New Pastour, no lesse diligent and powerfull both in word and deed, and who after incredible pains and dangers with infinite fruit thence pro|ceeding, crownd all his labours with Mar|tyrdom. This was S. Winfrid, which name was afterward changed into Boniface: who the sayd year having received a Benediction and authority from Pope Gregory the Second of that name, chearfully began his Apostolick Office in that countrey. His Gests have been written by severall writers, and particularly by S. Willebald a Bishop his Disciple with great care and sincerity: likewise more largely by a certain Preist call'd Othlo: and besides those, a great Volume still extant of S. Boniface his Epistles will furnish us with sufficient mate|rialls for this History many years conse|quently. Here therefore we will begin a Narration, hitherto deferred, of his Birth, and education till this great charge was impo|sed on him, and consequently proceed in recounting his glorious actions and la|bours, referring them to the severall times in which they were performed.
2. He was born in the year of Grace six hundred and seaventy, of an English Saxon family,Othlo Presb. Ap. Su in S. bonif. 5 Iun. Haraeus. 5. Iun. Willeb ap. Sur. ib. as appears evidently from his own Epistles. The place illustrated by his Birth was Creden, now called Kirton in Devonshire: the names of his parents are not recorded.He was by them with great care educated, and even in his infancy he was so earnestly studious to enrich his mind with spirituall knowledge and piety, that his father was first astonished, and after displeased with it, so that he spared not severe reprehensions, and endeavours to induce him to mind worldly cares. But the holy Child not abating his solicitudes after heavenly things, his Father by a sudden sicknes from God was ad|monished not to resist any longer the good inspirations of his child. Whereupon chan|ging his former rigour, he sent him being then thirteen years of age to a Monastery cal|led Adestancester (but more truly, Exceter) commending him to Wolfhard the Venerable Abbot thereof. Vnder whose government and direction he remained severall years, with great perfection practising all the Disciplin of a Regular life, and incessantly meditating on the Holy Scriptures. Notwithstanding by

reason of the penury of learned Teachers not finding full satisfaction to his desires of spirituall knowledge, by the permission of the said Abbot and Religious Brethren, he be|took himself to another Monastery at this day called Huntcell, or Nutcell where he submit|ted himself to the direction of the Abbot thereof called Winbert, who at first refused to admitt him, but seeing his perseverance in his earnest desire and supplications, at last through Gods Providence yeilded to him. Now where this Monastery was seated it does not appear. And no wonder, since by the succeeding invasions and fury of the Danes the memory of many Monasteries is lost.
3. In this Monastery he proffited so much in learning and piety, that he became a Ma|ster and Teacher to others. And his fame was so great, that a Synod being assembled to compose certain differences in the Churches of the West-Saxons, he was made choice of by the recommendation of his own Abbot Wintred or Winbert, Wintra Abbot of Tisselbury, and Beerwaldt Abbot of Glastenbury to goe into Kent, and consult the Arch-bishop Brith|wald about the present affairs: which em|ployment he discharged with so much suffi|ciency and prudence, that to the great satis|faction and ioy both of the West-Saxon King and Bishops, all debates ended.
4. After this he burning with charity and zeale for the conversion of Infidels, and ha|ving received the Order of Preisthood, after much importunity he obtained from his Abbot permission to follow S. Swibert into Germany, where by the Testimony of S. Mar|cellin he became Canon of the Church of Vtrecht under the Blessed Arch-bishop S. Wille|brord. But by reason of a furious persecution raised against the New-planted Churches of the Frisons by the Tyrant Radbode, all those Apostolick Missionners being dispersed, he re|turned into his own countrey and Monaste|ry. Where with great greif he found his beloved Father the Abbot Winbert sick, who also dyed shortly after. And S. Winfrid (or Boniface) by the unanimous consent of the Monks was chosen Abbot. But that Prelature he utterly refused, being designed by almigh|ty God for a far more laborious employ|ment, and in his place procured the ele|ction and institution of a pious Monk called Steven in the Office of Abbot.
5. In this Monastery he remained only two years, after which the zeale of Gods house consuming all desire of rest in his mind, he once more resolved to attempt the Aposto|lick Office of converting the Infidel Germans: Which that he might perform with more security and order, he, being now forty nine years old, undertook a voyage to Rome, to receive from the Holy Pope Gregory second of that Name, his Benediction and a Missionary authority. His proceedings in this iourney we will consequently relate out of the Nar|ration of his Disciple S. Willebald.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

i.2. c. S. Boniface his iourney to Rome: where he receives authority to preach the Gospell to Infidels.

1. IN order and preparation to his voyage to Rome,Ap. Sur 5. Iun. S. Winfrid (not yet called Boni|face) repaired to the Reverend Bishop Daniel, Bi|shop of Winchester, desiring of him, with his bles|sing, letters of recommendation to the See Apo|stolick. To this request the good Bishop willingly condescended. And exercising the Office of a Provident Pastour, after he had preferred to the government of the foresaid Monastery a good Re|ligious Monk, called Steven, he dismissed the man of God Winfrid with commendatory letters to his voyage towards the places much desired by him.
2. The Letters of recommendation given him by that good Bishop Daniel,Ap. Bonifac. Ep. 33. by which he demanded in his behalf the charity and fa|vour of all Kings, Princes, Bishops, Abbots and all devout Christians in the way, are to this day extant, among S. Boniface's Epistles: In which he declares to them by the exam|ples of Blessed Abraham and Loth how accep+table to almighty God charity and hospitality to strangers is, since for the merit thereof they were honoured with the presence of Angels. Consequently he promises to them eternall rewards if they would in the Reli|gious Preist the bearer of those Letters, chari|tably entertain Christ himself.
3. S. Winfrid (saith the same Holy Authour) encouraged with the good Bishops benediction,Id. op. Sut. ib. presently took leave of his Brethren, and began his iourney through far remote countreys and wayes hitherto unknown to him. Now there ioynd themselves as companions of his redious voyage a good number of Gods devout servants, who with great fervour and devotion visiting many Churches of Saints by the way, begged the Divine assistance, that they might without dan|ger passe the terrible precipices of the Alpes, and afterward find the feirce minds of the Lom|bards civill and kind to them.
4. This Prayer Almighty God mercifully granted, for without any harm or incommodity they travelled through the regions inhabited by that savage Nation, and arrived safely at the Monuments of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul: where after due thanks to Christ their Protectour, they by Pennance and Confession beg|ged Absolution of their sins, and a prosperous suc|cesse of the cheif design of their voyage.
5. Neither were they frustrated of their de|sires: For assoon as the Holy man S. Winfred was admitted to the presence and speech of Gregory the second then Prelat of the See Apostolick, and had declared to him the occasion of his voyage, and the Zeale with which his heart was enflamed, imme|diatly

the holy Pope looking on him with a chear|full countenance, asked him whether he had any commendatory letters from his Bishp. Where|upon he presently presented to his Holines the Epistle folded and seald according to the due form. Which being read by him, and thereby the holy mans design more fully discovered, the Pope had afterwards free and frequent discurse with him, entertaining him with much respect all the time of his abode at Rome, and moreover he bestowd on him whatsoever sacred Relicks of Saints he desi|red.In the end he gave him commission and au|thority to preach the Gospell through all Germany, exemplified in Apostolick Letters yet extant, Epst. 18 and directed to him, in which moreover he signifies to him: that he was obliged to ad|minister the Sacrament of Baptism towards such as by Divine Grace should be conver|ted, according to the Form and Order prescri|bed in the Roman Church contained in the Offices of the See Apostolick: And withall com|manded him that in case any thing were wanting to him in the succeeding discharge of his Office and Ministery, that he would not faile to give intimation thereof to him.
Ap. Sur. b.6. Saint Boniface after he had received these Letters from the Venerable Pope, went from Rome to Luitprand King of the Lombards, by whom he was honourably entertained, and abode with him some space of time. Then taking leave of him he passed the steep mountains of the Alpes, and vi|siting the formerly unknown borders of the Ba|varians and Germany, from thence came into Thuringia, where like a diligent and prudent Bee he searched all places where he might gather and carry the delicious Nectar of the Holy Faith.
7. During his abode, which was a conside|rable time, in Thuringia, he with lively and spiritually exhortations invited the Princes of that Province to embrace the Holy Faith and Religion of Christ. And certain Preists, whom he found in those parts addicted to many vices and disor|ders, he with effectuall reprehensions reduced to an orderly and Canonicall conversation.


VII. CH.VII. CHAP.

i.2. c. The miserable death of King Rad|bode: deluded by the Devill.

1. WHilst S. Boniface abode in Thurigia the happy newes came to him of the death of the Tyrant Radbode King of the Frisons,Idem ibid. who had lately with great fury persecuted the Christians. At which report he received great ioy, and presently after sayled into Friseland, where with great Zeale and diligence he dispered the precious seed of the Gospell, and withdrew very many from their Superstitions and Ido|latry.
2. But before wee proceed in this Narra|tion touching the Gests of this glorious Apo|stle, it will be expedient to declare the cir|cumstances of the miserable death of this Tyrant Radbode, recorded by a devout Writer of the same age, Ionas a Monk of Fontanell in France, who in the life of S. Wulfran Arch|bishop of Sens a ioynt-labourer with S. Wille|brord and S. Boniface in the Conversion of the Frisons, professes that what he wrote he received from the testimony of a Venerable Preist called Ovo, a Frison by Nation, who himself had been miraculously delivered from death by the said Apostolick Bishop, when he had been condemned and for the space of two howers actually hanged by the Ty|rants command, as a Sacrifice to his Idols.
3. When by the sight of many Miracles saith he,Ionas Font. in vit. s. Wfran. ap. Sur. 20. Mart. King Radbode had been convinced of the Verity of Christian Religion, and was dis|posed to receive Baptism, he by many earnest adiurations obliged the Apostolick Bishop to answer him to this Question, In whether of the two places did remain his Predecessours Kings and Princes; in that celestiall Region promised to him in case he would be baptised; or in the other Region of darknes and torments? Hereto the Bishop replied, that without doubt since they all dyed without Faith in Christ and Baptism they were condemned to eternall torments. When the barbarous King heard this, He being ready to step into the fountain where he was to be baptised, streight with-drew his foot, and said, That he could not be induced to want the society of so many gallant Princes, and live for ever among a small company of beggars and vile people.
4. Yet again after this he was perswaded once more to advise with the Holy Bishop Willebrord, whom he sent for to see whether he taught the same Doctrine with S. Wulfran, S. Willebrord answered the Messenger, Since the King will not hearken to the counsell of my Holy Brother Wulfran, it is not likely that he will be perswaded by mee: For this last night I saw him bound fast with a fiery chain. Yet he followed the Messenger; but in the way was told that that the unhappy King was dead without Baptism.
5. And indeed it appeard that the wicked King had filled up the measure of his sins, and was given up by God to impenitency; For in his last sicknes by the Divine permis|sion the Devill appeard to him in his sleep, transformed into an Angell of light, with a crown of gold upo~ his head glistering with inestimable iewells, and garments gloriously shining, and said to the astonished King, Tell mee, Noble Prince, who has seduced you to a wil|lingnes to forsake the Religion of your Predeces|sours? Doe not hearken to them, but continue con|stant in the worship of the ancient Gods of your Nation, and you shall not fayle after death to be translated to golden Palaces, and live there in all manner of pleasures and felicity. And to shew you that I doe not seduce you, To morrow send for the Christian Doctour Wulfran, and command

him to give you a sight of that happy eternall mansion which he promises you in case you will embrace the Christian Faith and be baptized. This since I am assured he cannot doe: Let there be Messengers chosen of his Beleif and yours: I will undertake to be their Guide to shew them that gloriously happy Mansion which I have promised you.
6. Assoon as the King awaked, he sent for the Holy Bishop, and recounted to him his Vision: Who groaning in Spirit told him, that it was an illusion of the Devill, to bring him to eternall misery, no way to be avoy|ded but by Faith in the Saviour of the world, and purging of Sins by Baptism. But the King replied, that unlesse he would give him a sight of the Happines promised him, he would not fayle according to the order prescribed in the Vision to send his Messen|gers. Hereupon the Holy Bishop apprehending that in case he should refuse to send one Messenger likewise to detect the Devills fraud, the Pagans would publish their own fictions, therefore he thought good to send one of his Deacons to accompany the Kings Messen|ger. These two therefore assoon as they were at an indifferent distance from the town, mert with one who appeared in the shape of a man, and told them, saying, Make hast, for I will shew you the happy mansion which I promised the King. Hereupon they following him, travelled through many unknown pathes, till at last they came to a large way paved with severall sorts of polished mar|ble. Then they saw afarr off a golden house, and the street leading to it was cove|red with gold and precious Stones. Assoon as they were entred into the house, they saw a most glorious Throne, of a wonderfull beauty and magnificence: and their Guide told them, This is the Palace and this the Seat which God has promised to give to King Rad|bode.
7. When the Deacon with great astonish|ment saw these things, he said, If all these things be works of the Omnipotent God, let them remain for ever: But if they be illusions of the De|vill, let them presently vanish. Having said this, he immediatly armed himself with the sign of the Crosse, and the Guide which seemed to have been a man vanished into a Devill, and the whole Palace became durt. So that the two companions, the Deacon and the Frison, found themselves entangled in the midst of reeds and briars in a great Marish plain. From whence they could not in lesse then three dayes space return to the Town. But being thither arrived, they found the King dead without Baptism: and related to the Blessed Bishop how strangely they had been deluded by the Devill.
8. As for the Frison, he presently profes|sed his beleif in Christ and was baptised: his Name was Ingamar: and afterward attended the Bishop to our Monastery of Fontanell. But the unhappy King was not permitted to be undeceived, because he did not pertain to Christs flock. And this Miracle was spread through the countrey, whereupon a great multitude was converted to our Lord. Now the death of the foresaid miserable King Rad|bode hapned in the year of our Saviour seaven hundred and nineteen, which was the seaventh of the illustrious Prince Charles Martel.


VIII. CHAP.VIII. CH

1.2. c. Severall Epistles of Saint Bo|niface.

1. BVT to leave this not impertinent di|gression,Baron. ad A. D. 719. and return to S. Boniface: He says Baronus, though he was by Apostolick dele|gation empowred to preach the Word of God inde|pendently, yet even in this he shewd the marks of Apostleship, in asmuch as embracing Christian humility, he thought fist to exercise the appren|tiship of his Apostolick Office under another. For during the space of three years he adioynd himself a Coadiutour to S. Willebrord (named by the Pope, Clement) in the conversion of the Fri|sons. And being earnestly pressed by him to ac|cept of his Arch-bishoprick of Vtrecht, he con|stantly refused, and begging licence departed from him to work alone in that heavenly Office.
2. And moreover distrusting his own forces, he humbly begged the Prayers of others for the Divine assistance in so sublime a work.Among his Epistles there is still extant one to the same effect directed to Leodbata a kinswoman of his,Bonf. Ep. 2. to Bedda, Chu|nigildis and other Religious Virgins to con|tinue their earnest Prayers to Almighty God
that he might be delivered from many pressures which he suffred from importune and wicked men, and that he might not be discouraged from defending Christs Faith and Church from many Hereticks, Schisma|tiks and Hypocrites which used all their en|deavours to make a prey of the new conver|ted Lambs with their Mothers, and did more encomber him, then, the professed enemies of our Faith, the Pagan Idolaters.
3. There is likewise found another Epistle to him from a Holy Virgin named Buggan,Ib. Ep. 35. an Abbesse then in Brittany, of a Royall family as is witnessed in other Letters of a following date written to him by Hildebert King of Kent. This devout Virgin he had found at Rome when he repaired thither to Pope Gre|gory: and being returned into Brittany she in an Epistle congratulated with him the sublime Office imposed on him by that Holy Pope; as likewise a vision which he had received from God, who revealed to him the great successe of his preaching: and moreover had cast down before him

that great Enemy of his Holy Faith King Radbode.A. D. 720. Moreover she informed him that whereas he had desired her to send him the Passions of Martyrs, she could not as then procure them, but would use all her en|deavours for his satisfaction. Consequently she begged of him to send her certain Colle|ctions out of Holy Scriptures for her consola|tion, as he had promised her: and that he would offer to God the Sacrifices of his Holy Masses for the soule of a dear kinsman of hers lately dead. In conclusion she told him that by the same messenger she had sent him for his present supply fifty shillings (Solidos) and a Pall for the Altar: the smallnes of which presents she excused by her poverty: and earnestly begged his Prayers, in which she had great confi|dence.
Id. pist. 17.4. Another Epistle himself also about this time wrote to Tatwin and Wigbert Preists, and to Bernard, Hiedde, Hunfrith and Stirme Monks of the Monastery of Nut|scelle from whence he came, earnestly ex|horting them to conserve the Regular Dis|cipline taught them by their late Venera|ble Father Wigbert. He ordained likewise that they should observe the directions of the other Wigbert Preist, and Mengin|gord Deacon touching the howers and order of the Ecclesiasticall Office: That, Hiedde should be the Superiour over the ser|vants, and Hunfrid his assistant: that Stirme should be in the Kitchin, and Bernard have care of building: lastly that in all things they should be obedient to Tatwin their Abbot.
(Now this Tatwin Abbot was a person of great esteem, for after the death of Brithwald Arch-bishop of Can|terbury, he was chosen to succeed in that See. Notwithstanding Bishop Parker affirms that Tatwin the Successour of Brithwald was taken out of a Monastery called Brin|ton, and S. Beda calls it Bruidum: which whether it was the same, or a distinct Mo|nastery from Nutscelle in the Province of the Mercians,Bedl. 5. c. ult. it is hard to determine.)


IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1.2. c. Severall Bishops ordained, c.
6. The Gests of Saint Pega, sister to Saint Guthlac.

1. BVT we must for some time leave Saint Boniface busy in his Apostolick Office in Germany, and return into Brittany, where according to our Ecclesiasticall Monuments, Eadbert who eight years before had been consecrated Bishop of the South-Saxons by the Arch-bishop Brithwald, dying, there succee|ded in his place Eolla. Who governed that See a very short time,Bed. l 5. c. ult. for Saint Beda ending his History in the year seaven hundred thirty one, there expressly affirms that the said Church of the South-Saxons having remained some years without a Bishop, was obliged to have recourse to the Bishop of the West-Saxons for the performing of such rights as required an Episco|pall iurisdiction.
2. And the year following the See of Dumwich in the Kingdom of the East Angles becoming voyd by the death of Astwolf, or Aesculf,A. D. 720. there succeeded in it Aldbert: And likewise the other Episcopall See of Helm|ham being vacant by the death of Norbert, Hadulac succeeded him, which two Bishops are by the same S. Beda affirmed to be alive at the end of his History.Id. ib.
3. The same year also Aedgar Bishop of the Lindesfart (now called Lincoln) dying, his successour was Kinebert, a man learned in the Ecclesiasticall History, and from whom S. Beda professes that he received help in the writing of his. Concerning all these Bi|shops little more besides their Names has been transmitted to posterity.
4. In the Kingdom also of the East-Saxons at this time dyed King Beorna, who left the throne to be possessed by Alfwald, for so we shall find that he calls himself in Letters written by him to S. Boniface, of which here|after.
5. But the person whose death gave the greatest loster to this year was Pega Sister to S. Guthlac,Martyr. Ang. 3. Iun. mentioned before: for so we read in our Martyrologe on the third of Iune. And hereto agrees our Historian Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland, who describing the state of that Island made famous by the Sanctity of Saint Guthlac, records the names of severall holy Hermites which imitated the said Saint in a solitary life of Contemplation, among the rest he makes expresse mention of his Sister Saint Pega, withall relating the following course of her life:6. In the same Island,Ingulph. hist saith he, in those times severall devout persons lived an Here|miticall life, who whilst the Holy man Saint Guthlac was alive enioyd a spirituall familiari|ty with him, and as sick men to their Physicions, they had recourse to him for remedy to all their spirituall infirmities. Among whom one there was lately converted to the Catholick Faith, a man illustrious for his noble descent and power in the world. His name was Cissa, who imme|diatly after his conversion forsook all secular pre|tensions, and in a poore austere life followed our Lord Iesus Christ. A second was Bertelin, a fa|miliar attendant of the foresaid holy Father. A third was Egbert, to whom the said Saint did most frequently and confidently discover his se|crets. And a fourth was Tatwin, the person who formerly had been his conductour by boat into the Island. All these devout persons in severall cot|tages, not far removed from the Oratory of Saint Guthlac, by the permission of the fore mentioned Abbot Kenulphus, spent their lives in solitude and prayer.
7. As for S. Pega Sister to the said glorious Saint, about a years space after his death, having left in the hands of Kenulphus the Abbot the whipp of S. Bartholmew, her Brothers Psalter and diverse other Relicks, she removed from her Bro|thers Oratory to another place about four leagues distant toward the West, where having spent two years and three monthes in a mournfull penitent life, she undertook a pilgrimage with great absti|nence and austerity to the Monuments of the glo|rious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul at Rome. There immediatly after her arrivall the whole Citty resounded with the fame of her Sanctity. There she devoutly ended her dayes in the holy fear and service of our Lord. Her Sacred body was with great honour buried there and her soule freed from all incommodities of this present mor|tall life, was received to eternall rest and ioy in heaven.
8 But though she dyed in a forrein coun+trey, yet her memory was preserved in Brit|tany with great veneration. For a Church was built and dedicated to her honour, in the same place where, according to the des|cription of Ingulphus, her Cell had been sea|ted. There to this day in the County of Northampton remains a Town from her name called Peagkirk:Camd. in Northamp|shire. concerning which Camden describing the course of the River Welland, thus writes, After a few miles from hence the river Welland passing by Maxey Castle and Peag|kirk is swallowd up in the fore-mentioned fenns. Now Peagkirk is the place where in the primitive Church of the Saxons Pega the sister of Guthlac, together with many other Sacred Virgins, affor|ded illustrious documents of piety and Chastity. From her that town took its name.
9 In the territory about this place, called Peagland, wee shall find two hun|dred and thirty years after this time a cer|tain community of Preists, who though they lived a devout Religious life, yet they were not Monks, nor by any vow obliged to perseverance in that condition: They wore a secular, though very grave habit: and were obliged to continence and obedience. They depended on the Abbot of Croy|land, without whose authority none could be admitted among them. But in the fore|said time Monasticall institution flourishing, and few Ecclesiasticks offring themselves to embrace their Institut, most of them became Monks of Croyland, as the same Ingulphus te|stifies.


X. CHAP.A. D. 721.
X. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests and blessed death of Saint Iohn of Beverley.
6.7. c. Severall Miracles wrought by him.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred twenty one,A. D. 721. the famous Saint Iohn sir|named of Beverley, being oppressed with age resigned his Bishoprick of York, and retired himself to the end he might only attend to the care of his own soule, and prepare him|self for a happy end.
Concerning his originall, as likewise his education during his childhood under the care of S. Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury, by whom he was instructed in all learning and piety, we have already treated. After that returning to his own countrey of the Northumbers, he retired into the Monastery of Screneshalch, under the government of the Holy Abbesse S. Hilda: for she near unto her own Abbey of Religious Virgins had founded a small Convent of Monks for the service of her Church: Out of which Saint Beda pro|fesses that he had seen to issue five Bishops;Bed. l. 4. c. 23 all of them men of singular merit and sanctity, whose names were these; Saint Bosa, Saint Eata, Saint Osifor, this S. Iohn, and S. Wilfrid.
3. In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred eighty six he was consecrated Bi|shop of Hagustlad (or Hexham) and succes|sour to Saint Eata. But the year after Saint Wilfrid returning from his long banishment, and being restored to the Arch-bishoprick o the whole kingdom of the Northumbers, comprehending the three Dioceses of York, Hagustald and Lindesfarn, Saint Iohn willingly yeilded up to him his New possessed Bisho|prick. But five years after S. Wilfrid being again expelled, S. Iohn was restored to his See: at which time he promoted to the order of Deaconship S. Beda then twenty years of age. This he did at the request of his Holy Abbot S. Ceolfrid. But in the year of Grace in which S. Wilfrid was recalled from his ba|nishment, and quietly restored to his rights, he contenting himself with the single Bi|shoprick of Hagustald then vacant by the death of S. Bosa, permitted S. Iohn to remove from thence to the See of York.
4. Having therefore with admirable perfe|ction spent thirty four years in the admini|stration of those two Sees successively Hagu|stald and York,p Capgrav  vit. S Io. de Beverl. and findin that by reason o his weaknes and old age he had not strength to discharge such an Office attended with cares and labours, this year, as hath been sayd,h eased himself of so great a burden, and ha+ving ordained in his place his Preist Wilfrid

who was a kinsman of the great S. Wilfrid, and by the advice of the Holy Abbot Brithun, retired himself to a Monastery built by him self at Deirwode (Sylva Deirerum) or Beverley, he there spent the remainder of his life in all sanctity, and on the Nones of May departed to our Lord, and was buried in the porch of Saint Peter, in the same Monastery.
Thus writes the Authour of his life in Cap|grave.
5. He was both in his life and after his death illustrious for his Miracles: severall of which are recorded by Saint Beda, who li|ved with him,Bed l. 5. c. 2. and writes nothing but what he had received by the testimony of such as familiarly knew him, and particularly of the most reverend and most sincere Abbot Ber|ctun, or Brithun, who had been his Deacon. Now though I am unwilling to swell this History with the frequent narration of Miracles: Yet being secured by such an irrefragable authority, I will here ad|ioyn a breif relation of one or two among them.
Id. ibid.6. There was a certain retired mansion compassed about with a wood and trench, at the distauce of about a mile and a half from the Church of Hagustald, from which it is separated by the River Tine: To which mansion there is adioyning a Church-yard consecrated to the honour of Saint Michael the Archangel. Thither the Holy Bishop at|tended by a few of his Disciples was wont, when opportunity was afforded, to retire himself, especially in Lent, that he might without interruption attend to Prayer and Spirituall Reading. On a certain time there|fore in the beginning of Lent going thither, he commanded that there should be condu|cted thither some poor begger, who withall was afflicted with some extraordinary in|firmity, that he might there have a fitt object for his charity and Almes. And the same course he usually held in his re|tirements.
7. Now there was then in a village not far distant a certain youth not unknown to the Bishop, who was altogether dumb, and with|all had his head wholly covered with a thick scurf, which entirely hindred the grouth of haires, except a few which like bristles stood in a thinn circle about the lower part of his head. This young man was brought there|fore to him, and a small cottage was built for him, to which the Holy Bishop dayly went with his Almes. Now on the second Sunday of Lent he commanded this poor child to enter into his Cell, and being there to putt forth his tongue, which the holy man took hold of, and made the sign of the Crosse upon it And having done this, he bid him speak: Pronounce, said he to him. gea, gea (that is, yea, yea:) This the child pronounced di|stinctly: and presently after other words of more syllables: and in conclusion whole Sentences: So that before night by frequent practise, in which he took great delight, he was able to expresse his thoughts freely.
8. This recovery of the poor dumb child did much reioyce the Holy Bishop, who pre|sently after commanded a surgeon to use his skill for curing the scurse of his head: and in a short time by such care, but prin|cipally by the prayers and benedictions of the good Prelat his head was perfectly hea|led, and the child who formerly had been deformed and dumb, became of a lovely chearfull countenance, adorned with beau|tifully curled haire, and ready in speech. Being thus cured, the Holy Bishop offred to entertain him in his family, but he chose rather to return to his freinds.
9. This Miracle was wrought in his first Diocese o Hagustald: Whereto we will add another performed in that of York: related by the same devout Abbot Brithun to Saint Beda.Id. ibid. c. 4. There was, said he, a certain village belonging to a Count named Puch, distant about two miles from our Monastery of Deirirode (or Beverley.) This Counts wife had for the space of forty dayes been greivously tormented with a sicknes, so that for three weeks she could not be removed out of her chamber. Now it hapned at the same time that the Man of God was desired by the said Count to dedicate a Church in the same place. Which having done, the Count ear|nestly requested him to dine with him. But the Bishop refused, saying, He must needs return to his Monastery near adioyning. The Count told him that if he would vouchsafe to honour his house with his presence, he would give con|siderable Alms to the poore. I likewise ioynd with him in the same request, promising the like Cha|rity to the poor, upon condition he would dine in his house and give his benediction to it.
10. With much adoe at last we obtained this favour from him, and so went to dinner: Now the Holy Bishop had by one of my Monks attending us sent to the Counts wife some part of the Holy water which he had consecrated and used among the Ceremonies of the Dedication: commanding him to give her some part of it to drink, and that with the rest she should wash that part where she felt the sharpest pain. Which she having accordingly performed, immediatly rose up perfectly sound, and was not only freed from her pains, but had her former strength entirely restored: so that she (imitating Saint Peters wives Mother in the Gospell) came down, and during the whole dinner presented drink to the Bishop and to all the rest of the company.
11. The Centuriators of Magdeburg write with a very uncertain stile concerning this famous Bishop:Magdeburg Cent. 8. f. 821. sometimes highly commen|ding him, and again as sharply censuring him He dyed, say they, with great constancy of an Evangelicall Spirit. And again: He was illustrious for his piety and miracles, as Saint Beda relates. But withall they adde, Not|withstanding such great wonders he did not per|form without Superstition: For he did not relye alone upon his Prayers, but moreover

made use of holy water (aqu lustrals.) Vn|happy man; they little understand the ef|ficacy of the Prayers and benedictions of Gods Church, by vertue of which for at least fifteen ages together the power of Devills has been so oft rendred of no force by the use of Holy Water and sign of the Crosse, ter|rible to infernall Spirits, and odious to such Ministers.
12. I will onely adde what William of Malmsbury relates as a thing usually perfor|med and Malamsb. de Pontif.generally acknowledged by the inhabitants of Beverley in testimony of the sanctity of their glorious Patron, which is, that the feircest Bulls being haled with many strong ropes by the force and sweat of severall lusty men, assoon as they are brought into his hurch yar, immediatly loose all their fury and feircenes, and be|come gentle as lambes, so that they are there left to their freedom to sport them|selves, whereas before with their feet and horns they endangered all that came near them.
Moreover how by the intercession and patronage of this Holy Prelate, above a hundred years after his death, King Ethelstan obtained a signall victory against the Scotts, shall be declared in its proper place. His Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the seaventh of May the day of his death:Martyr. Aug. 7. Maij. Ib. 25. Octob. and his Translation made in the year of Grace one thousand sixty three, is solemnly com|memorated on the twenty fifth of October. To conclude, his Feast always solemnly ob|served in the Province of York, was by a De|cree of a Synod assembled in the year four|teen hundred and sixteen, ordained to be kept Holiday through all England, upon oc|casion of a great Victory which then King Henry the fifth obtained in France the same day.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2. Of S Brithun Abbot.
3. The Pilgrimage of S. Daniel Bishop of winchester to Rome.

1. IN this Narration of the Gests of the holy Bishops S. Iohn of Beverley, often mention was made of his Deacon S. Brithun,Martyr. Ang. 1. Maij. or as in a Manuscript Copy of S. Beda he is cal|led S. Berctun, whose Name is commemora|ted among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the fifteenth of May. Now though our Ecclesiasticall Monuments doe not place his death till almost twenty years after that of S. Iohn. Yet in consecrating his Memory to posterity in this our History, it seemed expe|dient not to divide them.
2. Concerning him thus we read in the Authour of his Life in Capgrave:Ap. Capgrav. in S Brithun. The Vene|rable Confessour of Christ Saint Brithun drew his originall from the Nation of the English. He was Deacon for many years to the Holy Bishop of York Saint Iohn of Beverley: and for the sanctity f hs life and laudable con|versation; he was in his affection preferred by him before others, and constituted Abbot in the Monastery of Deirwode, now called Bever|ley, which the said Holy Bishop built from the foundations. And to the same Monastery Saint Iohn in his old age refigning his Bi|shoprick retired by the counsell of the said holy Abbot, where also he dyed after he had spent four years in an Angelicall purity of conversation. After his translation to hea|venly ioyes the Venerable Abbot imitating his good Master, persevered to the end of his life in watchings fastrags, prayers and other good works. For he was a lover of vertues, a persecutour of vice, a despiser of this present world, a Zealous aspirer to heavenly ioyes, a faithfull guardian and instructour of the flock committed to him, an unwearied practiser of jstice and piety, a munificent disperser of Almes, and in a word, one who with all di|ligence performed whatsoever he knew to be pleasing to God. Thus constantly serving our Lord in all good works to his decrepie age, he crownd a most holy life with a suitable death, and having quited this world on the Nones of May, he received his reward in heaven. His body was with great hnour buried in his own Monastery. Where in processe of time his sanctity becoming illustrious by many Mira|cles, with consent of the Clergy and people it was taken up; and his sacred Relicks pla|ced near the Coffin of his beloved Master and Instructour the Holy Bishop Saint Iohn, close to the Altar in his Church of Bever|ley.
3. The same year is recorded the de|vout Pilgrimage of Daniel Bishop of Win|chester to Rome, who is supposed by ome to have subscribed to a Synod about this time assembled there, in which a heavy Anathema is pronounced against al such as presume to associate to themselves in mariage any Virgins or other women con|secrated to God or those whose matrimonial society men being promoted to such orders, have according to the Churches Discipline, been obliged to forsake.



A. D. 723.
XII. CHA.XII. CHAP.

1. A Rebellion of the South-Saxons repres|sed.
2.3 c. Of Saint Pechelm Bishop of Casa Candida: and of S. Wir (an Irish Bishop.)
6.7. c. Casa Candida was within the Sa|xon Dominions.

A. D. 723. Hunting. l.1. THE year following great commo|tions were raised in the Southern parts of Brittany. For the South-Saxons impa|tient of the yoak layd on them by the West-Saxons, elected among them a Generall a young man of great courage called Eald|brith, under whose conduct they seised on a strong Castle newly built by King Inas in Somer|setshire at the River Thone, therefore called Thoneton, and now Taunton. At which time King Inas being by some design, or perhaps by sicknes diverted, his magnanimous Queen Edilburga with a choice army layd siege to the said Castle, and in a short space took and destroyd it, that it should no more be a seat of Rebellion. But Ealdbrith by flight escaped into Surrey, and from thence retired into Sussex, where King Inas following him with a powerfull army, and fighting with him, di|spersed all his forces, and slew Ealdbrith, so utterly extinguishing the rebellion.
2. The same year a New Episcopall See was erected in the Province of the Picts, or rather an ancient one being decayed, was restored: This was the Episcopall See called Candida Casa, and a holy man called Pecthelm was con|secrated Bishop of it.Bed. l. 5. c. vlt. For thus writes S. Beda, concluding his History, Pecthelm now sitts Bi|shop in that part of the Province which is called Candida Casa (or White house:) the which Dio|cese was newly erected by reason of the multiplying of beleivers in those parts, and the first Bishop was the said Pecthelm.
Sup. l 8 c. 23.3. Wee have in the eighth book of this History declared how in the year of Grace three hundred ninety four S. Siricius Pope consecrated S. Ninian first Bishop of the Sou|thern Picts, who established his Episcopal See at this place, where he built a Church to the honour of S. Martin, and with great industry converted a great part of the Nation. But after the Saxons had subdued the Picts, wee read of certain Bishops of the Picts, as about forty years before this, the devout Bishop Trumwin: but it seems they had no determi|nate See, at least not this of Wite-hern, or Can|dida Casa, which was at this time restored.
4. As for this Pecthelm, he was a man of great piety and learning, and so illustrious that he was consulted in difficulties of great importance by Saint Boniface, as appears by severall Epistles yet extant. In his younger age he was educated in the kingdom of the West-Saxons, where he was Disciple to the famous Saint Aldelm, and made Deacon, as William of Malmsbury testifies. After that he went over into Germany,Malmsb. de Pon. l. where he asso|ciated himself to Saint Willebrord, and was present at a Synod assembled by that Holy Apostolick Bishop at Vtrecht, to which his name is found subscribed. It was he who related to Saint Beda the sad Story of the im|penitent Soldier and favourite of Coenred King of the Mercians,Sup. l. 21. c. 4. formerly recounted in this History.
5. By whom this holy man was conse|crated Bishop, not any of our Historians doe declare: but in the Belgick Calendars publi|shed by Miraeus we read that he was ordai|ned Bishop by the Pope,Mir. in Fast. Belg 15. Iulij. as likewise the companion of his pilgrimage Saint Wro: For there wee read this passage: Saint Ple|chelm (so he is there named) born of Noble parents in the kingdom of the Northumbers, from his youth excelled in humility and mo|desty: and even in that tender age chastised his body by watchings and fastings, attending assiduously to Prayer. Being come to riper age, he was diligent in the study of Holy Scriptures. When he was promoted to the order of Preist|hood, he was liberall to the poor, and adornd with all vertues, insomuch as that internall Light which he received from Gods holy Spi|rit shone forth gloriously in all his actions. Not long after associating himself to Saint Wiro he accompanied him in a pilgrimage to the Monuments of the Blessed Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul at Rome. There they with great devotion visited all holy places, and by assiduous Mortifications and prayers offred themselves Holocausts of sweet savour to God. These two holy men being observed by the Pope to be endued with divine wise|dom and enflamed with Charity, he conse|crated them Bishops, and enriching them with Sacred Relicks of Saints, he dismissed them to their own countrey. There Plechelm became Bishop in the Church called Candida Casa, where with unwearied labour he extinguished all re|mainder of Idolatry.
6. Here is a great controversy against the Saxon pretentions, raised by the ancient Scotts or Irish, and the Modern Scotts, each of them challenging to their own countrey these two Saints. The Irish contend that Saint Pecthelm was Bishop of Tuam, and S. Wiro of Dublin: and consequently that their Saint Pe|cthelm was different from the present Bishop of Candida Casa. As for S. Wiro their preten|tions seem to be well grounded: For though he be in the printed Copies of S. Marcellin and other our Historians named Bishop of the Deiri, that is Yorkshire, yet since in none o our ancient Catalogues we find any such Bi|shop, their suspicion of a mistake in the writing seems reasonable, that instead o Deiri, we ought to read De Iren, that is, o Ireland. But as for Saint Pecthelm, who accompanied S. Wiro first to Rome, and after to the

countrey of the Frisons a second time, it is evident in S. Marcellin that he was Bishop of Candida casa.
7. As for the Modern, now only called, Scotts, they have no shew of right in their plea. For it is manifest by the consent of all our Historians, that the Diocese of Casa Candi|da, though now included in Scotland, yet anciently belonged to the English-Saxon Kingdom of the Bernicians, and so continued to the times of King Edgar. So that the im|pudent rashnes of Dempster affirming, That this doth evidently appear that the Bishoprick of Candida Casa was always in the dominion of Scotland, and never was subiect to the iurisdi|ction of the English, is unanswerably refuted by the learned B. Vsher in his Brittish Antiqui|ties,Vsser in Pri|mord. f. 665. who demonstrates that the Diocese of Casa Candida, or, as it was afterward named, of Glasgo, was a part of the Cumbrian King|dom. And Malmsbury expressely affirms that the Kings of the Northumbers in these times extended their Dominion to all the Regions beyond Humber as far as Scotland, and that within their confines were contained these Dioceses, The Arch-bishoprick of York, the Bi|shoprick of Hagustald and Rippon, that of Lin|desfarn, and lastly the See of Candida casa. And this is ingenuously acknowledged by Ioan|nes Maior a Scottish Writer.
8. Of these two Bishops S. Pecthelm and S. Wiro, wee shall treat further hereafter, when we shall find them with great zeale and fruit exercsing the Apostolick Office with our other Saxon Missioners in Germany. To which coun|trey the memorable Gests of S. Boniface at ths time, doe call us.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Boniface being summoned, re|paires to Rome: gives an account of his Faith: and is conscrated Bishop by Pope Gregory.
9. The Form of his Obedience to the See Apostolick.
6.7 c. He returns with many recommen+dations.

Beron. hc. Auth vit. S. Bonifoc. p. Sur. S. Inn.1. THE labours of S. Boniface were so great in dispersing the precious seed of the Gospell in Germany, and so wonderfull a Benediction had Almighty God showrd on them in those few years which passed since his leaving Rome, that the report thereof co|ming to Pope Gregory, he thought fitt to recall him thither, that he might hear from his own mouth an account of his Apostleship, and thereby enable him to proceed with more vigour and authority.
2. S. Boniface having received letters to this effect, deferred not at all his Obedience to the Holy Popes summons: but attended by a troop of his brethren and Disciples imme|diatly took his iourney towards Italy, and being come within the sight of Rome, he gave God thanks for his prosperous voyage, and commended himself to the patronage of the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Assoon as the Pope was informed of his arrivall, he presently sent for him, and after kind salu|tations, he appointed him a convenient and honourable place for his entertainment. And afterward taking an opportune season, he sent for him to come to a conference at the Church of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter. And after long discourses with mutuall satisfa|ction, the Pope required of him an account of his Faith. The Holy man answered him in these terms, It will not be easy for mee to give a reasonable satisfaction to your Holines by a sudden speech or reply to a demand of so great im|portance My request therefore is that you would afford mee some time to answer by writing. To this the Pope yeilded. Whereupon accor|dingly shortly after he presented to him in Writing a full account of his Faith.
3. When the Pope had per sed the said Writing, he commanded him in a familiar manner to sitt by him: and exhorted him to retain constantly, and with gret cae to teach that Faith which he there professed. And afterwards entring into long discour|ses touching spirituall matters, in which they spent the greatest part of the day: at last he asked him in how many regions he had plnted the Faith: Whereto he having succinctly answered, the Pope then plainly discovered his itention to him, that he would cnsecrate him Bishop, to the end that being promoted to a higher Apostelick dignity, he might with greater confidence and authority correct such as were in er|rour: adding withall, that his sermons and exhortations would be more acceptable and effectuall, when it should appear that he was empowred to that office by the Supreme Bi|shop of Gods Church.
4. Then the Holy man seriously conside|ring this proposall, and apprehending least if he should refuse it, that saying of the Pro|phet might be applied to him; He reiected benediction, and it shall be removed far from him, submitted himself to his Holines will. The day therefore of his Ordination being come, which was the Feast of S. Andrew, the Pope consecrated him Bishop, and withall would have him thence forward to be called Boni|face, whereas before his name was Winfrid. Moreover to the end he might more strictly oblige him to exhibite Obedience to himself and his Successours, and to observe the Tradi|tion of holy Faith, he required and received an Oath from him in the Form following, as is to be read in the most ancient Re|cords:5. In the Name of our Lord God and Sa|viour Iesus Christ, I Boniface by the Grace

of God now ordained Bishop, doe promise to thee, O Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles and to thy Vicar-Bishop Pope Gregory, by the Fa|ther, son and Holy Ghost the inseparable Trini|ty, and by this thy most sacred Body that I will constantly maintain the Vniversality and purity of Holy Faith, in the Vnity of which Faith I will through Gods assista~ce ever persevere, since there|in the salvation of every Christian does consist: I doe promise likewise that I will never be indu|ced by the perswasions of any to dissent from the Vnity of the Catholick Church, but as hath been sayd, I will in all things maintain this Faith and the purity thereof, and exhibite my endeavours and concurrence to advance the proffits of thy Church, since to thee our Lord God has given the power of inding and loosing, and to thy foresaid Vicar and his Successours. And in case I shall know any Bishops transgressours of the ancient Decrees of the holy Fathers, I will have no com|munion or participation with them; but on the contrary to the utmost of my power I will resist them, and however I will faithfully without delay denounce them to his Holines. But if it should happen, which God forbid, that I should hereafter attempt or any way doe any thing contrary to the tenon of this my Vow, may I in the last dreadfull Iudgment incurr the Sentence and punishment of Ananias and Saphira, who presumed to deale unfaithfully with you in di|sposing their goods. This form of Oath also I Bo|niface humble Bishop have written with mine own hand, and having layd it upon the most sa|cred Body of S. Peter, I have, in the presence of God who is my judge taken this my oath accor|dingly, which I doe promise to keep.
6. After this the Pope studiously assisted and respected him in all things: for he gave him a Book containing all Ecclesiasticall De|crees which had been Synodically made by his Predecessours: enioyning him that both his Clergy and people should be ordered accor|ding to the said Instituts. He likewise by a Priviledge in Writing promised and confir|med to him and all that depended on him the favour and Protection of the See Apo|stolick.
7. To conclude, at his departure he gave him severall Letters, to the illustrious Duke Charles Mair of the French Kings palace, to all Bishops, Preists, Nobles, c. requiring their assistance and defence of the said holy man, in the execution of his Apostolick Office among the Nations feared on the Eastern parts of the Rhene. With these he adioynd a Letter also to the Clergy and people pecu|liarly subject to this Holy Bishop, requiring them to shew all reverence and obedience to him: acquainting them withall that among other Iniunctions given him, he had commanded him not to presume to make any unlawfull Ordinations; not to permitt any one who had two wives, or one which had not been a Virgin, no illiterate man, or deformed and vitiated in any of his members, none which had been in publick Pennance, or obnoxious to Iu|stice, to be promoted to Holy Orders.A. D. 724 That he should not receive to the same Orders any Aegy|ptians or Africans, because many such were Ma|nicheans and often rebaptized: That he should be carefull not to diminish, but rather encrease the revenews or ornaments of his Churches: And that the Rents and Oblations should be divided into four portions, of which one he should reserve to himself: a second should be distributed to the Clergy proportionably to their Offices: a third to the poor and strangers: and a fourth to be reserved for maintaining the fabricks of Churches: Of all which he was to give an account in the Iudgment of God. That Ordinations of Preists and Dea|cons should be celebrated onely in the Fasts of the fourth and tenth Monthes, at the be|ginning of Lent, and on the Vespers of Satur|day after Whitsontide. Lastly that except in dan|ger of death the Sacrament of Baptism should not be conferred but only on the Solemnities of Easter and Pentecost.
8 To these Letters were added others full of pious exhortations and Catechisti|call Instructions to the people of the Pro|vince of the Thuringians and also the Alt Saxons, both Idolaters and new converted Christians. And lastly whereas among the Thuringians there were some courageous persons who in defence of their Faith had suffred greivous persecutions from the Pa|gans, he addressed a particular letter to them, by name to these Noble persons, Altolph, Godolas, Wilary, Gunthar, Albold, c. in which he highly exalted their constancy, giving humble thanks to God for the same: and encouraging them to persevere in their constancy; to have recourse to the See Apostolick in any of their necessi|ties; and to be obedient to their new con|secrated Bishop.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. CH.

1.2 c. S Boniface returning into Germa|ny constantly exercises his Apostolick Of|fice: He destroye, Idolatry c.
4. He excommunicates Hereticks and licen|tious Christians
5. He is encouraged by S. Michal to whom he builds a Church.
6.7 8. He by Letters beggs the Prayers of severall Devout persons.

1.A. D. 714. Auth. Vit. S. Bonif. ap. Sur. SAint Boniface encouraged and secu|red by the authority of so many re|commendations began his iourney towards Germany the beginning of the year follo|wing: and being come to the Noble Prince Charles, sirnamed Martel, he presented to him the Holy Popes Letters: and recom|mending himself to his protection, with

his consent he proceeded in his iour|ney to the Region of the Catti, now called Hassians, to whom he had already begun to preach the Gospell: and to secure him both there and in the way thither the Prince gave him likewise Letters of safe-guard, directed to all Bishops, Dukes, Counts, c. signifying to them that it was his will that the Apostolick Father and Bishop Boniface the bearer of those should without any molestation or iniury goe or remain in the said countreys as being one whom he had received into his favour and Protection (which he calls Mundi|burde.)
2. When he was come into the Province of the Catti he found there very many who had cast off the Profession of Christianity; Some Sacrifised to trees and fountins at least pri|vatly: some followed sooth saying and cou|sening divinations, and many were addicted to abominable Sacrifices: so that a very small number remained constant in the way of Truth which they had been taught.
3. By the advice of these the Holy Bishop with their assitance attempted to cutt down a certain Tree of a prodigious vastnes which grew in a place called Gesmer, and had been for many ages called the Tree of Iupiter. Whereupon a great multitude of Pagans ran thither, with an intention to kill him as an Ennemy of their Gods. But at the same instant the Tree though not at all deep cutt, as if it had been agitated by a Divine force, was torn into four peices. This when those Pagans saw, they gave glory to God, and em|braced the Faith.
4. Neither did he find greater opposition from Pagans, then from Hereticks and licen|tious Christians. For going from that Pro|vince to the Thurigians, he found there a great decay of the Catholick Faith occasioned by the death of some of their Princes which had been converted. The principall Au|thours of severall Heresies among them had been these infamous persons Dorthuvia, Ber|ther, Eanbert and Humed. Others there were horribly defiled with scandalous lusts and adulteries: All which after sharp reprehen|sions he cutt off from the Churches Commu|nion by Excommunication.
5. In the mean time the fam of his Preaching, being spread, great accessions were made to the number of Beleives. Many Churches were erected and Monasteries built. Among which one of the most Notable was founded at Ordorf to the honour of the Blessed Archangel Saint Michael, who had appeared with great glory to the Holy Bi|shop on a certain night sleeping in his Tent near the River Oraham, where he had been employed in preaching and baptizing, and with many comfortable words encouraged him to be constant in that holy employ|ment. The morning following he cele|brated Masse in the same place: after which he commanded that dinner should be pre|pared. But being told that there was no meat: Is it so, answered he? How many thou|sands did God fee in the wildernes forty years together? Cannot he provide for his servant, how unworthy soever, nourishment for one day? Having said this, he commanded the Table should be covered: and presently a great bird flew thither bringing in her mouth a fish sufficient to satisfy all their hunger. This fish he bidd should be dressed: which having eaten, the remainders were cast into the river. This was the occasion of dedi|cating the said Monastery to the honour of Saint Michal: in which he assembled a great number of Gods servants, all which living after the Primitive manner, provi|ded themselves necessaries for their suste|nance and cloathing by the labour of their hands.
6. Now though such effects of his prea|ching were indeed admirable: yet their stran|genes will be diminished if wee consider the profound Humility of this man of God, who distrusting his own forces, depended only on God, whose assistance he begged dayly himself, and by frequent letters soli|cited others to doe the same. To which purpose there are to this day extant severall Epistles directed to his devout freinds in Brittany. Two there were written to the devout Abbesse Eadburga kinswoman to the King of Kent:Bonif. Ep. 24  28. in one of which he entreats her to send him written with her own hand the Epistles of his Master (so he calls him) Saint Peter, who had directed him to that iour|ney, whose words he desired to have always pre|sent before his eyes.
7. Answers also to other Epistles of the like nature he received from severall per|sons;Ib. Ep. 76. Ib. Ep 43. From Aelowald (or Ethelwald) King of the East-Angles, from a Bishop called Torthelm (probably the same with Torther who had surrendred his Bishoprick of Here|ford to Walstod, and was yet alive: or per|haps with Totta Bishop of Leicester, of whom more hereafter.) Likewise from Daniel Bishop of Winchester,Ib Ep. 67. by whose en|couragement and benediction Saint Boni|face first undertook this Apotolick employ|ment, and who had been Bishop twenty years before him: Who therefore in the same letter with a becoming gravi|ty instructs our Holy Bishop how to pro|ceed in his confutation of the Errours of the Pagans, c. He likewise com|plains of an infirmity with which he was much afflicted, and desires his prayers to God for a remedy. Which infirmity, as appears by S. Bonifaces answer, was some disease in his eyes.
8. Of the happy successe of his prea|ching Saint Boniface, according to or|ders received, informed Pope Gregory, s appears by the same Popes answer: In which,Ib Ep. 125. besides thanks given to Al|mighty God for the power of his Grace;

and exhortations S. Boniface to persevere in his labours,A. D. 725. which God would gloriously crown: He acquaints him, that whereas, according to his information, a certain Bi|shop in those parts, through slouthfullnes would not assist him in preaching to the In|fidells, yet challenged a portion in the Obla|tions and contributions of the Diocese he had written to the Noble Prince Charles Mar|tel to forbid the attempt of the sayd Bishop, not doubting but he would obey such his admonition.


XV. CHA.XV. CHAP.

1.2. c. Religious Virgins out of England, Mistresses of Piety in Germany.
4.5. c Proceedings of S. Boniface.

A. D. 725. Auth vit. S. Bonifac. ap. Sur. Baron. hc.1. THE year following S. Boniface percei|ving how great a harvest there was in those regions of the Catri and Thuringians, and how few labourers: he therefore sent into Brittany for more assistants.And the whole English Church there did so willingly comply with his desires, that not only many persons eminent for learning and sanctity were sent over to him, but likewise Books and other furniture and presents of severall kinds.
2. The principall men which went from Brittany to assist him were Burchard, Lullus, Gregory, Willebold, Willebald and his Brother Witta. Severall Religious women likewise upon his invitation passed over into Germa|ny to become instructours in Monasticall Dis|cipline: Among whom the most eminent were Cunigildu Aunt to S. Lullus, and her daughter Bertgictis, likewise Cunitrudis, Tecla, Lioba and Watpurgis sister to Willeblad, and another Cunigildis sister to Willebold, with her daughter Bertgictis: These were skilfull in sciences and appointed Mistresses in lear|ning and piety among the Thuringians. Cu|nitrudis was sent into Bavaria, Tecla by his order remained at Ochnofurt upon the River Mogan, and Lioba was made Abbesse of Reli|gions Virgins at Bischofesheim. All these were eminent for sanctity: and of them the names of three are recorded among the Saints, to wit, Tecla, Lioba and Waltpurgis. The Life of Saint Waltpurgis was faithfully written by a devout Monk called Wolfard: and that of S. Lioba upon the command of Rabanus by his Disciple Rodulphus.
Vit. S. Liobae.3. In which Life we read how S. Boniface being desirous to establish in Germany Mona|sticall Disciplin in a most exact manner, sent to the ountain thereof, the principall Mo|nastery of S. Benedicts Order, Mount-Cassin, his Disciple Sturmius, to the end that making his abode there a convenient space of time he might be perfectly instructed in their most accurate observances. So unwilling he was to pretermitt any thing which might advance piety: although himself had from his infancy been bred up in the same Discipline, which was also practised in many Monasteries in Brittany as S. Beda testi|fies, and as appears in severall of S. Bonifaces Letters.
4. About the same time Withred King of Kent (whom S. Beda calls Victred) dyed on the ninth day before the Calends of May,Bed. l 5. c. 25. and left his three Sons, Edilbert, Eadbert and Aldric heyrs of his kingdom which himself had worthily governed the space of thirty four years and a half. Of these three Sons, Edilbert, first named by S. Beda, and therefore probably eldest (though William of Malmsbury gives the pre|ference to Eadbert) wrote the same year an Epistle to S. Boniface,Ap. Bonifac Ep. 40. which he sent him by a Monk called Etheld who accompanied the forenmed Missioners in their voyage:In which he signified to him the ioy which he received in the assurance given him by the holy Abbesse Buggan his Kinswoman, lately returned from her pilgrimage to Rome, that he the said Boniface would be mindfull of him in his Prayers. He withall told him how great the generall ioy in his kingdom was for the wonderfull benediction which God had given to his preaching among the Pa|gans. Moreover he exused the malnes of a present sent by the same bearer, to wit, a vessell of silver gilded within, weighing three pounds and an half, and two smaller ones. One request also he made to him to send over two falcons, because birds of that sort bred in his kingdom were not so vigo|rous. He concuded with begging his prayers for himself living or dead, and en|treating the favour af an Answer.
5. Now as S. Boniface courageously labou|red in Vpper Germany, so did S. Willebrord in the Lower. And this year he seems to have vi|sited and cultivated the Teritory of Antwerp: For thus writes Miraeus in his Belgick Calen|der, In the sixth year of Theodoric King of France.Mr in ast Belg. 7. No|vemb. Roing Prince of Antwerp and his wife Bebelina gave to S. Willebrord a third part of the Cu|stomes, and likewise the Church belonging to the Castle there which S. Amand Bishop of Maestrick had built. These gifts he bestowd for buying incense and Lights, and that the Preists serving in the said Church might pray for Gods mercy and pardon of the Sins of the Donours: as appears in the Charter of the said Princes, recorded by the same Authour. Moreover in a Second Charter the same Prince and his wife signify that they had also given to the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul built likewise by Saint Amand, (of which Church S. Willebrord had the oversight) the entire village of Preprusdare seated on the River Nutta, and half the rents and proffits of another village called Win|lindechim. Thus writes Miraeus out of an an|cient Manuscript belonging to the Abbey of

Epternac,A. D. 726. where also the same S. Willebrrd dyed, as shall be shewd in its due place: And he thus concludes, That Evangelicall Planta|tion which S. Amandus and S. Eligius began among the inhabitants of Antwerp, was perfected by S. Willebrord.


XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

1.2. c The Piety of King Ina: His devout iourney to Rome.

1. THE year of Grace seaven hundred twenty six was much illustrated by the piety and devotion of the glorious King of the West-Saxons,A. D. 726. Ina, who after a raign of thirty eight years, having munificently ex|tended his liberality to the See of Rome, then at last in his old age undertook a tedious iourney thither, leaving his Kingdom to younger and stronger shoulders, and resol|ving to spend the remainder of his life in devotion meditation of celestiall things, near the monuments of the glorious Apo|stles S. Peter and S. Paul:Bed. l de 6. et tibus. A practise of devotion in these dayes very frequent with all sorts, Noble and ignoble, men and women also, as S. Beda te|stifies.
Antiquit. Glaston. Spel. in Concil. p. 2. Before he putt this in execution, he the year before had, beyond all his Predecessours, richly endowed the ancient venerable Mo|nastery of Glastonbury, where from the foun|dation he erected a New Church consecrated to our Saviour, and the Honour of S. Peter and S. Paul Princes of the Apostles: and withall conferred on the said Monastery (which he stiles the prime fountain and Originall of all Reli|gion in Brittany) very many large possessions and Manors, confirming withall, whatsoeves had been formerly given by Kings his Prede|cessours or any others a particular account whereof he setts down in his Charter. More|over he granted to the same Monastery very great Priviledges and exemptions from the Bishops authority, permitting the Monks to re|ceive in the said Monastery or in any Chappells annexed to it the Ecclesiasticall Sacraments fro~ whatsoever Bishop they should think fit, so he were such an one as was conformable to the Church in the Paschall celebration.
3. A Coppy of which Royal Charter is extant in Sir H. Spelman, extracted out of the an|cient Archives of that Monastery: Where it is further written,Ibid. that the foresaid King Ina after the sealing of this Charter by himself, with the consent and attestation of his Queen Edilbur|ga, of King Bulded, of Adelard the Queens Bro|ther, of Beorthwald Arch-bishop of Canterbury, c. directed Letters to Pope Gregory signed with his Royall Seale, in which was enclosed the same Charter exemplified, together with a Cup of gold and other royall presents, beseeching him that he would receive the Church of Canterbury with all its appartenances and priviledges into the prote|ction of the See Apostolick and confirm them for ever by his authority. The same year likewise the said King took a iourney personally to Rome, and sent back to Glastonbury this Priviledge confir|med by the Apostolick signet.
4. This devout iourney of King Ina to Rome was suggested to him principally by his ver|tuous and pious Queen Ethelburga: The inno|cent subtilty by which she at last effected it is related by William of Malmsbury, to this effect: King Ina, saith he, had to wife Ethelburga, a Lady of Royall blood and a Royall mind likewise.Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2 She frequently instilld into the cares of her husband motives to induce him to bid farwell, at least in his last age, to all wordly vanities. Such good sug|gestions he would seem to approve, but the exe|cution of them he delayd from day to day. At last she attempted to overcome him by subtilty, in the manner following:5. On a certain time being in their Countrey-pa|lace, where a Royall court was kept with extreme magnificence: assoon as they were gone from thence, the Keeper of the house by the Queens private or|der defiled all the rooms of the palace with rubbish and the dung of cattell; yea in the bed where the King and Queen had lyen, he putt a sow with her young piggs. In the mean time when the Court had proceeded little more then a mile in their return, the Queen entreated and importuned the King to goe back to the same palace, as if it im|ported almost her life. The King with no great difficulty was perswaded: but when he found his Pa|lace, which he had elt but even then magnifice~tly adorned, now become so ugly and nasty, he wonderd at it, and turning his eyes to the Quern, seemed to ask her the reason of this change.She taking ad|vantage of this occasion, with a smiling look said to him, so, where are now the rustling tumults and noises Where are the magnificent purple Tapistries? Where are the many vessels of gold and silver? where the luxurious banquets for which sea and land was searched? Are not all these vanished away like smoke and wind? But woe to those who fixe their minds on such vanities, which like a swift torrent make hast to loose themselves in the abysse, for they likewise sholl be snatched away with them. The more powerfull wee are, the more powerfull will our torments be, unlesse wee provide in time for our eternall state To this purpose she spoke, and with such efficacy she by this emblem drew her husbands mind to perform what for many years together she could not obtain by her perswasions.
For after many victories and rich spoyles gained from his enemies, and many noble explos performed in the world, he at last aspiring to the supreme perfection of piety, undertook a pil|grimage to Rome.
6. As touching his pious Queen Edilburga, how she disposed of her self, entring into a Monastery, of which she became Abbesse and dyed in great Sanctity, wee shall treat in due season and place.



XVII. CH.XVII. CHAP.

1.2. King Ina first conferrs on the See A|postolick the Pension called Romescot, or Peter pence.
3.4. c The same is continued by succee|ding Princes: even of the Norman Race: and the like by forrain Kings, c.

1. KING Ina being not only resolved, but in a readinesse to begin his Pilgri|mage towards Rome, determind to leave some lasting monument of his Piety and affection to the See Apostolick. His Predecessour Cedwalla had voluntarily quitted the throne, and with great devotion changed his Purple into a poor Monasticall habit there near the Monu|ments of the Apostles. King Ina not content to imitate him in that, will moreover testify his submission and respect to the See Aposto|lick by a liberall contriution to last for ever. For which purpose, saith an ancient Historian, a generall Decree was made by the whole Kingdom of the West-Saxons, that out of every family there should yearly be sent and offred to S. Peter and his Church one penny,Westmon. ad A. D. 727. which was therefore called Romescott, or Peter-pence, not because it was collected at the Feast of S. Peter ad Vincula, as Sir H. Spelma~ imagins (for that order was made long after this time) but to shew the signall obligations, and more then ordinary respect, Vnion and subiection which that kingdom had to S. Peter and his Successours in the See Apostolick.
2. This Munificence of King Ina was in fu|ture times imitated by other Saxon Kings also. For in the year of Grace seaven hundred ninety four Offa King of the Mercians (saith Huntingdon) gave to the Roman Bishop a setled rent out of every house in his Kingdom for ever. And in the year eight hundred fifty four, when the whole Kingdom had been reduced into a Monarchy, King Ethelwolf the son of Egbert undertaking likewise a pilgrimage to Rome, as William of Malmsbury testifies, offred to S. Peter in the presence of Pope Leo the fourth a tribute out of his whole kingdom, which is payed to this day.
3. As touching the succeeding Saxon Monarks, though no doubt this contribution was payed, yet there is to be found no solemne Decree enioyning the payment of it before King Edgar, who made a Law (recited by our learned Selden) the title whereof is,Selden in Spi|clegio leg. 18.20. Concerning S. Peters pence or the Roman tribute (Vectigali.) In which a certain Taxe is established propor|tionably to each mans ability: and moreover, in case of Non-payment there is prescribed a deter|minate penalty and forfeyture to be payed to the Bishop and the King. And the same Law was re|ceived and submitted to by the Danes who at that time, which was in the year of Grace nine hundred sixty four, possessed some Provinces of the Kingdom.
4. Afterward when, during two or three successions, the Danes had subdued the whole Kingdom, the said Tribute was augmented, money then it seems being more plentifull, or the peoples charity encreasing, and in|stead of a Penny,Hoveden f. 603. half a mark was appointed to be payed on a certain day. Thus we read in the Ancient Lawes recorded by Hoveden. And King Canutus in the year of Grace one thou|sand thirty two being then at Rome, whither in imitation of this King Ina he had under|taken a devout Pilgrimage, wrote from thence Letters to his Bishops, Nobles and all Officers in Brittany,Malmsbur. in which with great severity be re|quired them before his return to discharge all ar|rears due by the ancient Law, to wit, the pence due to S. Peter out of all Citties, towns, villages, c. Which if they failed to doe, he threatned to those who faild in this duty a severe punishment with|out pardon.
5. After the expulsion of the Danes, S. Edward King and Confessour, the last of the Saxon race, as he exceeded all his Predecessours in piety, so likewise in reverence and affection to the Apostolick See.Ap. Seld. i Spicoleg f. 171 And therefore in a Body of Las collected by him with the consent of his Ba|rons, he renewd all ancient Lawes of his Saxon Progenitors which savoured of iustice and pie|ty, and among the rest this Pension of S. Peters pence. And though in the Chronicle of Lich|feild it be said that the said Lawes (ever after|wards called S Edwards Lawes) had for the space of sixty seaven years, since the death of his Grandfather Edgar, been forgotten: that is to be understood not of this particular Law touching Peter-pence, but o some other of the Saxon Lawes then renewd: Since it i evident that the said Pension had not been omitted. as we shewd by the example of King Canutus.
6. After this time followd the Race of the Norman Kings, among whom this Piety of K. Ina was not obliterated.Ep. Gull. In Conquest. ad Gregor. c. vii For in an Epistle to Pope Gregory the seaventh from K. William the Con|querour we read, that the same King assures the Pope that the money due to him which for the last three years had been negligently collected, should then at his return be sent: And that for the fu|ture his Arch-bishop Lansrank and other Bishops should have the care of collecting and sending it. Consequently in another Epistle from the said Pope to the Arch-bishops, Bishops,Ep. Gregor. P. vii. ad Archip. c c. wee find the particular rates imposed on each Diocese,  at that time due, collected out of the Register of the See Apostolick viz. From Canterbury Diocese, seaven pounds, eighteen shil|lings sterling: From London, sixteen pounds, ten shillings: From Rochester five pounds, twelve shil|lings: From Norwich, one and twenty pounds, ten shillings: From Ely, five pounds: From Lincoln, forty two pounds: From Chester, eight pounds. From Winchester, seaventeen pounds, six shillings, eight pence: From Exceter, nine pound, five shillings: From Worcester, ten pounds, five shillings: From Hereford, six pounds: From Bathe, twelve pounds, five shillings: From Salisbury seaventeen pounds From Coventrey, ten pounds, five shillings: From York eleaven pounds, ten shillings.
7. As for his Son and next Successour King William Rufus,Malmsb. William of Malmsbury informs as that the Bishop Elect of Exceter being at Rome pleaded the Kings cause before the Pope with all his eloquence and skill telling him that all his Fa|thers and Brothers customes should be restored: That England was a peculiar Province of the Ro|man Church, and therefore yearly payed Tribute to it. Whether he had order from the King to strain his compliment so far, it does not ap|pear. As for King Steven, King Henry the second and King Iohn, they not only continued this Pension, but standing in need of the Popes fa|vour and assistance, they to flatter the Pope, acknowledged the Kingdom of England to be feudatary to the Church of Rome, and under her Iurisdiction: yea King Iohn made himself the Popes Vassal, and his son did homage to the Pope for his Crown:Mat. Par. a . D. 123. a subiection which Mathew Paris deservedly calls (non formosam, sed famo|sam) not seemly, but on the contrary infamous. In succeeding times the same Pension was duly payed, but never acknowledged to be in pro|per expression a Tribute but an honourable contribution, or charitable Alms, of iustice indeed due, because established by Law: but far from giving the Pope a Temporall right or dominion in England.An. i6. R. Rich. 2. On the Contrary, in a Parliament in King Richard the Seconds days all the Bishops and Lords of the Kingdom prote|sted, Tha the Crown of Englan and ever had been free from subiection to any, as to the Temporall Rights and Regalities of it, and that it depended on od alone. As for the Peter-pence they were always payed: and proper Coyn: or that pur|pose was anciently stamped: yea and the Pope had in England peculiar Officers for the Colle|ction of it as Iohn Derlington in the times of three Popes,Pits descrip. Angl A. D. 84. Iohn the One and twentieth Nicholas the third, and Martin the fourth. And Polydor Virgil an Italian acknowledges that he was sent into England to perform the Office of Col|lectour for the Pope.
8. This liberality begun by our Saxon Kings, was imitated by other Extern Princes in suc|ceeding times:Ap Baron. ad A. D. 804. Thus Pope Gregory the ninth of that Name in an Epistle to his Legats de|clares that in the Archives of S. Peter in three severall places it is fund that Charles the Empe|rour collected yearly for the service of the Aposto|lick See twelve hundred pounds, besides what every one offred in his particular devotion. And in the year of Grace one thousand forty six by a Generall Assembly of the States of Poland under King Casimir a promise was made of a half penny yearly to be payed by every person in that kingdom to the Pope.Coriolun. ad. A. D. 1476. And in the year of our Lord one thousand seaventy six Demetrius Duke of Dalmatia Croatia in a Synod assem|bled at Salona obliged himself to pay to the See of Rome an annuall Tribute of two hun|dred peices of Gold called Byzantins.Id. ad. A. D. 1076. The like Pensions we read to have been given by the Dukes of Brittany, c. Thus much wee thought fitt to adde upon occasion of this charitable Liberality to the See of Rome begun by the de|vout Saxon King Ina.A. D. 727 Wee will prosecute his iourney the year following.


XVIII. CHAP.XVIII. C.

1. Death of Tobias Bishop of Rochester.
2 3 S. Boniface consults the Pope about seve|rall Questions: which are resolved by him

1. THE same year Tobias Bishop of Rochester dyed. He was,Bed. l. 5. c. 24. saith S. Beda, Disciple of Theo|dore Arch-bishop of Canterbury of happy memory, and of Adrian Abbot of S. Augustins Monastery. And to a great perfection of learning both Ecclesia|sticall and secular he added so accurate a skill in languages both Greek and Latin, that they were as familiar to him as his Native countreys tongue He was buried in the Porch of S. Pauls, which himself had built within the Church of S. An|drew to be a place for his sepulcher. From this passage of S. Beda the great Cardinall Baronius inferrs,Baron. hc that the English Nation received from the Roman Church, not the Catholick Faith only, but likewise all good literature. To Tobias there succeeded in the See of Rochester Aldul|fus, who was the tenth Bishop of that Church.
2. But the incessant labours of S. Boniface wil oft interrupt our Narration of the affaires of Brittany,Ap. Bonifac. p. and require our attention to them.This year (as appears by an Epistle or Pope Gregory to him) he sent his Preist Denua to the said Pope to onsult him about certain difficulties occurring in the discharge of his Apostolick Office. As 1. within what degrees of propinquity Mariage may be permitted: to which the Resolution was, that the utmos strictnes ought not to be exercised to such new converted Nation, and therefore tha beyond the fourth degree of affinity or consan|guinity Mariage might be allowd. Again 2. that in case a woman have an incurable in|firmity (before Mariage be accomplished) it may be lawfull for the husband to marry another 3. That if a Preist be defamed by an accusation of the people, and no certain Wit|nesses be produced against him, the Preist by oath making God witnes of his innocence shall remain in his degree 4. That it is no fitt that more Chalices then one should be upon the Altar at celebration of Masse 5 That concerning eating meats consecrated to Idols, it may be allowd after making the sign of the Crosse over them except in case o scandal mentioned by S. Paul,  at one shoul say, This was offred to Idols. 6. That children o either sex offred by their parents to God in their infancy to a Regular Discipline, may not afterward in ripe age leave that state and contract matrimony. 7. That persons bapti|zed by adulterous and scandalous Preists ought not therefore to be rebaptized. But in case there be a doubt whether infants have been baptized or not, then according to the Tradition of the Holy Fathers, they ought

to be baptized 8 That the holy Sacrament of Christs body and blood ought not to be denyed to persons infected with Leprosy, or other like contagious disease: but they must not be ad|mitted to eat and drink with others. 9. That in case the Pestilence should rage in Monasteries o Churches, it would be a folly to flye, since no man can scape Gods hands. 10. That he ought sharply to reprove scan|dalous and licentious Bishops or Preists: but was not obliged to refuse eating or conver|sing with them: For this may be a mean to gain them.
Ib. Ep. 3.  n not. Serrar dand.3. Some of these doubts also S. Boniface proposed to his learned freinds in Brittany, and particularly to the holy Prelat Daniel Bi|shop of Winchester, who returned him the like answers: and comforted him being much afflicted with his perverse and obstinat Ger|man Clergy. Both his Epistle and the Answer to it are still extant.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. c. King Ina at Rome builds the Schoole of the English: hre it was seated.
6 7 He there takes a Monasticall Habit. his happy death.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred twenty seaven the devout King Ina fi|nished his iourney to Rome.A. D. 727. At his leaving Brittany he resigned his kingdom to his kins|man called Ethelard, a worthy Successour of so Noble a Prince. And being thus discharged of so great a burden of secular solicitudes, he performed his iourney more chearfully.
Westmon. hc.2. Being arrived at Rome saith Mathew of Westminster, he by the consent and will of Pope Gregory, built in the Citty a certain house, which he would have to be called The Schoole of the En|glish. To the said house the following Kings of this Nation, the Princes, Bishops, Preists or any other Ecclesiasticks, were to come, to be instructed in the Catholick Faith and learning, to prevent the teaching any perverse doctrine contrary to Ca|tholick Vnity: and when they were become well established in the Faith, they returned home again
3. It seems that not only the Popes in these times, but the Saxon Princes in Brittany thought more convenient, that the youth of this Na|tion should be taught learning and vertue at Rome rather then publick Schooles should be erected at home. And the reason is given by the same Authour,Id. ib. saying, From the time of S. Augustin our Apostle to this Publick Schooles and Professours of Teaching were by the Bishops of Rome straitly forbidden to the English, by reason of the many Heresies which at the coming of the English into Brittany (at which time the Pagans were mixed with the Christians) did much corrupt the doctrines and Discipline of Christianity. So that the Censure given by the Apostat Bale touching this Foundation does well become him,Bl. cent. 1. c. 15. who affirms, That it was erected to the great mischeif of the English state.
4. Besides this house,Id. ib. the same King Inas built near to it a Church to the honour of the Blessed Virgin Mary, in which the Divine Mysteries might be celebrated by and for such English as should come to the Citty, and in which if any of them hapned to dye, here they might be buried: Thus writes the same Authour: who in another place declares, that Burrhed last King of the Mer|cians going in pilgrimage to Rome and there dying,Id. ad. A. D. 874. was after a Royall manner buried in the Church of the Blessed Virgin, adioyning to the Schoole of the English.
5 It is not easy to determin in what region of this Citty the said Schoole and Church were placed. Severall of our Historians agree that it was the same which is to this day called the Hospitall of the English, or the Hospitall of S. Tho|mas thus write Polydor, Harpsfeild, Parker c But other Authours mentioning the frequent conflagrations of it, particularly Anastasiu Bibliothecarius in his description thereof about the year of Grace eight hundred,Ap. Baron. A. D. 823. twenty three shews that it was seated in the Suburbs, near to the Church of S. Peter, in that place which is now called the Borgo, and anciently Saxia, because a Colony of Saxons was sent thither by Charles the great.
6. King Inas having thus provided for secu|ring a perpetuall succession and propaga|tion of the Faith among his countreymen, presently retired himself to a quiet repose in contemplation. He therefore in the ex|pression o William of Malmsbury, cutt off his hair,Malmsb. l. 1 c 2. and cloathing himself with a vile plebeian habit spent the short remainder of his age in a secret retirement. And how acceptable this last sacrifice of himself was to Almighty God,Id. ib. he was pleased to shew by many miracles, saith the same Authour. Now that by this plebeian habit was meant a Monasticall one, the gene|rall consent of our Historians doe confirm. For the cloathing of Religious persons at the beginning was the same with that of the or|dinary meaner sort of people: but fashions altering among secular persons, and Religious men not changing, hence it comes that they have a distinct peculiar habit, nothing at all resembling the generall fashion of other men in the world.
7. His life was not prolonged at Rome:Martyrol. Angl. 7. Febr For in our Martyrologe he is recorded to have dyed this same year: and his memory is cele|brated among Saints on the seaventh of Fe|bruary. Which does not well agree together. For his arrivall at Rome, and the orders taken for such buildings could not be effected so early in the year. Yet that he did not passe through the following year may be colle|cted from hence, that being dead his Sacred Body was buried with great honour in the entrance of S. Peters Church, by reason that the Church founded by him to the honour of the Blessed Virgin was not quite finished.



A. D. 729.
XX. CHA.XX. CHAP.

1.2. Death of S. Willeic: and of S. Engel|mund a Martyr.
3.4. Oswold rebells against King Ethelard: and is expelled.
5 6 c. Death of S Egbert.
8.9 Osric King of the Northumbers dying, the pious King Ceolulf succeeds.

1. TO this same year is consigned the happy death of the Holy Preist and Dis|ciple of S. Swibert, S. Willeic, of whom some what hath been sayd before. Concerning him thus writes Miraeus in his Belgick Calen|dar:Mir. in Fast. Belg. 2. Mart. S. Willeic was an assistant of the holy Bishop S. Swibert in the preaching of the Gospell: and became a Canon of the Church of Vtrecht lately erected. After S. Swiberts death he governed the Monastery of Werda the space of ten years with great commendasion and esteem. He dyed this year: and his Memory is celebrated among the Saints on the second of March.
Id. b. d 21. .2. About the same time also dyed, yet more happily, because his life was sacrifised by Martyrdom, the glorious Saint and cpanion of S. Willebrord, S. Engelmund, who, according to the same Authour, imbue with Evangeli|call Doctrin the acavians and Kenemarians. But in the Supplement to the Gallican Martyrologe a larger Elogy is iven o him in this man|ner At Welsa in Holland on this one and twen|tieth day of Iune is celebrated the happy death of S. Engelmund Preist and Martyr.Supplem. Mayr Gal|lc. 2. . He by Nation an Englishman, was companion of S. Willebrord,  by command of Pope Sergius was ioynd in com|mission with him in his Apostolick Office, in preaching, converting of soules and working mi|racles among the Pisons. He was also Abbot and directour of many Religious persons which he as|sembled together to praise our Lord. At length being zealously vrgent to withdraw the Savage Nation of the Prisons from their horrible Super|stitions and barbarous manners, he for so great Charity incurred their hatred and furous perse|cution, with which he was at last oppressed: So crowning his Apostolick Office with a glorious Martyrdom.
A. D. 728.3. The year following the Kingdom and Churches of the West-Saxons were much dis|quieted by the restles ambition of a young Prince of the Royall family called Oswold, who it seems in indignation that King Ina in re|signing the Crown preferred his kinsman Ethelward or Adelhard before him, thought by force to give it himself. Concerning this tumult and the successe of it, unhappy to the aggressour,Huntingd. l. 4. thus writes Henry of Huntingdon: Adelhard King of the West-Saxons before the first year of his raign was expired, fought a batel against Oswold a young man of the Royall stock, who at|tempted to obtain the kingdom for himself. But the young man not being able to bring equall forces into the feild, having for some time born the burden of a furious combat, at last being overpowred was forced to fly, and quite abandon the kingdom: By which means King Ethelward was firmly established therein.
4. This worthy King to shew himself a de|serving Successour of King Ina,A. D. 729. presently after extended his Royall magnificence to houses of piety and Religion: particularly to the fa|mous Monastery of Glastonbury, the memory whereof the Antiquities of that place doe thus commend to posterity:Antiquit. Glaston. When Cngisle was Abbot in the year of our Lords Incarnation sea|ven hundred twenty nine, Ethelard King and Successour of Ina bestowed for a stable possession to the Religious family serving our Lord in the Mo|nastery of Glastonbury sixty hdes of land in Po|honhol, and twelve hydes in Thoric. His Queen likewise named Fridogitha gave Brunant. How this devout Queen nine years after this quit|ted her Royall state, and undertook a pilgri+mage to Rome, where she consecrated her|self to God, wee shall shew hereafter.
5. This year likewise dyed the most holy Abbot Egbert, of whom frequent mention has been made. This is he who in the year of Grace six hundred sixty four being mortally sick of the Pestilence was wonderfully resto|red to health: and forsaking his Native countrey Brittany, went into Ireland in the year six hundred and ninety, where for his admirable piety he was in igh estimation: and being desirous to expose himself to all incommodities and dangers for spreading the Faith in forrain countreys, wa by Al|mighty God who designed him for another employment, hindred; Notwithstanding by his exhortations the glorious Saint Wille|brord, Sutbert and their companions under|took that most famous Apostolick Mission into Germany: This likewise was he who, thirteen years before this, reduced the Monks of Hy in Scotland to conform themselves to the Catholick observation of the Paschall Solemnity.
6. This Blessed Saint, whom S. Beda calls a Venerable and not without honour to be named servant of Christ and Preist Egbert,Bed l. 5 c. 10.  l. 3 c 27. being ninety years old, departed this world to a heavenly king|dom. And for a proof that this his zeale, whereby he united that Schismaticall Church to the Vniversall Church, was acceptable to God, the same Authour observes, that, as he had much laboured in establishing the true celebration of Faster he received his eternall recompence on the same Feast. For thus he writes:7. The man of God Egbert remained thirteen years in the said Island of Hy,Id l. 5 c 23. which he by a new extraordinary illustration of Divine Grace of Ec|clesiasticall Communion and peace, had consecra|ted to our Lord. In the year therefore of our Lords Incarnation seaven hundred twenty nine, in which the Paschall Solemnity was celebrated on

the eighth day before the Calends of May, when he had solemnly celebrated Masse in memory of our Lords Resurrection, the very same day he himself likewise departed to our Lord, and ha|ving begun the ioy of so great a Festivity with his Brethren on earth, whom he had converted to the Grace of Ecclesiasticall Vnity, he finished it with our Lord, and his Apostles together with all the glorified Saints in heaven; or rather he still ce|lebrates it to all eternity. Indeed the Divine di|spensation was wonderfull, that not only this Ve|nerable man should passe to our Lord on this Feast of Easter, but in such a day on which it had never before been celebrated in that place. His Religious Brethren therefore reioyced for the cer|tainly true Catholick knowledge of the Paschall time which they had learnt of him: and they re|ioyced in the assured protection of their holy Fa|ther by whom they were taught and corrected. And he himself likewise congratulates, that he was continued alive in the flesh till he might enioy the happines to see his Brethren and Disci|ples admitt, and together with him celebrate Easter on that day, which in former times they had always avoyded. Thus the most reverend Father being assured of their correction reioyced to see the day of our Lord, he s it and was glad. He dyed therefore thus happily,Martyr Rom. 24. Aprl. and both in the Roman and other Martyrologes his name is anniversarily recited among the Saints on the four and twentieth day of Aprill.
8. To conclude, the same year King Osric having raigned eleaven years over the Nor|thumbers, and appointed for his heyr in the kingdom Ceoluf Brother to King Kenred, dyed,Ethelvv. l. 2. c. 13. or as Ethelwerd writes, was slain. He was in nothing happy so much as leaving behind him so worthy a Successour, for Ceo|lulf both for piety and learning was com|parable with the best Princes and after he had happily governed his kingdom many years, voluntarily quitted it, to aspire to an im|mortall Crown.
9. Concerning the beginning of his Raign, William of Malmsbury writes in this manner: Ceolulf, saith he, the eighth King from Ida, ascen|ded the trembling throne of the Northumbers this year. A man he was of ability sufficient for any employment, and besides that, endued with learning in great perfection, which with assiduous study and a sharp witt he attained to. S. Beda will be my surety for this: for presently after this, in a time when Brittany most abounded with learned men, he made choice of this Prince, to whom he de|dicated his History of English affaires, as being a person who by his authority could add strength to whatsoever was well written therein: and by his knowledge and skill could correct, if any thing was written amisse. Concerning him more shall be said hereafter.


XXI. CHAP.A. D. 731.
XXI. CH.

1.2. Death of the Venerable Abbot Cym|bert.
3.4. Death of Saint Brithwald Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury: to whom succeeds Tatwin.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation sea|ven hundred and thirty,A. D. 730. according to our English Martyrologe dyed the holy Abbot Cymbert, stiled there Bishop and Confessour, and supposed by some to have had his See in the Isle of Wight. But none of our Ancient Monu|ments doe signify that that Island was ever made the Seat of a Bishop, for generally it hath been assigned to the See of Winchester: neither is the name of Cymbert recorded among Bi|shops, except only by Saint Beda, who thereby understands the same person, who by other Writers is called Kinebert, and was Bishop of the Mercians, and had his Seat at Lindesfare, now called Lincoln. Which Kinebert is at this time alive, as S. Beda testifies in the conclu|sion of his History, which ends the year fol|lowing.
2. This therefore may seem to have been the ground of the mistake of those who compiled our Martyrologe. The Cymbert there|fore commemorated there as dying this year is the same Holy Abbot of Redford in Hamp|shire,Vid. l. 20.  5. who, as hath been declared, obtaind permission to instruct in the Christian Faith and baptize two young Princes Brethren o Arwald King of the Isle of Wight, before they were to be putt to death by the command of King Cedwalla, who had subdued the said Island.Martyr. Ang. 21 Feb. The Memory of this holy Abbot is ce|lebrated among the Saints on the one and twentieth of February.
3. The same year also dyed Saint Brithwald Arch-bishop of Canterbury, successour to Saint Theodore after he had administred that See the space of almost thirty eight years,Vd. l. 17 c. 11 saith Huntingdon. Wee have before declared how he being Nephew to Ethelred King of the Mercians was the first of the Saxon race who was Abbot of Glastonbury: which dignity in love to solitude he relinquished, and retire himself to a secret place called Reculver From whence he was even by force drawn to sitt in the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbu|ry: which he adorned with many actions of Pastorall zeale and piety, assembling Synods and regulating disorders in severall Provin|ces of this Island. And at last full of years and merits was this year translated to heaven. He is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the ninth of Ianuary.Martyr. Ang 9. Ian.
4. In his place the year following was ele|cted and consecrated Arch-bishop the Vene|rableA. D. 731. Bed. l. 5. c 24.

Abbot Tatwin, saith S. Beda, a Preist and Abbot of a Monastery called Bruidun, or Bren|ton. He was consecrated in the Citty of Can|terbury by the Venerable Bishops, Daniel of Winchester, Inguald of London, Aldwin of Lich|feild, and Aldwof of Rochester, on the tenth of Iune in the year of our Lords Incarnation sea|ven hundred thirty one. He was a man illu|strious for his piety and prudence, and emi|nently learned in Sacred Scriptures. Of him more hereafter.


XXII. C.XXII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The State of Brittany at this time in which Saint Beda ended his History.

1. SINCE it was in this year of Grace sea|ven hundred thirty one that Saint Beda concluded his History, and as some Authours affirm, his Life also: wee will here, as he has done, give a breif prospect in generall of the state of Brittany at this time, as well touching the Church as State. In the next place to ma|nifest the sincere veracity of so learned and pious an Authour, wee will, from his penn, declare upon how well grounded an autho|rity he built the whole frame of his History, as likewise what diligent search he made for true information in all things, as well such as hapned in former ages, as during his own age in the other regions and kingdoms of Brittany and forrain countreyes: And last|ly wee will conclude with a particular Nar|ration of Saint Beda's own life and happy death.
 l 5. c. 24.2. As touching the first thus he writes: At this present time (to witt, in the year of Grace seaven hundred thirty one) the Bishops gover|ning the severall Episcopall Sees of Brittany are these following. The Province of Kent is admini|stred by Tatwine Arch-bishop (o Canterbury) and Aldulf (Bishop of Rochester) That of the East-Saxons by Inguald (Bishop of Lon|don.) The East Angles by Eadbert (or Ald|bert Bishop of Dumwich) and Hadulac (Bi|shop of Helmham.) The Province of the West-Saxons by Daniel (Bishop of Winchester) and Forthere (Bishop of Shirborn.) In the king|dom of the Mercians Alduin is Bishop (of Lich|feild,) Walstod Bishop (of Hereford and the region beyond the Severn. Wilfrid Bishop of Worcester, and Cymbert (or Kinebert) Bishop of the Lindisfari (or Lincoln:) as for the Isle of Wight, it was annexed to the See of Winchester. The Province of the South-Saxons of late has been va|cant, and therefore has recourse to the Bishop of the West-Saxons (that is Winchester) for such necessities as require Episcopall Ministery. And all these together with other Southern Provinces, though governed immediatly by particular Kings, yet both they and their Kings also from the South Sea as far as the Humber Northwards are subject to Edilbald King of the Mercians. Lastly the large Province of the Northumbers, of which Ceolulf is now King, is administred by four Bishops: the Church of York by Wilfrid (the younger) that of Lindearn by Edilwald: Hagustald (or Hexham) by Acca: and Candida Casa (or Witehern) by Pecthem. This last Episcopall See has been lately erected, by reason that the number of Christians there has been greatly multiplied, and Pecthelm was consecrated the first Bishop thereof. Thus are the severall Episcopall Churches of Brittany administred.
3. As touching the severall Nations inha|biting it,d ibid. that of the Picts is ioynd in league with the English: and to their great ioy with the Vni|versall Church in the Orthodox Faith, Commu|nion and peace. The Scotts inhabiting the Nor|thern parts of Brittany are quiet, and make no attempts or fraudulent designs against the En|glish.Brittains. The Brittains although for the most part out of a Nationall hatred they have an iecon|cileable aversion from the English, and likewise doe erroneously and impiously oppose the Catho|lick Church in the Paschall Observance: yet in neither of these regards can they attain their purpose and prevaile, both divine and human power resisting their designs. For though a great part of that Nation be independent on any other, yet in some places they are subject to the Empire of the English: And again the times at present being peaceable very many of them in the Nor|thern parts (called Cumbers) both Nobles and of inferiour condition doe more frequently receive the Monasticall Tonsure in English Monasteries, and consecrate their children to the same Profes|sion, then exercise themselves in arms and war|like exploits. And what good issue may come from hence the succeeding age will see.
4. Such at present is the state of all Brittany in this year, which is the two hundred eighty fifth since the coming of the English into this Island, and the seaven hundred and one and thirtieth after our Lords Incarnation. I will conclude with this prayer: That the earth may all ways reioyce in the kingdom of our God, and many Islands with ioy confesse to the memory of his Holines the con|stancy of Brittany in his Faith. Thus does S. Beda conclude his History.


XXIII. CHAP.XXIII. C

i 2. c. The names and qualities of such persons from whom S. Beda received in|formation in his History.

1. IN the next place for a proof of his ve|racity in his History, wee will produce his Epistle to the illustrious and learned King Ceolulf then raigning over the Northumbers,

to whom S. Beda presented the same, desi|ring not so much his protection, as iudg|ment and censure of it. In which Epistle to the end he might approve his care and dili|gence to inform himself in the truth, he produces the names and characters of the principall persons from whom he received information and assistance, persons of such abilities, piety and esteem, that no man can reasonably suspect in them either want of knowledge or of sincerity: Thus therefore he writes:Bed. Epist. ad Ceolulf. Re|gem.2. The principall Authour and assistant in this work (saith he) was Albinus the most re|verend Abbot of Canterbury, a man of eminent learning in all kinds of litterature, having been educated therein by those two most venerable and learned men, Theodore Arch-bishop of the said Church of happy memory, and Hadrian Abbot. This worthy Abbot Albinus was pleased to com|municate to mee partly in writing, and partly by the Religious Preist of the Church of London, No|thelm, whom he sent to acquaint mee with all particular occurrents worthy memory which had, after diligent enquiry, come to his knowledge, either in the Province of Kent or adiacent Re|gions, concerning the Gests of the Disciples of the Blessed Pope S. Gregory, or whatsoever he could find in ancient Record, or receive from the Tra|dition of Ancestours. The said Nothelm likewise afterward going to Rome, by permission of Pope Gregory searching the Archives of that Church, found and copied out certain Letters both of the said Pope and some of his Predecessours touching the affaires of Brittany, which at his return, by the advice of the most Reverend Abbot Albin, he brought to mee to be inserted in this Hi|story.
3. In the which, those things which are related from the beginning thereof to the times in which the English Nation receiued the Christian Faith, wee collected principally out of such Writings as we could here and there meet with. Then from that time to the present age all the Gests perfor|med in the Province of Kent by the Disciples of S. Gregory and their Successours, and under what Kings they were performed, all these came to my knowledge by the industry of the foresaid Abbot Albin, and the relation of Nothelm sent by him. The same persons likewise informed mee in se|verall things touching the Conversion of the West and East-Saxons the East-Angles and Nor|thumbers, by the preaching of what Bishops, and in the raign of what Kings those Provinces recei|ved the Christian Faith. In a word it was princi|pally by the advice and perswasion of the same Albinus that I had the courage to sett upon this work.
4. Besides these, the most Reverend Bishop of the West Saxons Daniel, who is yet alive, gave mee an account in writing of many things regar|ding the Ecclesiasticall History of that Province, and that of the South-Saxons confining to it, to|gether with the Isle of Wight. Again how by the ministery of the Holy Preists Ceddand Ceadda the Province of the Mercians came to embrace the Faith of Christ, before unknown to them, and that of the East-Saxons to recover that Faith which once received was afterward reiected by them: And likewise how those two Holy Fathers spent their lives in all Sanctity, and how happily they dyed, all these things wee learnt from the Religious Brethren of the Mo|nastery of Lestingen, built by them. More|over in the Province of the East-Angles the Ecclesiasticall Gests, wee understood partly by writings and Tradition of their Ancestours, and partly by the relation of the most Reverend Ab|bot Esius.
5. But as touching the Province of Lindissi (or Lincoln) how the Faith of Christ  spread there, together with the Succession of Bishops, we were informed in some part by Let|ters of the most Revered Bishop Cymbert (or Kinebert) or by discoursing with severall men of good credit. To conclude, the occur|rents hapning in the Kingdom of the Nor|thumbers and severall regions of it, these I came to the knowledge of by the constant re|port, not of a few, but of allmost innume|rable Witnesses, who might well know or re|member them, besides many things to which I my self can give testimony. Among which those things which I have written concerning our most holy Father and Bishop Saint Cuth|bert, either in this History, or in a par|ticular Book of his Gests, those I received and transcribed out of certain writings com|piled by the Religious Monks of the Church of Lindesfarn, the sincerity of which I had no reason to suspect: and to those I added with great care many other things which I my self learnt from the most sure attesta|tion of severall faithfull and sincere per|sons.
6. To conclude, I humbly entreat the Reader, that in case he find in those my Wri|tings any particular passage swerving from Truth, he would not impute that to mee as my fault, since my only care has been simply and sincerely to commit by writing to posterity for their instruction, such things as either from vulgar fame or writings of former ages I have collected. Now it is against the generall Law of History, that the Writer should be answerable for the mistakes of other men. Thus much touching the Truth and sincerity of S. Beda's History.



XXIV. C.XXIV. CHAP.

1.2. c. The birth, life and Gests of the Venerable Doctour of the Church S. Beda.

1. WE will in the last place adde a Narra|tion of the Life and blessed Death of this great Ornament of his age, and glory of our Island, S. Beda, a man so admirably emi|nent in all kinds of learning, so excellent a Poet, an Oratour, an Historian, an Astronomer, an Arihmetician, a Chronographer, a Cosmo|grapher, a Philosopher and a Divine, that it was a common saying among the learned of his age, That a man born in the utmost cor|ner of the earth had dazeled the whole world with the luster of his Witt and learning: And such use he made of all these great Talents in his life, that, according to his own testi|mony, between the observances of Regular Dis|ciplin, and dayly singing the Divine Office in the Church, he always found a great sweetnes in learning, or teaching, or writing some thing. For which in his life time he was first by Pope Sergius, and for that reason perhaps general|ly by all, stiled Venerable, and in that regard that Title since his death has by the whole Church been in a sort appropriated to him: For though in all Histories and Martyrologes his Sanctity is celebrated, yet he is seldom found written or named Saint, but Venera|ble Beda: so that perhaps I may incurr the censure of some Readers for not observing the same in this present History.
2. How long he lived cannot certainly be determined. Some, as hath been said, assign his death to this year in which he concluded his History But this is suffi|ciently disproved in that Saint Boniface,Sigbert. Rayne. Bonif. Ep. 8. fourteen years afther this, writing to Eg|bert Arch-bishop of York, and desiring some Books of Venerable Beda to be sent to him, speaks of him as then newly dead, for he entitles him a man, as he had heard, who of late had been much enriched with divine Grace and spirituall knowledge, and shined glo|riously in that Province, c. And the like passage we find in an Epistle of the same Holy Bishop to Cuthbert Abbot and Disciple of S. Beda.
3. Again, others prolong his age beyond the year of Grace seaven hundred seaventy six, grounding their opinion on an Epistle written as by him that year to a Preist cal|led Withreda: Vpon which account he should many years over-live Saint Boniface, contrary to what was even now produced. Moreover severall of our ancient Historians place his death four years after this: But neither will S. Bonifaces expression well suit with that position.
4. In this uncertainty without inter|posing mine own iudgment, it seemd most expedient, since we can no longer make use of the testimony and light of this so holy and faithfull an Historian, to adioyn his own story to that which he wrote of his countrey: especially considering that wee find no Gests of his hereafter inter-woven with the generall Ecclesiasticall affairs, so that without any preiudice to order, wee may treat of his end in this place conve|niently enough.
5. He was born in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy one, as evidently appears in that himself affirms that he was this year in which he concluded his History fifty nine years old. The place of his Birth was a little village not far from Durham called Girwy (now Iarrow) where the River Tine is ready to fall into the Sea. A village then of no consideration, though since ennobled not only by his birth, but by its neighbour|hood to the famous Monastery of Saint Peter founded by S. Benedict Biscop three years after S. Beda was born, and it self being the Seat of another Monastery about eight years after built by the same Holy Abbot, and dedicated to S. Paul.
6. Who or of what condition his parents were, hath not been recorded, but in a poor village then so obscure, we may expect to find inhabitants as obscure. What ever con|dition they were of, he was in his infancy deprived of them both, and left to the care of his kinred, who probably for want of subsistence recommended him, being but seaven years old, to the care and discipline of the foresaid S. Benedict: by which means he in his tender years was imbibed in the rudi|ments of a Monasticall Life according to the Rule of the Great Patriark of Monasticall Insti|tion S. BENEDICT: which Rule, as hath been declared, was not long before this time in|troduced into the Province of the Northum|bers by the famous Bishops S. Wilfrid.
7. In this Monastery of S. Peter seated at Wiremouth S. Beda under so carefull and pious a Master spent his time in all innocence and devotion, till he came to an age capable of Professing that Disciplin under which he had been bred: and then he was committed to the care and government of the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid in the new-built Monastery of Saint Paul at Girwy (or Iarrow) the place of his birth, from whom he received the Monasticall Habit.
8. What speciall Masters he found there of ability sufficient to train him up in learning and to bring him to that prodigious perfe|ction therein as that he became the wonder of all Christendom, it does not appear. There were indeed then in the kingdom o Kent two eminent Masters in all kinds of Litera|ture, S. Theodore Arch-bishop, and S. Adrian Abbot of Canterbury. But it is without any ground from History that some Modern Wri|ters have sent him thither to Schoole. Nei|ther

is there any necessity to frame such an imagination.A. D. 729. For S. Beda himself describing the plenty and richnes of the Library which with immense costs Saint Benedict Bishop provided for his Monastery, wee ought not to doubt, but that he furnished Masters like|wise to make those Books usefull to the Reli|gious Disciples living there. Neither indeed was there probably any great necessity of eminent Masters to a Schollar of so vast a ca|pacity as Saint Beda. It was sufficient for him to be taught the rudiments of our lear|ning: for after that his own naturall quick|nes of witt and solidity of iudgment would not faile to make a speedy progresse, espe|cially since he enioyd the advantage of so famous a Library, of the richnes whereof himself alone was a Proof more then suffi|cient, since it appears by such a world of vo|lumes written by him, he wanted not instru|ctions in all manner of Litterature, and in all learned languages.
9. It is a sufficient sign that he was very early much advanced in learning, and in esteem likewise for piety, that when he was entring into his twentieth year he was at the request of his Abbot S. Ceolfrid promoted to the Order of Deacon by the famous Bishop S. Iohn of Beverley then newly possessed of the See of Hagustald, who by some Writers is affirmed also to have been an Instructour of S. Beda in learning, and specially in the study of Holy Scriptures.
10. Assoon as he was thirty years old he was by command of the same Abbot advan|ced to the degree of Preist-hood. For in these days that was the age which rendred persons capable of that sublime Order, in which the Church proposed to her self our Blessed Sa|viour for an Example, who about those years began the Ministery of his Propheticall Office, as the Gospell teaches us: Though in succee|ding times the same Church for reasons no doubt weighty, has diminished six years of that measure.
11. At this time S. Beda's fame for learning was so spread, even among forrain Nations, that Pope Sergius by Letters written to the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid, called S. Beda to Rome, to be his assistant in Ecclesiasticall affaires  dis|patches, as Saint Ierom had been ancient|ly to Pope Damasus. The Epistle of the same Pope,Ap Baron. ad A. D. 701. saith Baronius, is extant to Ceolfrid in Brittany Abbot of that Monastery in which Saint Beda had been educated, and was grown into a perfect man, illustrious for his San|ctity and learning. Whereupon the same Pope commanded he should be sent to him. The tenour of the Epistle is this:12. What words are sufficient to exalt the un|expressible clemency and Providence of our God towards us, so as that we may render him worthy praises for his immense benefits bestowed on us, whom out of darknes and the shadow of death he hath called and brought to the light of his know|ledge! Ad a little after he proceeds thus: Know that we have with a chearfull mind re|ceived the present,A. D. 726 and grace of Benediction which thy Religious devotion has sent us by the bearer of these. And wee doe most willingly comply with those requests which so opportunely and with such a religious solicitude thou hast made unto us. Wee doe likewise exhort thy Piety, as becomes one who has a true zeale for the advancement of the Holy Church, that since there have been of late raised here certain difficulties about Ecclesiasticall causes of great weight, the examination and clearing whereof cannot be long delayd, thou wouldst not fayle to afford thy devout obedience to our request, and without delay to send hither to the shrines of my Lords and thy fa|vourable Patrons and Protectours S. Peter and S. Paul Princes of the Apostles, the Religious ser|vant of God Beda a Venerable Preist of thy Mo|nastery, that he may here appear in our presence: And doe not doubt but as soon as the said causes shall through Gods assistance be solemnly de|termined, he being assisted with thy prayers shall shortly return to thee in safety. I doe the more confidently desire this from thee, because I doe not doubt but whatsoever he shall contribute to the generall good of the Church, will be proffitable to thee and to all committed to thy charge.
13. Some Writers are of opinion that S. Beda accordingly undertook this iourney: But that is not very probable, since Pope Sergius dyed toward the end of this very year in which S. Beda was made Preist, and in these Letters he is named Venerable Preist: so that there could not intervene space enough for so long a voyage. Besides this, if he himself had been at Rome, he had stood in no need of Nothelm's searching into the Archives of that See for furnishing thence fitt materialls for his History: since he himself might more conveniently have done it.
14. There doe not occurre in our Ecclesia|sticall Writers many more particular matters touching his life. Neither indeed can it be expected: For what can be said of a solitary Religious man and a student, but that he pas|sed his dayes and nights in Prayer to God, in Sacred learning and Writing, and in Teaching others? And thus much he delivers of him|selfe in a Postscript to his Ecclesiasticall History. So many volumes written by him doe te|stify almost an impossibility that he should have mispent any hower of his life: espe|cially considering how considerable a part of it the dayly attendance to Psalmody in the Church, and other Regular observances in the Monastery would require.
15. He had, saith Trithemius, many eminent men his Disciples,Thrithem. in vit. S. Bed. whom by his example and most fervent exhortations he did in|cite to a love of Holy Scriptures: so that his endeavour was to render them illustrious not so much by studies, as religion and san|ctity. Out of all Brittany men flowed to him, desirous to advance themselves in sacred knowledge and piety under his Di|rection.
A. D. 731.16. He adioynd to his History a Catalogue of his Works containing about seaventy se|verall Books: Of which some have misca|ried. Some also were afterward published, as having been written after he had made the said Catalogue, which, as himself testifies was this year when he was fifty nine years old. For there is an excellent Epistle of Spirituall advice which he sent to Egbert Bishop of York instructing him in Pastorall Duties. Now Eg|bert did not enter into that See till the year of Grace seaven hundred thirty five. And in|deed that seems to have been one of the last things he ever wrote, for in it he complains of his age and sicknes: Neither would it have been very seemly for a simple Monk to write instructions of that Nature to an emi|nent Father of the Church, but that the ad|vantage  authority of age might iustify it.
17. Many Books he has written of great curiosity and subtilty: but his cheif delight was to meditate and interpret Holy Scriptures: which he did with so unwearied a diligence, that he allowed no time o leasure for the Devill or the flesh to tempt him. And parti|cularly concerning his Expositions of Scri|pture he says,Bed. l. 3. in Samuel. That if they brought no other proffit to the Readers, at least they were benefi|ciall to himself in this, that whilst he employed his whole studies on them, he avoyded all vain thoughts of wordly things.
18. A principall encourager and inciter of him to proceed in such expositions was the Reverend and Holy Bishop Acca the suc|cessour of S. Wilfrid in the Episcopall See of gustald, as William of Malmsbury testifies. There is still extant a Letter of Acca to him in which he exhorts him to explain the Go|spell of S. Luke with a iust Commentary, after he had finished that upon the Acts of the Apostles. Many others had desired the same thing from him: but he deferred, or rather excused the labour, partly for the difficulty, and likewise because S. Ambrose had left a sufficient explanation of the Gospell. But these reasons not satisfying the Holy Bishop Acca, who told him that the commentary of S. Ambrose it self needed an Interpretation: Hereupon S. Beda delayd no longer, but in an Answer testifyed his Obedience. Which Letter also he prefixed to the same Commen|tary.
19. Such his Expositions of Holy Scriptures were even in his own age of so reverend esteem; that by an Ordonnance of an English Synod they were received into the Ecclesiasti|call Office: and at this day by the consent of the Vniversall Church many Lessons on severall occasions are publickly read in the Church-Service out of his Homilies.
20. It is not unexpedient to treat so parti|cularly concerning S. Beda's study, medita|tion, and explanation of Holy Scripture to stop the mouths of Modern Sectaries, who vainly impute the pretended Errours and Su|perstitions of Catholicks to their ignorance in Scripture: Whereas we see a holy mortified, disinteressed person, who spent his whole life in prayer and Meditation on Scripture, and yet confidently taught those Doctrins and Practises which such men will needs call Su|perstitions Errours.
21. I will conclude this Discourse of this Holy Doctours Life with those words which he is sayd a little before his death to have spoken to his Disciples,Ap. Capgra in vit. S. Bed. If by my labours and study I have in any measure proffited you or the Church of God, render mee I beseech you this requitall, to be mindfull of mee after my death there where Christ our Lord is every day both the Preist and Sacrifice of Propitiation.


XXV. CHAP.XXV. CH.

1.2. c. The order and circumstances of the happy Death of S. Beda.

1. AS touching S. Beda's happy departure out of this Life to God, there is still exitant an Epistle written by one of his Dis|ciples (whose name I suppose was Cuthbert, afterwards Abbot of his Monastery.) It is written with great sincerity, neither is it ob|noxious o any suspicion of being supposi|titious: We find it annexed to the end of his Works, and well deserves a place in this History. The person to whom it was dire|cted is not known, and the Writers name onely guessed at: But the tenour of it is as follows:
2. The small Gift you were pleased to send mee I gratefully received,Epist. de Obit. . Bed. and your devout Letter I read with much consolation, espe|cially finding in it that your Community does carefully celebrate Masses and Prayers for our Beloved Master and Father in God, Beda. There|fore being moved rather by my affection to him then any opinion of mine own ability, I will most willingly acquaint you in a short discourse with the order and circum|stances of his happy departure out of this world, since I perceive that you desire and have requested to be informed of it.
3. His last sicknes began about a forth|night before Easter, and continued till the Feast of our Lords Ascention. The thing which most troubled him in it was shortnes of breath: other pain he had little or none. During all which time he ceased not day and night to give thanks to God. All this hindred him not to continue his Lessons to his Disciples at the Ordinary howers: and ex|cept that short time, all the rest of the day he spent in singing of Psalms with great chearfullnes of mind. The whole night likewise (except when sleep, which was very short, interrupted him) he spent in Prayer and giving of thanks to God. I sincerely

professe I never saw, nor heard of any man who so incessantly employed his time in praising God. A most blessed man certainly he was. He would sometimes repeat also that sencence of S. Paul, It is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of God, and other like passages of Holy Scripture, to admonish us by meditating on our last hour to awake from spirituall sleep and negligence. Again at other times he would sing certain Antipho|nes, for both our and his own consolation. Particularly in repeating one which begins thus, O King of glory, Lord of all power, when he came to those words, Leave us not orphans, he broke forth into excessive weeping: But he would again resume it, and such was his employment all the day. As for us his Dis|ciples who attended him, we could not ab|stain from weeping: Some times wee would read, and presently burst forth into tears, and sometimes we would read, and weep to|gether.
4. In such an exercise mixt with greif and ioy we passed the dayes of Lent till the afore|said Feast. And he would oftimes reioyce and give God thanks for his sicknes, fre|quently saying, God corrects every child whom he receives: sometimes also he would repeat that speech of S. Ambrose, I have not so lived among you as that I need to be ashamed: neither doe I fear to dye, because I have a mercifull Lord.
5. In those dayes moreover, besides our dayly Lessons, he accomplished two Works, (which deserves to be remembred for the strangenes:) the one was the Translation of S. Iohns Gospell into the English tongue for the Churches proffit, till he came to those words (in the sixth Chapter) but What are these (five loaves and two fishes) among so many? The other was a Collection of memorable passages out of S. Isidores works.
6 But when the Tewsday before our Lords Ascension was come, his sicknes became much more violent, and breathing more difficult: and besides that, a swelling began to arise in his feet. Yet all that day he taught and dictated to us very chearfully: and he would now and then say to us, Be diligent in learning, for I know not how long I may last, nor whether my Creatour will very shortly take mee from you. Such speeches made us beleive that he foresaw when he should dye. The night following he passed without any sleep at all, and spent it wholly in praying and pray|sing God. The morning following very early he bid us to be very attentive and diligent to make an end of writing the Lesson we had begun: So that we continued in receiving his Dictats till nine of the clock. After which hower we went in soleme Procession with Relicks of the Saints, as the Office of that day required. One of us his Disciples in the mean time stayd with him, and told him saying, There remains still one Chapter of the Treatise which you did dictate to us: But I fear it will be too great trouble for you to speak. No, said he, Take your pen presently and Write: and he did accor|dingly.
7. About three of the Clock after noon he called mee to him and said, I have in a little boxe some precious things, there is Pepper, incense, and Oraria (which some interpret Handkercheifs, others, Stoles; and some like|wise, Chaplets, for numbring of Prayers, which, say they, therefore from him took the name of Beades.) Run presently and fetch them: and desire the Preists of our Monastery to come hither, that I may distribute among them some such small Gifs as God bestowd on mee. This I performed with much trembling. And when the Preists were come, he earnestly re|quested every one of them not to faile to pray and say Masses diligently for him. Which they also heartily promised him. But they burst out into bitter weeping when he told them, he beleived they should never see his face again in this world. But again it was a ioy to them when he said, It is now time if such be the pleasure of God my Creatour, that I should be delivered out of this flesh, and goe to him who when I was not, framd mee of nothing. I have lived a long time, and my mercifull Iudge has well ordered my life. The time of my freedom is at hand, for my soule desires to see Christ my King in his glory. In such like speeches to our great comfort and edification he spent ioyfully that which was his last day, till even.
8. The foresaid young Disciple of his (whose name was Wilberck) sayd once again to him, Dear Master, There remains yet one sentence un|written. But he answerd, Well, well, all is finished. Thou hast said right. Come and turn my head for I much desire to sitt and look to my Ora|toy, and pray to my heavenly Father. Thus being layd upon a hayr-cloath spread on the floor, as he was singing these words, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, c. he happily breathed forth his soule: And we may assuredly beleive that considering his laborious constancy in praising God, his soule was by Angells ca|ried to eternall ioyes.
9. Now all which heard his speeches and were witnesses of the manner of the death of this our good Father Beda, doe professe that they never saw any one end his life with so great tranquillity of mind and de|votion. For as you have heard, as long as his soule continued in his body he never ceased to praise God and with arms stretchd forth to give thanks to him. Now you must know that besides what I have written, there remain many other particulars, which for want of skill in expressing I am forced to omitt. Yet I have a purpose through Gods help to relate more amply severall other things which I saw and heard from him.
This account did this Disciple give of his holy Masters death. After which, as we read in the Authour of his Life in Capgrave, there followd in the room where he dyed a sweet fra|grancy

so wonderfully odoriferous, that all the persons present thought themselves in Paradise,Ap. Capgrav. in S. Bed. for no Perfumes or precious balsam came near the sweetnes of it.
10. And hereto William of Malmsbury adds, which was omitted by the said Disciple, That the whole congregation of the Monks being as|sembled,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3. he received Extreme-Vnction and com|municated the Body of our Lord for his Viaticum to strengthen him in his last combat against his spirituall enemies: and moreover that having kissed them every one, he earnestly desired to be remembred in their Prayers, c.
11. He dyed on the seaventh day before the Calends of Iune, which was the twenty sixth of May: But because that day was also the Feast of our great Apostle S. Augustin, therefore the Church thought fitt to com|memorate S. Beda the day following,Marty. Rom. 27. Maij. and so we find both in the Roman and English Martyrologes. He was buried in his own Mo|nastery, in which from his infancy he had lived about threescore years. But the fame of his Sanctity afterward encreasing, his Bones together with the Sacred Body of Saint Cuthbert Bishop of Lindesfarn were translated to Durham, and there reposed together.
12. Assoon as his Death was known abroad, severall Letters came from forrain countreys to desire some of his Treatises and Books. Two Epistles there are still extant from S. Boniface,Ap. Bonif ap. 89  and from S. Lullus Successour to him and to S. Willebrord, to the same purpose; And parti|cularly S. Lullus writing to Cuthbert who had been his Disciple three and forty years, and was afterward Abbot of the same Monastery, tells him that he had sent a Vesture all of silk to enwrap the Relicks of his beloved Master: To which the Answers of the same Cuthbert also are still extant.
13. I doe not know by what warrant from Ancient Monuments the devout Writer, by some stiled the Chancellour of the Blessed Vir|gin, B. Alanus de Rupe affirms that Saint Beda was the first who began in England the Exercise of particular Devotions and reciting of Chaplets to the honour of that glorious Queen of Virgins, for so weer find the Oraria distributed by S. Beda to his Brethren, inter|preted. And that from Brittany such Devotion was propagated into France and other for|rain countreys.
14. I will conclude this Narration with the large Testimonies given to S. Beda's lear|ning and Piety, even by Enemies to that Re|ligion which he taught. Thus then writes Camden of him, Beda among all our Writers is a lover of Truth. And again, Our Beda, the sin|gular glory of England,Camd. in Hist. Britt. p. 12. Id. ib p. 670. for his piety and erudi|tion gott the Title, Venerabilis. He gave up him|self, as he testifies, to the Meditation of Holy Scriptures, and wrote a very great number of Vo|lumes, in an age turmoyld with huge waves of barbarism. Thus likewise Whitaker, Beda did excell in many vertues, and singular learning. To the same purpose Foxe,Whitac. ad 2. dem. Sand. Foxe in Act. p. 114. Beda was a man worthy of eternall memory: the whole Western Church of that age gave him the palm and pree|minence for learning and understanding of Scri|pture. Very many more like testimonies may be added: but I will content my self with that of the carnall Apostat Bale,Bale Cent. 2. c. 1. Beda, saith he, was esteemed by many even above Gregory the Great, for his exact skill both in the Latin and Greek tongues. There is scarce any thing wor|thy the reading in all Antiquity, which is not found in his Writings. If he had lived in the times of Hierom, Augustin and Chrysostom, I doe not doubt but he might have come in com|petition with them for esteem. He published very many works full of all kinds of learning: and in a decrepit age he dyed at last among his Disci|ples, and obtained a most happy end.
15. Now since evident Truth extorted such praises from the penns of the deser|tours of that Religion which so pious and so learned a Doctour of Gods Church who both lived and dyed in eminent Sanctity, always taught, our dear Countreymen will doe wisely to attend to the affrighting admonition of the learned Cardinal Baronius,Baron. ad A. D. 731. saying, The Holy English Church hath always gloried, and with great reason, in so holy Doctour: whom since her Apostate children doe now reject, and in|stead of him doe follow deceived and deceiving Apostles of Satan, they have reason to apprehend, least in the last Iudgment, so great and power|full an accuser standing against them before the Tribunal of our Lord, they shall receive a sen|tence of damnation.





THE THREE AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. S. Boniface receives from the Pope a resolution of certain doubts.
3 4. Likewise an Archiepiscopall Pall.
5 6. Of another Saint Wigbert, his compa|nion, c.

1. _HAVING with due honour buried S. Beda, who hath hi|therto been our principall and most secure Guide,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3. and with whom in the judgment of William of Malmsbury, all knowledge in a manner of the Gests of former ages hath been buried: We will pursue this History, making use of the best Light can be found, and beginning with an account of the proceedings the same year of the glorious English Apostle of Germany S. Boniface, as we are informed by the Au|thour of his Life from the Writings of his Holy Disciple and companion Saint Wille|bald.
Vit. S. Bonif. ap. Sur.2. S. Boniface, saith he, having by himself or his companions converted to the Faith of Christ many thousands, whom he purified with the Water of saving Baptism, heard news of the death of the Holy Pope Gregory second of that name, whose Successour was a third Gregory. Whereupon he sent Messengers with Letters to Rome, to renew with the New Pope the league of amity which he had enioyd with his Predecessour; to make profes|sion of all duty and obedience to the See Aposto|lick: and to give him an account of the great number of German Idolaters converted to the Faith: Moreover he proposed certain difficulties occurring in the exercise of his Apostolick charge, a resolution whereof he desired.
3. Though S. Boniface's Epistle be not ex|tant,Bonifac. Epis. 122. yet all these particulars may be colle|cted from Pope Gregorye's Answer to him:In which. 1. He testifies his ioy for the great Benediction given by God to his preaching. 2. He signifies to him that to give him more authority in those parts, he has sent him an Archiepiscopall Pall, which yet he was only to wear when he celebrated Masse, or or|dained Bishops, Which power he now gives him. 3. Whereas S. Boniface had given him notice of a certain Preist who went to Rome, and at his return boasted that he had obtai|ned Absolution of the Pope from his many scandalous and enormous crimes: He tells him that such a Preist came to him, signi|fying

only that he was a Preist, and desiring Letters of recommendation to Charles Martel: but that he made no Confession to him, nor by consequence received any Absolution. Ther|fore he advises S. Boniface to avoyd Commu|nion with him, and such like as he. 4 He advises him severely to pennance such as fed upon horse-flesh. 5. He enioyns him to rebapize such as had been unduly baptized by Pagans, and by a Christian Preist revolted from the Faith, and who had sacrifised to Iupiter. 6. That Oblations should be received, and commemoration made by the Preist at the Altar, not indifferently for all that were dead, but only such as were true Ca|tholick Christians. 7. He disswades from Ma|riage to the seaventh degree of affinity or consanguinity. 8. And counsells him to ex|hort men after the death of their wives, not to marry more then once. 9 As touching such as had murdred their Father, Mother, Brother or sister, that they should be denyed Communion all their life, except only at the point of death, and be oblged to fast every Munday, Wednesday and Friday. 10. And whereas there was an impious custom among even the converted Germans to sell their slaves to Pagans to be sacifised by them, he requires him absolutely to forbid it, and to impose the same Pennance on trans|gressours which the Canons inflict on Homi|cides. 11 Lastly that he should never conse|crate any Bishop, but in the presence and with the assistance of at least two Bishops.
4. The Messengers returning with these Letters and Presents,Auth. Vit S. Bonif. ap. Sur brought great ioy to S. Boniface, who presently after erected two new Churches one at Fritzlare to the honour of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles: and the other at Amanbury to the honour of S Michael the Archangel. And to those two Churches he adioynd two Monaste|ries, in which he placed a good number of Monks to serve and praise Almighty God.
5. Over one of these Monasteries he seems to have appointed Abbot a certain Preist named Wigbert, whom he sent for out of Brittany from out of the Monastery of Gla|stonbury. Which devout Preist being arrived, wrote an Epistle, yet extant, to his Fathers and Brethren at Glastonbury to give them no|tice of his prosperous iourney: desiring their prayers to God that he would give good successe to his labours in this Mission, which exposed him to great incommodities and dangers He requests them to give notice of all these things to his Mother Tetta, and the Congregation with her.
6. This S. Wigbert is evidently different from that Saint Wigbert a Martyr, which wee mentioned six years before this time.Mir. in Fast. Beg. 13 Aug. And he is doubtlesse the same concerning whom Miraeus thus writes in his Calender on the thirteenth of August: In Germany the commemoration of S. Wigbert Preist and Con|fessour. He was, I suppose, designed first Abbot of Fritzlare by S. Boniface the Apostle of the Germans.A. D. 733. His Relicks were afterward translated to the Monastery of Hirsfeld in Hassia by Lullus Successour of S. Boniface in his Arch-bishoprick. To his name and honour Rabanus Maurus who was Arch-bishop in the year of our Lords Incar|nation eight hundred and fifty, built a Church in Hirsfeild. And severall ages afterward Mathildis the most pious Empresse Mother of Otho the first, did the like.
7. This S. Wigbert was present at a Synod celebrated at Mentz in the year of Grace seaven hundred forty five: and consequently outlived S. Beda. Therefore whereas his name is found in S. Beda's Martyrologe, and a Homily pretended as made by S. Beda on his solemnity, we many conclude that both these were added by S. Beda's Disciples after his death.
8. Not long after S. Boniface visited the confining Regions of Bavaria,Auth. Vit. S. Boni. ap. Sur. the Prince whereof was called Hugbert: To whom the Holy Bishop with great zeale preached the Faith of Christ. There likewise with much fervour and authority he condemned and cast out of the Church a certain pestilent He|retick called Ermewolf. What his Heresy was it does not appear: probably it died with the Authour.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. The Primacy of the Sea of Canter|bury, again established by the Pope.
3.4. Bishops conecrated by Arch-bishop Tatwin, after he had received the Ar|chiepiscopall Pall.
5.6. Sedition among the Northumbers, c.

1. WE read in B. Parkers Brittish Anti|quities that in the year of Grace sea|ven hundred thirty two,A. D. 732. Antiq Brtan. in Tatwin. being the second after the consecration of Tatwin Arch-bishop of Can|terbury, a controversy arose between that See and the See of York about Primacy: Vpon which occa|sion Tatwin went to Rome, where he obtained the Pall from Pope Gregory, and likewise a confir|mation of his Primacy. After which he made great hast to return into Brittany.
2. There is indeed extant in William of Malmsbury an Epistle of Pope Gregory addressed to all the English Bishops,Malmsb. de Fon. l. 1. p. 210. in which he exhorts them to Vnity and constancy in Faith and Charity: and withall signifies that he had given the Archiepiscopall Pall with the vene|rable use of the Dalmatick to Tatwin Succes|sour to S. Augustin in his chair of Canterbury: and that after a diligent search in the Sacred Archives for the Priviledges and rights of Iurisdiction belonging to that See from the time of the said S. Augustin, he had con|firmed

the same; commanding all the Chur|ches of Brittany with their respective Bishops to yeild due obedience to all the Canonicall precepts of the said Tatwin, whom he appoin|ted Primat, and withall conferred on him authority in his stead to visit all Churches in that Region: Moreover that the Church of Canterbury being the first offspring of Christianity and Mother of all other Churches there, he took it into his speciall protection, threatning severely to vindicate all con|tempts and disobediences to it on any per|son whatsoever.
3. To this effect did Pope Gregory write, but without any mention or reflection on the See of York, or any competition of any other in the Primacy. Besides this, the present Bishop of York, Wilfrid second of that name, was a man of great modesty and aversion from contention. Whereas indeed his Successour of a Princely family, and high Spirits, did, not long after, not only restore his See o York to the Archiepiscopall dignity, which at first S. Paulinus the Apostle of that Province en|ioyd, but challenged an equality with the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, as shall be decla|red. And this perhaps gave occasion of mi|stake and a confusion of times to B. Parker and likewise B. Godwin.
A. D. 733. Hoved. ad A. D. 733.4. Arch-bishop Tatwin having thus received the Pall, and being returned into Brittany, the year following consecrated two Bishops: For Kinebert Bishop of the Lindesfari (or Lin|coln) being dead: he substituted in his place Alw, whom wee find present in a Synod as|sembled fourteen years after this. Likewise the Episcopall See of the South-Saxons by the death of Eolla, being vacant, he consecrated for his Successour Sigga, or Sigfrid.
Westm. hic.5. The same year there were great tumults in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, by a fa|ction, the Head whereof is now unknown. But so violent was the Sedition, that both King Ceolulf and the Holy Bishop Acca, were forced to submitt to the impetuousnes of it. King Ceolulf was made prisoner and Shaved as a Monk. Notwithstanding presently after in consideration of his integrity, vertue and prudence, he was restored to his Throne.
6 But as for the Holy Bishop Acca the per|secution against him continued longer. For during the space of three years he remaind banished from his See. Yea, saith William of Malmsbury, it is uncertain whether ever he returned to it, or no. However, that after his death he was with great honour buried there, and became famous to posterity by his frequent Miracles, shall be shewed here|after.


III. CHAP.A. D. 734.
III. CHA.

1.2.3. Ethelbald the Mercian King in|vades his neighbours.
4.5 Tatin Arch bishop of Canterbury dying: Nothelm succeeds. And Egbert succeeds in the See of York.
6 7 8. S. Boniface proposes a Scrupulous doubt to Nothelm, c. The Rsolution of it.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred thirty four Ethelbald Kig of the Mer|cians,A D. 734. who as hath been sayd, was wonder|fully called by God to the Kingdom, became very powerfull, and not content with the li|mits of his own kingdom invaded the Pro|vinces of his Neighbours.Wigorn. A. D 731. All the Regions from the South-Saxons as far as Humber Northward, though governed by petty Kings yet those Provin|ces with their Kings were subject to his Domi|nion, saith Florentius. Yet all these to a mind so vast as his were narrow bounds. There|fore making an impression into the Western parts,Westm. hic. he besieged the Castle of Smerton, and no assistance coming to the souldiers there inclosed, he brought it into his own power. By which means he became possessour of a great part of Somersetshire, which takes its name from that place.
2. And not content with this,Huntingd. l. 4. he marched with his Army Northward, and force prevay|ling over iustice, he in a hostile manner entred the Kingdome of the Northumbers: where finding none to resist him, he enriched himself and his army with spoyles, as much as he thought good,  then withdrew his forces homewards. Thus writes Huntingdon. The Abridger of S. Beda's History referrs this invasion to the year sea|ven hundred and forty: but the generall consent of other Writers disproves him.
3. But this prosperity which Gods goodnes gave him, he abused, and plunged himself into many enormous crimes, as shall be shewed. Notwithstanding the Divine Grace did not utterly forsake him: For at last he re|pented his ingratitude to God, amended his errours, and with a mixture of vertues and vices ended his life by the treason of his Subjects.
4. The same year,Hoved. as Hoveden testifies, the Moon for the space of an hour early in the mor|ning on the thirtieth day of Ianuary became of a deep blood-red colour: and from thence turned black, after which its naturall brightnes was re|stored. This prodigy, it seems, in his opinion foreshewed the death of Tatwin Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury: for he immediatly addes an account of his death thereto, hapning the twenty ninth of Iuly following, and in the fourth year after his Consecration. He was a man, saith S. Beda, highly eminent for his Reli|gion and prudence. He succeeded Brithwald his equall in learning and piety, who was Successour to S. Theodore.
A. D. 735.5. The year following gave to the two Principall Sees of Brittany, Canterbury and York,A. D. 735. vacant by the death of their Pastours, two worthy persons to succeed in the exer|cise of the Episcopall function, to Canterbury Nothelm, and to York, Egbert. As touching the former, Nothelm was born at London, in which Church he was Preist (not Bishop, as Parker mistakingly affirms.) Some thing hath already been spoken of him,Antiq Brit. in Nothelme. when wee related how S. Beda made use of his industry and assistance in composing his History.
6. To this New Arch-bishop, Nothelm, pre|sently after his consecration S. Boniface dire|cted an Epistle, in which, after he had desired from him the same Christian affection  Vnion of minds, which heretofore he had with S. Brithwald his Predecessour, he proposed to him a difficulty and scrupule which had much and long tormented him, a resolution whereof he desired from him as he did from diverse others, and particularly from Pe|cthelm Bishop of Candida Casa, and also from an English Abbot called Duddo, who had for|merly been S. Boniface his own Schollar, yet such was his humility, that he disdaind not to consult him. Now the Doubt or difficulty I will sett down in S. Boniface's own expres|sion:Bonif. Ep. 18.7. I desire, saith he, to hear your counsell tou|ching a sin committed by mee through ignorance, in permitting mariage between two parties: the Case stood thus. A certain Man with my leave maried a woman a widdow to whose sn he had formerly been God-father. This the Romans say is so unlawfull, that they ought to be divorced. Yea moreover they affirm that anciently under the Christian Emperours uch a crime was punished with death, or at least perpetuall banishment. Now I beseech you to inform mee whether you can find either in the Decrees of the Ancient Ca|tholick Fathers or Holy Scriptures that this is so great a sin. For mine own part I can by no means comprehend how a carnall conjunction between persons in a Spirituall prpinquity should be a heynous sin, since in Sacred Baptism wee are all of us sons and daughters of Christ and his Church, and Brothers and Ssters to one another.
8. The Resolution of this Doubt wee can not find, since their Answers hereto are lost.But Serrarius a learned Iesuit,Serrar in  Bonif. Ep. 11. who published Saint Boniface's Epistles with Annotations, after he had produced severall Decrees of Ancient Popes strictly forbidding such Mariages, shews the Answer to this Doubt to be now very easy: Adding withall, That if in S. Boni|face's time the Ancient Cains had been in the same number and order as now, he would never have doubted of the Question.
However his dili|gence in seeking satisfaction is highly to be praised, and his humility of mind to be imitated, since he not only proposes his doubts to Bishops but even his own Disciples, desiring to be taught by them now in his old age yea since he professes that he will not pertinaciously adhere to his own iudg|ment, but obediently acquiesee in the Decrees of the Church and Holy Fathers. How far now are our modern Sectaries from such a disposition of mind! For Luther and Beza grounding themselves upon their private iudgment,Luth in Capt. Bab Bz l. de Matrim. and proudly con|temning and opposing all Antiquity and authori|ty, doe sett as nought all regard of Spirituall Al|liance: Such difference there is between the Spirits of a modest humble Catholick, and an arrogant Heretick.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2. c The Gests of S. Pecthelm.
6.7.8 Of S. Wiro.
9. And of S. Otger.

1. AS touching S. Pecthelm Bishop of Candida Casa to whom S. Boniface directed one of his Epistles demanding his iudgment touching the forementiond doubt, it is not easy to determin in what place that Epistle might find him. Wee signified his Ordination to that See in the year seaven hun|dred twenty three: and S. Beda in the eighth year after concluding his History, affirms that he continued at that time Bishop there: Yet the Writers of the Gallican and Belgick Anti|quities consonantly arm that he left Brittany, and after the example of S. Boniface propagated the Christian Faith in those Coun|treys: Of which there is an absolute silence among our English Historians. Let us there|fore enquire concerning his Gests of forrain Authours.
2. In the Gallican Martyrologe upon the fifteenth day of Iuly wee read thus:Martir. Ga. 5. Iulij. In the Mount of S. Peter, otherwise called the Monastery of S. Odila, neer Ruremnd in Belgium s that day celebrated the deposition of S. Pecthelm Bishop of Candida Casa in Scotland (that  now, for anciently it was within the Donio of the English-Saxons) and Confessour: who being in|flamed with a zeale to root out Heathenish Super|stition to that time springing p in some parts of Belgium, undertook a voyage into those countreys in the company of S. Wiro Bhop and S. Otger a Deacon: Where he was kindly entertaind by King Pipin, and encouraged o so pious a work. He brought very many to the Light of Evangelicall Truth, and cast down severall profane Temples of flse Gods, building many Churches to the honou of the only true God. The like testimony wee find in Miraeus his Belgick Calendar.
5 Now the death of this Holy Bishop our Historian Florentius referrs to this present year. Concerning which the sayd Martyrologe thus treats. In the same Monastery S Pecthelm full of dayes and merits peaceably dyed.Ib. And many Divine Miracles shining at his Sepulcher declared him a glorified Saint in heaven. Where|upon veneration and honour due to Saints was at|tributed to him and his Holy Companions: For

heir Sacred Relicks were taken up and reposed under the Altar of the Cathedrall Church of Ru|emond and moreover an annuall Feast and Of|fice celebrated in their honour, not only through that whole Diocese, but also at Oldensale in the Bishoprick of Daventer, where his Head is preser|ved and with great veneration of the people ho|noured. Hereunto Miraeus adds,Miraeus in Fast. Belg. 15. Iul. That this an|ient Inscription is found upon their Shrines, Parts of the Relicks of S. Wiro, S. Pecthelm and Saint Otger. In the year of Grace one thousand five hundred seaventy one, in which the rebel|lious Gueuses (or Calvinists) having overthrown the Table of the Altar, but leaving the base un|touched, they were by a singular Providence of God defended from the fury of those Hereticks: and twenty three years after, when the same Altar was repaired, they were there found, and afterward honourably taken up, as wee read in the Office of the Church of Ruremond.
4 In this Narration there occurr difficul|ties of some weight. For whereas it is sayd that Saint Pecthelm was kindly received by King Papin, it will not be easy to determin among three Princes in this age, all of the same name, which was he who received our Saints: Whether the first Pipin son to the elder Carloman, or his Grandchild by his daughter Begga, or the last who was Son to Charles Martel: and was the only Pipin who was King. But he not beginning his raign till the year seaven hundred fifty two, he could not be King at S. Pecthelm's arrivall in France. Therefore most probable it is, that he was at this time only a young Duke, but is stiled King, because he became so afterward. Notwithstanding after all this, the Irish Hi|storians confidently apply all this Story to their Pecthelm Bishop of Tuam: and indeed their pretentions are not all together un|probable.
5. Saint Pectelm being dead, to him succee|ded Frithwald in the See of Candida Casa. So that the Illustrious Cardinall Baronius is evi|dently mistaken in the sence of a passage in S Beda, in which after mentioning the death of Heddi, he immediatly addes these words, To conclude Pecthelm, who a long time was Deacon and a Monk with his Successour Aldelm, was wont to relate, c. From which Passage the learned Cardinall affirms that Pecthelm had for his Successour Aldelm: whereas S. Beda's meaning was, that Aldelm was Successour to Heddi, and that Pecthelm was S. Aldelms Dea|con and Monk: which from severall Authours we have verified before.
Vid. l 22. c. 12.6. As touching the Companions of S. Pe|cthelm the uncertainty of their native coun|trey is as great. Saint Wiro, as hath been decla|red, is likewise challenged by the Irish, and one particular mentioned in his Life argues strongly for it, where it is sayd, That it was the custom in the Island where he was born that when any Bishop was elected, he was sent to Rome to receive Ordination from the hands of the Pope, and so to return and take possession of his See.
7. Saint Wiro therefore being thus ordaind,Ap. Capgr. in S. Wirone. was with great ioy received by his flock, to whom he diligently gave wholesom instructions both by preaching and example. Yet a desire long fixed in his mind, to live in a forrain countrey known only to God, still remained. Whereupon privatly esca|ping away with S. Pecthelm and S. Otger, he pas|sed over into France: where as hath been sayd, he was with all respect and favour received by Prince Pipin: who held him particularly in such Vene|ration for his eminent Sanctity, that he chose him for his Spirituall Father and Guide of his soule, to whom he usually confessed his sins, and this with so great humility, that his custom was to approach to him with bare feet.
8. How long he remaind wih  is n|certain: But certain it is that thirsting after Solitude, he retired himself to the place called the Mount of S. Peter of Odilia, near the Citty of Ruremond in the Diocese of Liege, where both by his preaching, Sanctity and Miracles he became illustrious: And being full of years and Sanctity, a feaver not violent freed him from the prison of his flesh, and sent his Spirit to heaven. His comme|moration among the Saints is placed in our Mar|tyrologe on the eighth of May.Martyr. Aug 8. Maij. His Body was bu|ried in the Chappell dedicated to our Blessed Lady near Ruremond: but afterward, at least a great part of it was translated to Maestrick, where it is held in great veneration.
9. It remains that wee speak breifly of S. Oger, who is generally acknowledged to have been born in Brittany:Sur. 10. Sept For Surius in his Life declares that Saint Pecthelm and S. Wiro in their iourney to Rome passing through Brittany, by a speciall Providence of God S. Otger a Deacon adioynd himself to their company, who out of a fervent desire of heavenly good things contemning all commoditie, and pleasures on earth, became an inseparable Companion to S. Wiro; whom from Rome he followed to the said Mount of Saint Peter, where leading a heavenly life upon earth, and inflaming the soules of many with a Love of Spirituall and Celestiall good things he there happily ended his Life on the tenth of September,Martyr. Aug. 10. Sept. on which day his memo|ry is celebrated. The Centuriators of Magde|burg confounding him with S. Aldebert, doe mistake in affirming that he was son to the King of the Deiri, or Yorkshire.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1.2. c. Egbert Archbishop of York: re|stores the Primitive dignity to his See.
5. He consecrates Suffagan Bishops.

1. THE same year, as hath been sayd, not only the See of Canterbury, but that of York also received a New Pastour: For Wilfrid the younger, either dying, or which seems more probable, voluntarily reliquishing

that See, there was chosen in his place Egbert Brother to Eadbert, or as some also call him, Egbert,Malmsbur. l 3. who shortly after was King of the Nor|thumbers.
2. The Church of York, since the death of the founder of it and first Arch-bishop Saint Paulinus, to this time continued in much depression; By whose fault this hapned, it does not appear perhaps it was by means of the contentions long continuing among the Bishops, or the multiplication of Bisho|pricks. But now Egbert being a man of great parts, and courage, restores it to its primitive Dignity,Id. ib. f. 269. as William of Malmsbury thus declares: Egbert, saith he, by his prudence and assisted with his Brothers power reduced that See to its first State.Vid. l. 14 c. 21 22. For as it is manifest to any one who reads the Ancient Gests of the English Nation, Saint Paulinus the first Prelat of that Church, was by open violence and hostility driven out of it: So that he was forced to retire himself to Rochester in Kent, where he died Bishop of that See, and there left the Archiepiscopall Pall which he had received from Pope Honorius. As for his Succes|sours in that great Church of York they contented themselves with the simple Title of Bishops, not aspiring higher. But Egbert a man of a more haughty disposition, considering with himself that, as it is a mark of ride for a man to seek honours undue so is it a mark of basenes to neglect such as are due, thereupon by severall Appeals to the See Apostolick he at last recovered the Archiepi|scopall Pall, so raising that Church, once more to a Metropolitan Dignity.
3. Not any of our Historians doe impute this action of Egbert to a culpable ambition, on the contrary his memory is much cele|brated by them:Harp. f. saec. 8. c. 22. Malmsb. vbi sup. Harpsfeild sayes that he was a Prelat in many regards worthy of high commen|dation. And William of Malmsbury gives him this Character, That he was a Treasury of all libe|rall sciences. And of this, says he, I can produce a witnes of unquestioned authority, the learned Al|cuin, who in an Epistle to the Emperour Charles the Great thus writes, Let mee be furnished with Books of more exquisite learning, such as whilst I lived in mine own countrey of Brittany, by the favour and industry of my worthy Master Egbert Arch-bishop of York I had the use of. And if such be your Excellencies pleasure, I will send thither some of my Disciples, to coppy out there,  bring with them into France the choycest flowers in their Libraries. Probably this Alcuin who after Saint Aldelm and Saint Beda was the most learned man of the English Nation had a prin|cipall regard in this passage cited out of him, to that most Noble Library which Egbert furnished at York.
4. But nothing gives a greater luster to him, and more setts forth his learning and erudition then that Saint Boniface iud|ged him a person capable to resolve his difficulties.There is among his Epistles one written after the death of Saint Beda to him, in which he desires him to send him some of that Holy Doctours Treatises:Boni. c. Ep. 85. and withall asks his advice,A. D. 736. whether he might lawfully permitt a certain Preist, besides whom there was none other, to administer Baptism, and celebrate Masse in a large territory inhabi|ted by Christians indeed, yet such as were tainted with errours: considering that the said Preist who long agoe had falln into the sin of fornication, afterward not only was absolved after Pennance, but also restored to his degree and Office, contrary to the ex|presse Canons of the Church. Now the Que|stion is, Whether it be better, or at least a lesse ill that such a Preist should perform the Office of the Altar contrary to the Canons, or in case he be deprived, a multitude of Infants should dye without Baptism, and the rest of the people without Sacraments: since that people can not be furnished with another more chast Preist? Which is indeed no Question at all.
5. Egbert having obtaind his Archiepi|scopall Pall this same year supplied two Epi|scopall Sees which were vacant. For to Ple|cthelm Bishop of Candida Casa he substituted Fridwald: And the Holy Bishop Acca having been unjustly expelled his Church of Hagu|stald, and there being no probability of his restitution, least our Lords flock should remain longer without a Pastour, he con|secrated thereto Fridbere: Who notwith|standing in our Ecclesiasticall Monuments is not esteemed Bishop, till the death of Acca, which followed five years after.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHAP.

1.2. c. A Summe of the Gests of S. Wil|lebrord: and his death.
6.7. c. Severall Bishops consecrated by Nothelm Arch-bishop of Canter|bury.
9. Queen Frithogitha's pilgrimage to Rome.

1. THE year following the most fa|mous Apostle of the Frisons,A. D. 736. the ere|ctour and first Arch-bishop of Vtrecht, Saint Willebrord received the eternall reward of all his labours. Wee have often mentio|ned him before, and will here only add a breif Summ of his Life and Gests out of the Gallican Martyrologe:2. On the seaventh of November at Epternac in the Territory of Triers is celebrated the Com|memoration of Saint Willebrord Bishop and Con|fessour,Martyrol. Gallic. 7. Novemb. Apostle of the Frisons. He was by Na|tion an English-Saxon, and being endowed with many Divine Graces, he with nine Companions were by Saint Egbert directed into Lower Ger|many. From Brittany therefore he passed over into Friseland: and began the Apprentissage of his A|postolick Office at Vtrecht, but was desired by Pi|pin to goe further into the countrey of the Frisons.

At the Castle of Vtrecht near an Ancient ruind Church of Saint Thomas, he built an Ora|tory to the honour of the Holy Crosse. Pope Ser|gius being before admonished by an Angeli|call vision, solemnly ordained him Arch-bishop in the Church of Saint Peter, at the request of Duke Pipin: and withall strengthning him with Apostolick authority to preach and dilate the Gospell, to the end he might with a more pros|perous omen undertake that labour, he gave him the Sirname of Clement, to whom after the two Princes of the Apostles the Care of Religion in its infancy was committed.
3. From Rome he returned into Friseland, and at Vtrecht upon Rhene placed his Episcopall See, building there a Church which he consecra|ted to Saint Martin. He baptized with the Water of regeneration Pipin the Son of Charles Martel. He spread the Gospell largely in Frise|land, baptizing Catechumens, confirming Neophytes, celebrating holy Orders, and almost in every village building Churches, over which he constituted Pastours.
4. Whilst he was busily employed in these sacred works, there came to him Saint Boniface, who in processe of time became his Successour in his Bishoprick and Apostleship of the Frisons: Who staying with him about two years, assisted him with courage and diligence in procuring the salvation of many. At last after many la|bours, incommodities and travells undertaken by him for many years in planting the Church and saving of soules, he rendred his holy and happy Spirit to his Creatour at Epternac: after he had for the space of forty years with a piety and vertue truly Apostolick governed the Church founded by himself.
5. His Sacred Body was buried in a Monastery of that Town, which formerly he had erected: where it did hine with so many illustrious Mi|racles, that both the Monastery and Church were afterwards called by his Name. Concerning his Successours Eoban, Boniface and Gregory we shall treat in due place. His Life was written both in verse and Prose by his Coun|trey man Saint Alcuin, an eloquent Wit|nesse of his Sanctity.
6. The same year Nothelm Arch-bishop of Canterbury having received his Archiepisco|pall Pall from Rome consecrated severall Bi|shops: For the See of Hereford being vacant by the death of Walstd he substituted in his place Cuthbert: Who four years after suc|ceeded Nothelm himself, being translated to the See of Canterbury. But before that, he finished a very costly Crosse begun by his Predecessour,Godvvin. in Catal. Ep. Hereford. and moreover built a sumptuous Tomb, in which he placed the Bodies of the three preceding Bishops, Tirtil, Torthere and Walstd: to which he adioyned three more, a certain Nobleman called Mil|frid, with his Lady called Quenburga, and Osrith the Son of Oselin: as appears by the verses inscribed on it, recorded by B. Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of He|reford.
7.A. D. 737. The Church of the East-Angles like|wise being deprived of her two Pastours Eadbert Bishop of Dumwich, and Hadulac Bishop of Helmham; The said Arch-bishop gave for successour to the former Cuthwin (called by Hoveden, Heordwald) and to the other, Ethelfrid: Concerning whom nothing remains to posterity but their names.
8. The next year Alduin Bishop of Lich|feild dying,A. D. 737. two Bishops were consecrated in his place, Witta in Lichfeild, and Totta (or Torthelm) in Leycester. In this Citty of Ley|cester (which, saith William of Malmsbury, is very ancient, and situated in the mid|land countrey of England, called Legecestria from the River Leger passing by it) Saint Wilfrid, as hath been declared, after his ex|pulsion out of the Kingdom of the Northum|bers, made his abode, and exercised Iurisdi|ction there. After whose departure the Kingdom of the Mercians had but one Bishop: till this year, in which for the Vastnes of the Province two Bishops were ordained. And Leycester continued an Episcopall See till the time of King Edgar, when Leovn Bishop of the Lindesfari, or Lincoln, united Leycester to his See.
9. Moreover in the place of Forthere Bi|shop of Shirburn, Herwald was consecrated: The cause whereof was not the death of Farther,Wigorn. hic but as Florentius testifies, because be attending Frithogitha Queen of the West-Saxons, undertook a Pilgrimage to Rome: And it was not fitt that the Church should want a Pastour. This is the same Frithogitha Wife to King Ethelard who eight years before this was so munificent a Benefactrice to the Mo|nastery of Canterbury: And now the flame of Divine Charity encreasing in her soule, she abandoned all her splendid possessions, and gave her self entirely to God. And in those days, at wee read in Mathew of Westmin|ster, many Kings and Bishops, Noble men and gnoble Clergy-men and Secular, yea women also did the like.


VII. CHAP.VII. CH.

1.2. c Ceolulf King of the Northumbers becomes a Monk: His Muneficence to the Church of Saint Cuthbert.

1. THE same year Brittany saw a spe|ctacle, which all other Christian countreys esteemed prodigious, but was become no wonder in our Island: and this was a potent King in his ripe age, and the midst of his prosperity, to renounce all wordly glory, advantages and contentment, and to prefer before all these a poor Cell, a course habit, sparing and simple dyet, and submission to the meanest of his Subiects.

This was Ceolulf King of the Northumbers to whom S. Beda had dedicated his History of Brittany, not so much that he might by his eminent quality be a protectour of it or of the Authour, as by his learning and iudge|ment to be a correctour. And it is not to be doubted but that so many examples which he found there, of persons contemning, hating and flying from all worldly tenta|tions and pleasures, had a strong influence on his mind to inflame it with the love of heavenly and only true happines.
2. A little before he thus offred himself a Holocaust to our Lord he had bestowd libe|rally many possessions on the Monastery of Lindesfarn where the famous S. Cuthbert learnt and practised the rudiments of his Sanctiy whose life and glorious actons he had read in S. Beda's writings. Hoveden among the munificent gifts of this King to S. Cuthbert reckons these paces,Heved. ad A. D. 882. Vdecester, Wittingham, Edulfingham, and Cewlingham. But the Religious King esteemed this liberality not considrable unlesse he gave himself likewise to him by embracing a penitenciall Life in his Monastey: which this year being the ninth of his raign, he performd3 This space of nine years spent in vanity (saith Huntingdon) seemed to him a whole age:Huntingd. l. 4 for he was in great anguish of mind that so great a part of his Life should be lost in the vain cares and encombrances of the world. He resolved therefore to consecrate the remainder of his years to spirituall Wisedom, and to the eternall ad|vantage of his own soul. Therefore proposing to himself out of the History of S. Beda six potent Kings for his imitation, he resolved to follow their examples. These were Ethelred King of the Mer|cians, and Kenred his Successour: Likewise Ced|walla King of the West-Saxons and Ina his Suc|cessour: Sigebert King of the East Angels, who be|came a Monk, and was afterwards slain by the Tyrant Penda: And Sebbi King of the East Sa|xons, who embracing a Religious Profession, by Dvine revelation foresaw the wishd-for day of his death, he saw it and was glad. These did not consume their Substance with harlots, like the Prodigal son, but went on their way with sorrow sowing their seed, that they might return with ioy and present their heaves to our Lord. King Ceolulf therefore added a seaventh (Hebdoma|dam) to the number of perfect Kings: and re|ceiving a Monasticall habit, in exchange of the Temporall Crown which he left, God sett upon his Head a glorious Crown of one entire precious stone
4. The Monastery into which he retired was tht of Lindesfarn the Monks whereof were the Disciples of S. Aidan, whom long before this, King Oswald had sent for thither out of Scotland: and they following his example practised far more rigourous austerities,Bed. l. 3. c. 5. then were usually seen else where. For not only all the Rligious men, and women too, of that insti|tut continued fasting every Wednesday and Friday till Vespers were accomplished: but also wholly abstained from wine and all strong drink,A. D. 738. contenting themselves with Water mingled with a little milk. But whether it was that expe|rience shewd them that English Complexions, not so robustious as those of the Scotts, could not support this great austerity, or whether likewise it was out of condescen|dance to the delicacy and infirm temper of King Ceolulf, at his entrance an indulgence was given to the Monks, and they were per|mitted for their drink to use a moderate pro|portion of Wine or Ale.
5. Now besides his former liberalities to that Monastery, King Ceolulf at the time of his Monasticall Tensure gave the Mannor of Warkworth:Camd. in Northamb. So writes Camden out of our Ancient Monuments: Warkworth, saith he, with all its dependences was a possession of the Church of Lindesfarn by the gift of King Ceolulf For this mansion at his renouncing the world he bestowd on the said Church, in which bein made a Monk he aspired to a heavenly king|dom.
6. Our Martyrologe,Martyr. Arg Ianuar. in which his memo is celebrated among the Saints on the fifth of Ianuary, refers his death to this sa year: But certain it is that his life was prolongd there the space of twenty thr years: So that we are to interpret, tha thi year he dyed to the world. Now how hap|pily he concealed himself in that solitude from the world, and how charged he was with merits and graces when he left it, this is sufficiently testified,Mlmsb. d Reg. l. 1 c.  saith William of Malms|bury, by the honour he received in being bu|ried close to S. Cuthbert, and by many Divine Miracles wrought there by his intercession. His Relicks were afterward translated to Northam,Hveden hic Hrpsf. sae. 9. c. 14. saith Hoveden, where they likewise became il|lustrious by Miracles being placed in a Church there built by Egred Bishop of Lindesfarn about seaventy years after this Kings death, and de|dicated to the honour of Saint Peter, Saint Cuthbert and S. Ceolulf.
7. This Holy King resigned his Kingdom to his Nephew Eadbert, or Egbert, a Succes|sour likewise of his vertue and piety: for saith William of Malmsbury,Malmsb. 6 he governed it the space of twenty years with great prudence and iustice. He had likewise a Brother of his own name Arch-bishop of York, who by his own wisedom and his Brothers power restored his See to its primitive dignity. But of these two il|lustrious persons more hereafter.



VIII. CHVIII. CHAP.

1.2. Saint Boniface his iourney to Rome.
5.6. c. He by Apostolick authority erects severall Bishopricks in Germany.

1. THE Gests of S. Boniface, which are the principall busines of the greatest part of this Age, almost yearly furnishing our History, doe call us into Germany, from thence to attend his iourney to Rome, which he again undertook in the year of Grace seaven hundred thirty eight:The occusion of his iourney (as we read in the Authour of his Life, the account whereof is collected from that of his Disciple S. Willebald) was partly to visit Pope Gregory third of that Name,Vid. Bar. hic. Auth. vit. S. Bonif. ap. Su as likewise to commend himself to the Prayers of the Holy Apostles and other Saints reposing there: and also to obtain from the said Pope, as appears by his Letters, a resolution of certain difficulties touching the care of soules committed to his charge.
2. He went therefore to Rome attended by a great troop of French men, Bavarians and Brit|taine: Where being arrived, he was kindly re|ceived by the Pope. The people of Rome likewise had him in such veneration, that they flocked in great multitudes to his preaching, and endeavou|red to detain him a long time among them. For of old it had been their custom when any man of note or sanctity came to Rome, they would with all civility, respect and kindnes entertain him. Thus they did in former ages with S. Athana|sius, S. Epiphanius, S Hierom, S. Peter of Ale|xandria and many others.
3, Now when S. Boniface was ready to depart, the Pope very liberally bestowed on him many gifts, and whatsoever Relicks of Saints he de|sired. He sent likewise by him severall Let|ters to the Bishops, Princes and Abbots of Germany, requiring their assistance to S. Bo|niface in the great charge committed to him of converting soules, as likewise their pre|sence to whatsoever Synods he should assem|ble, and their Obedience to his orders and Decrees made according to the Rule prescri|bed by the See Apostolick, which had autho|rized him to his Apostolick Office, and con|stituted him the supreme Prelat of Germany.
4. With these Letters S. Boniface departed from Rome, and came to Ticinum, or Pavia, where he abode some time with Luitprand King of the Lombards. Thence he proceeded towards Germany,Ap. Bonif. p. 27. and being arrived near the River Danubius, he made some stay there, expecting a Synod of Bishops which he by the Popes order had called. And from thence he wrote Letters to certain speciall freinds Gop|pin, Eoban, Tacwin and Wyx Religious Ab|bots, as likewise to all their Monks, and seve|rall Religious Virgins, in which he gave them a particular account of this his iourney, and the successe of it.
5. The year following being invited by Vtilo Duke of the Bavarians,A. D. 739. he visited his countrey, staying there many dayes, and preaching the word of God, with great fruit. There he found many false Christians, who wasted the Churches, and seduced the people. Some of these falsely pretended themselves to be Bishops, and others usurped the Office of Peists: Many likewise with fictions and pernicious lyes wrought great mischief among the ignorant. A further course of whose malice he found not any meanes more effectually to prevent, then by dividing the Province of Bavaria into four Dioceses: which with the consent of Duke Vtilo he per|formed: the Government of which he com|mitted to persons of eminent vertue, whom he ordained Bishops.
6. Of these the first was Iohn, whose Episcopall See was placed at Salisburg: The second was Erimbert, who governed the Church of Fri|slingen: the third was Hunibald, who was con|secrated Bishop of Ratisbon, the Metropolis of Bavaria. And Winilus, who before had been ordained Bishsp by the Pope of the whole countrey, had the Church of Patary assigned to him.
7. Having done this, he wrote to the Pope giving him an account of all things and desiring his confirmation and ratification for perpetuity: Therein imitating his Prede|cessours: For so did Fugatius and Damianus, in the Brittish Church: so did S Patrick in Ireland; and so did S. Augustin among the English-Saxons demand from the See Aposto|lick a confirmation of their Ordonnances.
8. We have still extant the Popes answer hereto,Ap. Bonifac. p. 10. containing an approbation of what he had done: Likewise an iniunction to assemble a Synod of all Germany, and in his place to preside over it.
And because the necessi|ties of those Churches would not allow him repose in any one place, he renewed his Apostolick Authority to erect Bishopricks wheresoever he should iudge expedient.



A. D. 740.
IX. CHAP.IX. CHAP.

1. Cuthred succeeds King Ethelard in the Kingdom of the West-Saxons.
2. Nothelm Arch-bishop of Canterbury dying, Cuthbert succeeds.
3.4. The Death of the Holy Bishop Saint Acca.
5 6. c. The Martyrdom of Saint Iuth|wara a Brittish Virgin: of her Sister S Sidwella.
10.11. c. The Gests of the Holy Virgin S. Fridsvida
17.18 Death of S Ethelburga Abbesse, for|merly Queen of the West-Saxons.
19 The Death of Saint Arnulf a Her|mite.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation sea|ven hundred and forty Cuthred began his raign over the West-Saxons,A. D. 740. whose Pre|decessour Ethelard, by some called his Bro|ther, by others his kinsman, dyed the year before. This King, saith Huntingdon, was much afflicted by the proud King of the Mercians Ethelbald, who sometimes made open war against him, and sometimes raised sedition in his coun|trey In all which Fortune shewed her self very various between them, sometimes the one, and some times the other gaining advantage. And now and then, being weary they would make peace: which seldom lasted any considerable time, the one or the other presently renewing the warr.
2. The same year there was exalted to the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury being va|cant by the death of Nothelm, Cuthbert, who four years before had been consecrated Bi|shop of Hereford. He was descended from an illustrious Saxon family and as Nobly he ad|ministred his Office. He was no sooner esta|blished in his Seat,Hoved hic. but Aldulf Bishop of Rochester dying, he consecrated his Succes|sour in that See a Preist called Dun.
3. At this time the Holy Bishop Acca for|merly a great freind to S. Beda and encou|ager in his studies and Writing, ended his ite, of whom mention hath been severall times made before. A breif relation of his Gests we will here adioyn from Miraeus: who recites his name among the Saints on the last day of November though in our Marty|rologe his commemoration be on the nine|teenth of February.Mart. Angl 19. Fbr. Mr in Fast. Belg. 30 Nov Concerning him Mi|raeus thus writes Acca a Bishop is named the third among the Apostolick Preists which under the conuct of S. Willebrord departed out of En|gland and arrived at Vtrecht in the year of our Lord six hundred and ninety, to procure the con|secrat on of S. Swibert, he was there detained, and not long after ordained Bishop of (Hagustald, not) Lindesfarn (as Miraeus mistaking wri|tes)4. How Saint-like his life was Almighty God shewd by many miracles after his death, as Hoveden testifies saying,Heved. hic. The same year Acca Bishop of Venerable memory was received into the happy region of the living, after he had administred the Church of Hagustald twen|ty four years. His body was buried with great honour in the Eastern part of that Church. And above three hundred years after his death, by oc|casion of a Revelation made to a certain Prest, his Sacred Relicks were translated, and putt into a shrine: Where to this day he is held in great ve+neration. And for a demonstration of his Sancti|ty his hasuble, Albe and Maniple which had been buried with his Sacred Body, to this day doe not only preserve their colour, but primitive firmnes likewise.
5. In our Martyrologe on the three and twentieth of December this year is comme|morated the Martyrdom of a devout Brittish Virgin called Iuthwara:Martyr. Ag. 23. Decemb The Circumstances of her death and Martyrdom and a breif abridgment of her life we find in Capgrave:Capgrav in S Iuthwara. The Holy Virgin S. Iuthwara (saith the Au|thour there) was born of Noble parents, and from her childhood being prevented by a plentifull Grace of Gods holy Spiri, she was diligent to serve our Lord in all good works. She living in her Fathers house after the death of her Mother, with all innocence, became amiable to all, and made a progresse in vertues, as she did in years. Whensoever any Pilgrims came to her Fathers house, as frequently they did, she with great chearfullnes of devotion and humility attended and ministed to them. She had a Brother called Bana, and three devout Sisters, S. Eadwara, Saint Wilgitha and Sidwella, all which imitated her piety and vertue.
6. Not long after S. Iuthwara's Mother was dead, her Father took a second Wife, a woman for her extraction Noble enough, but of a most ma|licious disposition, for her soule by the Devills in|stinct was full of the gall of bitternes, especially against this devout Virgin for the destruction of whom she employd continually the thoughts of her poysonnous heart in contriving snares and mischeivous treachery: And for the executing thereof she intended to make Bana, a robustious man, but fitt for any villany, her instrument.
7. It was the Holy Virgin's constant practise in all Vigils of Saints to be present at Divine Ser|vice, and to spend whole nights in Prayer: But thither she never went alone, but in the company of other Virgins. She was likewise very assiduous in Watching and Fasting and other Mortifica|tions subduing carnall desires. With these auste|rities and greif for her Fathers death, she became extremely feeble and pale. This occasion by the Devills suggestion her malicious Mother in Law took to execute her rancour against her. For which purpose dissembling her bloody intent under a shew of Motherly affection and care, she began to

speak kindly to her, and solicitously to enquire the causes of her palenesse. S. Iuthwara suspecting no ill, imputed it to the losse of her dear Father, the greif for which had caused great pain in her breast. The Malicious woman having heard this spoke comfortably to her, and promised her to find out some remedy. And presently after she brought her two small peices of Fresh cheese still dropping with whey, which she bad her to lay upon each breast before she went to Church, assuring her that this would take away all her pain. The simple Virgin suspecting no harm, did accordingly. Then the cruell stepdame went to the Virgins Brother Bana, and told him that his Sister was with child: and for a proof thereof advised him to open her breasts, and taking away the linnen cloath which covers them, he should see them all were with milk dropping from them. The young man foo|lishly beleiving her, meets his Sister as she was coming out of Church, and before all the people asked her, Who had gott her with child. The poor Virgin astonished at such a Question, protested she was not with child. Whereupon he presently ope|ned her breasts, and finding the linnen all moyst, in a rage he drew out his sword, and cutt off her head.
8. Immediatly after this, the Holy Virgin with her own hands took up the head, and to the asto|nishment of all, caried it back steadily into the Church. And moreover for a further proof of the Holy Virgins Sanctity, Almighty God caused a fountain to burst forth out of the place where the head fell: and over the fountain as miraculously a Tree began to grow.
9. Thus writes the Authour of her Life, adding many other Miracles as testimonies of her Sanctity. The memory of this Holy Virgin, as likewise of her Sister Sidwella is much renowned in some Western parts of England, and certain Chappells have been ere|cted to their Honour in Devonshire. Our Martyrologe stiles them Brittish Virgins, ad|ding that the Martyrdom of S. Iuthwara hap|ned in some part of South-wales. Which is very probable, because none of our Ancient Historians treating of Saxon affaires, have mentioned any of these Sisters.
10. Wee will adioyn to her another admi|rable Virgin, who was without all question of English blood, and whose glorious Memory is celebrated both at home and abroad. Now though her actions and death can not by any certain signs be consigned to determi|nate years, yet since our Writers generally agree that they belonged to the times of the Raign of Cuthred King of the West-Saxons,  our Martyrologe likewise declares that she flourished about this year seaven hundred  forty, it seems expedient here to assemble such particulr passages touching her life and death, as are found dispersed in our se|verall Authours, William of Malmsbury, Ma|thew Paris and Capgrave.
11. The Holy Virgin concerning whom wee are now to treat, is the famous S. Fridesida, the ornament and Patronesse of the most illustrious Citty and Vniversity of Oxford. Her Fathers name was Didan a person of Noble quality,Capgrav. in Saint Fri|desvvida. Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4. Math. Paris a A. D. 111. and her Mothers, Safrida: Both which for their happines in the birth and pious education of such a daughter, have deser|ved to be kept in the memory of posterity.Almighty God was pleased even from her infancy to shew that he chose her for his own, so great a sence of piety he inspired into her soule in her most tender years. For, saith the Authour of her life, even then she had an aversion from all delicacies, in so much as she usually lay upon the hard pave|ment, and not this rest would she afford her self till she could no longer resist sleep: so that a great part of the night she spent in prayer upon her knees, or prostrate on the ground Her ordinary dyet was barley-bread with a few hearbes and roots, and her drink only water. Hence it was that her Parents perceiving that all her thoughts were dire|cted to God, freely gave her leave to conse|crate her self entirely to him in a Religious Profession. And by her example twelve other Virgins of Noble families forsook the world to attend only upon our Lord.
12. By the Munificence therefore of the King she built a Monastery, into which en|tring with her companions, she passed the greatest part of her time in Prayer and Fasting: And this particular task of Devotion she im|posed on her self, to recite a certain number of Prayers to God upon her knees a hundred times each day, and as many in the night.
13. But what soule can perfectly aspire to goodnes, without incurring the envy of him who is unchangeably evill? And when his envy is once raised, all his pernicious subtilties will be employed to destroy or di|minish at least, the good which he envyes. Saint Frideswida enclosed in a Monastery may seem secure from all attempts prejudiciall to her purity: Yet even there the Devill found a way to endanger her. Before she had consecrated herself to God, there was a certain Prince deeply wounded by her beau|ty, not knowing that he was prevented by another celestiall Rivall. He used all the Arts and flatteries of a Lover to win the devour Virgins affections. But in vain: Her spirituall espousalls made his hoped-for Mariage im|possible, and the desire of it Sacrilegious. But what will not carnall Love inflamed with rage attempt? Since flatteries could not prevayle when she lived free in the world, he will not fear to use force now she is confined to her Enclosure. This when the Holy Virgin saw, she concluded there could not be any other security for her but in flight. Hereupon she privately stole alone out of the Monastery, and endeavoured to secure her self in a wood neighbouring thereto. But the peir|cing eyes of a Lover discovered her flight,  pursued her thither: Which she perceiving, by secret pathes through our Lords guidance she escaped to Oxford, whither she arrived

very late in the dark night. But thither also did lust and rage conduct the furious Lover, who early in the morning entred the Town. Then the Holy Virgin, whose strength was wholly spent, utterly despaired of all suc|cour from Creatures, and therefore having recourse to Gods omnipotence only, she with rears begged of him a defence to her self, and punishment to the Ravisher. This she did at the instant when the Young Prince, whose Name was Alard, or Algar, was entring the gate of the Town, attended by many servants. She had no sooner sent up his Prayer to heaven, but by a Divine hand the lustfull young man was struck with blindnes Which visible iudgment opened the eyes of his mind, and made him clearly perceive how hatefull to God his obstinate attempt was. Whereupon by Messengers di|rected to the Holy Virgin e condemned his own foly, and with great submission beg|ged pardon, promising an eternall bani|shment of all such desires out of his mind. This his repentance procured compassion rom the Holy Virgin: by whose enewd Prayers his blindnes was as quickly cured as t had been inflicted. This Miracle recorded by all our Historians was so notable to all, and so unquestioned for many Aes, that as William of Malmsbury observes, the Princes of this Island had a scrupulous fear to enter into that gate of the Citty, which Algar found so fatall to himself.
14 In thankfullnes to God for this delive|rance the pious Virgin erected another Mona|stery, where assembling other chast compa|nions of the same Institut and devotion, she pent the remainder of her life in purity and divine Contemplation. And after her death her immaculate Body reposing there, became the principall Ornament of the Citty. For though long before this in the time of the Brittains, Oxford had been a Seat of the Muses, yet wee doe not find that the English Saxons as yet had restored it to that dignity.
Camd. in Oxfordshire.15. Hence it is that Camden, a diligent sur|veyer of ancient Monuments, thus writes, Our Ancestours the Brittains with great prudence consecrated this Citty of Oxford to the Muses, which from Greklade they translated hither, as to a more happy and fruitfull Seminary. But the following ages under the Saxons being much em|ployed in destroying of Citties, this place was not exempted from the common lott: So that for a long time it was celebrated for nothing but the Relicks of S. Frideswde, who was numbred among the Saints because a certain Prince called Algar vio|lently attempting her chastity, after she had by so|lemn vowes consecrated it to God, was miraculously struck with blindnes.
Martyr. Aug. 19 Octob.16 The Memory of her Sanctity is celebrated in our Martyroloe on the nieteenth of Octo|ber And as for her Monastery a first inhabited by Religious Virgins, it was in after times pos|sessed by Seculars Canons,  from them it came to Regulars, as shall be shewd in due time.
17. This year aso dyed S. Ethelburga,A. D. 741. for|merly Queen of the West-Saxons, who had so zealously and prudently incited her Hus|band King Ina to relinquish the perishing glory and pleasures of this world, that he might without interruption attend only to eternal and Spirituall happines. After his departure to Rome she retired her self into that famous Monastery of Barking, where she professed a Religious life: and after some time was elected Abbesse, in which Office having with great Sanctity spent severall years she happily dyed, and is numbred in our Marty|rologe among the Saints on the ninth of Iuly.Martyr. Aug. 9. Iulij. William of Malmsbury writing of her and King Ina her husband, says that they were both united in mutuall charity during their Lives, and after their deaths both dignified by God with Divine Miracles.
18. This is a different S. Ethelburga from her who was first Abbesse of the same Mona|stery of arking, who was daughter of Anna King of the East Saxons, and Sister to Saint Ero Wald Bishop of London. She had for her Successour in the Office of Abbsse  S. Hildelitha, to whom S. Aldelm dedicated his Book of Virginity. And after her the third Abbesse of the same Monastery was this Saint Ethelburga Queen of the West-Saxons. Inso|much as that Monastery well deserved  Title given it by one of our Historians, who stiles it, a well known Sacred Repository of many Saints.
19. Wee will conclude the occurrents of this year with breifly recording the Memory of a certain devout Hermite called S. Anuf, who as a Memoriall of his Sanctity has  his name to a Town in Huntingdonshire, whe he piously lived and happily dyed is called Arnulfsbury, or more contractedly Eynsbry, near a place dedicated to S. Neo. There this devout Hermite having served God many years with great fidelity and fervour, after he had filled the whole Province with the odour of his vertues, this same year blessedly dyed, as wee read in our Martyrologe, where his Name is recorded among the Saints o the two and twentieth of August.Martyr. Aug. 12. August.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Letters of Pope Zachrias to S. Boniface: with severall Ordonnances.

1 IN the year of Grace seaen hundred for|ty one Pope Gregory third of that name dyed,A. D. 741. to whom succeeded Pope Zachrias. Which being come to the knowldge of S. Bo|niface in Germany,Bonif. Ep. 132. he presently wrote an Epi|stle to him by one o his Preist called Dene|chard, to testify his obedience,  give him an account of his proceed in S. Amo~g which he inform'd him that he had newly erecte three Bishopricks in Germany:The Episcopall Seat o

one was a Town called Wirtzburg,A. D. 742. of another Buriburg; and of the third Erfsfurt (or as some write, Eychstedt, so called from the abundance of Oakes growing near.) These Episcopall Sees he desires may be confirmed and established by the Pope. And severall other Points he added, in which he humbly desired the said Popes Order and resolution: As will ap|pear by the Answer returned to him the following year.Id. Ep. 39.
2. Another Letter likewise he sent by the same Preist to a certain Prefect whose Terri|tory lay in his way to Rome, desiring him that he would grant the same security, and afford the same assistance to this his Messen|ger, that he had formerly done to others. The said Prefects name is Regibert.
3. As touching the three Episcopall Sees by him newly erected, he does not name the Bishops ordaind in them. But by the Subscriptions to a Synod the next year wee may collect that they were those three Preists which in the year of our Lord seaven hun|dred twenty five he had called to his assi+stance out of Brittany: namely Burchard, Witta, and Willebald. Burchard was consecra|ted by him Bishop of Wirtzburg (Herbipolis) Witta, who likewise from Whitenes (for so the German name signifies) is by some na|med Albuinus, had his See at Buriburg, an an|cient Town near Fritzlare or Paderborn: And Willebald, who came out of England, being the son of a Prince called Richard son to king Lothere, as some affirm, seems to have been placed in the third See though commonly in Writers he be called Bishop of Eystad.
A. D. 742. Ap. Bonif. p. 142.4. The year following Saint Boniface re|ceived an Answer to his Letter from Pope Zacharias: wherein after expressing much ioy for the wonderfull successe of his prea|ching he. 1. Confirms the three Bishopricks, newly erected by him in Germany: adding that he had sent to the three Bishops Epistles of Confirmation, which they were to receive from his hands. 2. Whereas Carloman Duke of the French had desired Saint Boni|face to assemble a Synod in France and preside in it, to correct the infinite disorders of the Clergy hapning by reason they had no Archbishop, neither had any Synod been con|voked there of fourscore years: S. Boniface answered the Duke, that Fance not being within the district of his Iurisdiction, he had no authority without order from the Pope to call a Synod there: Hereupon Pope Zacha|rias gives him authority to assemble a Synod, and in his name to preside there. 3. The speciall disorders which he would have rectified were to exclude from Preist-hood, or if they were already Bishops or Preists, to prohibie the exercises of their office to all such persons as were guilty of adultery, or had had many wives, or cohabited after they were Preists with the wives they for|merly had, or had shed the blood of any, Christians or Pagans. 4. Whereas Saint Boniface had petitioned for leave to constitute one who might be his Successour in his Archie|pscopall authority, the Pope absolutely re|fused him: as being contrary to Ecclesia|sticall Canons: Yet he permitts him at the hower of his death to design a Successour, upon this condition notwithstanding, that such his Successour shall repair to Rome and receive Ordination there, and no where else. 5. Whereas a certain person of qua|lity had maried his Vncles wife, who like|wise formerly had been the wife of her cousen german, and in his life time was separated from him, and had received the Sacred Veyle of Religion, and the New hus|band pretended, but falsely, that he had a dispensation for this Mariage from the the See Apostolick, Pope Zacharias com|mands Saint Boniface that he should take order to dissolve so abominable a Matri|mony, telling him withall that he had sent a Commonitory Breif, to the same purpose. 6. To a certain admonition which Saint Boniface had sent to the Pope, desiring him to prohibite certain Super|stitions said to be practised at Rome near Saint Peters Church on New-years day, or the night before, at which time there were publickly in the streets dancing after a Pagan manner, with loud acclamations: neither would any one then out of a Hea|thenish Superstition lend his neighbour any thing out of his house, not so much as fire: and more over women wore about their arms and leggs ligatures, phylacteries and superstitious knotts, which also they made to sell to others: that they observed auguries, incantations, c. All which su|perstitions caused great Scandall among the Germans, who thought every thing to be lawfull which they saw or heard to be pra|ctised at Rome: Hereto the Pope answered that indeed such things had been some times done at Rome: but assoon as he was consecrated Pope, he utterly forbad them as most detestable and pernicious practises, commanding Saint Boniface to doe the like. 7. Whereas certain Bishops or Preists for|merly guilty of adultery and fornication, pretended that they had a dispensation from the See Apostolick to exercise their charges notwithstanding, the Pope bids Saint Boni|face by no means to beleive them, but to execute against them the rigour of the Ca|nons. 8. To conclude, he tells him he had sent other Letters to Carloman desirng his assistance to him in the execution of these Ordonnances.



XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2. c A Synod at Ratisbon convoked by King Carloman: in which S. Boniface presided.
4. The Decrees of it confirmed by the Pope.
5.6 c. S. Boniface his Letter to Cthbert Arch bishop of Canterbury: taxing the disorders of the English.

Baron. ad A. D. 742.1. AFter the receit of these Letters, the proceedings of S Boniface and his sua an Bishops are thus described by Car|dinall Baronius, out of the Authour of Saint Bonifac'es Life:At that time, sayes he, when the Noble Duke Charles Martel had finished the course of his life, and his Sons Caro|loman and Pipin had succeeded in his Govern|ment, of which, Caroloman, as being the el|dest, disposed all publick affairs of the King|dom: S. Boniface went to him, and presenting Pope Zacharias his Letters, earnestly besought him for the Love of God, the establishment of his Dominion and the salvation of his Subjects to advance the Orthodox Faith, therein imitating the zeale of his Illustrious Father. Vpon which request Caroloman as if he had received a command from heaven, used his utmost endeavours to recall to the way of iustice and piety all persons, Eccle|siasticks and Secular, who had swerved from the duties to which Christian Religion obliged them: for this purpose employing both his Kingly authority and the Ecclesiasticall like|wise. He commanded moreover a Synod to be assembled at Ratisbon, by the prescript whereof all abuses should be corrected. The Decrees of which Synod, being full of edifi|cation, doe here follow.
2. In the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ, I Ca|roloman Duke and Prince of the French, in the year after our Lords Incarnation seaven hundred forty two, on the eleaventh day before the Ca|lends of May, have by the Counsell of the Ser|vants of God and of my Nobles, in the fear of Christ, assembled to a Synod the Bishops which e in my Kingdom, together with their Preists, namely Boniface Arch-bishop, Burchard, Rin|frid, Wittan, and Willebrord, Dadan and Adan with their Preists: to the end they may give mee advice how the Law of God and Chri|stian Religion, which in our Predecessours days has been much dissipated, may be restored, and the Christian people hitherto seduced by false Preists may be brought back into the way of salvation. Therefore by the counsell of the said Religious Prelats, as likewise of my Nobles or|der has been taken for consecrating Prelats in our Citties, over whom wee have constituted Arch-bishop Boniface who is Legat of the See Apostolick. Wee have appointed likewise, that every year a Synod be assembled in our presence for restoring the ancient Canons and Discipline of the Church, and correcting abuses.
3. More particularly, wee command that restitution be made of all moneys fraudulently taken from Churches. 2. Wee have deprived of all participation of Church-revenews all false Preists, Deacons and other Clarks who have been adulters or fornicatours, moreover degrading them, and constraining them to Pennance. 3. Wee have utterly forbidden all the Servants of God, Ecclesiasticks, to fight, or wear arms, yea or to be present in our Armies, excepting only those who are purposely chosen for the Divine Mi|nistery, the Celebrating of Masse, or carying Sacred Relicks, that is, one or two to attend the Prince, and to every Prefect one Preist to hear Confessions and enioyn Pennances. 4. Likewise wee have interdicted the same persons to hunt with doggs, or to keep hawks. 5. Moreover wee have decreed according to Holy Canons that all Preists in their Parishes be subiect to their proper Bishops, and every Lent give him an account of their Ministery, of the order observed by them in Baptism, celebrating of Masse, reciting Prayer and Cathechising. And that whensoever the Bishop according to the Canons shall make his V|itation for administring Confirmation to the people, every Preist be ready to receive and en|tertain him at the charges of the people to be confirmed: As also that every Maundy Thursday they receive new hrism of the Bishop  recei|ving likewise from him a testimony of their chasti|ty, unblameable Life and soundnes of Faith. 6. Wee have also ordained according to the circum|spection enynd by the Canons that no stranger-Bishops or Preists from whence soever they come, shall be admitted to the Ecclesiastical Ministery before they have received an Approbation from the Synod. 7. Likewise we have decreed that every Bishop shew great solicitude to withdraw the people of God from all Heathenish Superst|tions, all Sacrifices over the dead, all Soile|ges, Divinations, Phylacteries, Auguries and Incantations exercised after a Pagan manner by some foolish Christians near their Churches, under the name of Holy Martyrs and confessours, so provoking the wrath of God and his Saints: Particularly wee require them to forbid earnestly those Sacrilegious Fires called Meefres. And for the rooting out of all such Pagan Superstitions wee command our Magistrates (Graphiones) every where to give their assistance to the Bi|shops. 8. Also wee have ordained that what|soever Ecclesiasticall person or Religious woman shall after this Synod fall into the crime of for|nication, shall be putt in prison, and doe pen|nance in bread and water. And if he be a Preist, he shall be scourged and remain a Prisoner two years. If an inferiour Clark or Monk be guilty of the same sin, he shall be whipped thrice, and conti|nue in prison a year, there to doe Pennance 9 Wee have decreed moreover that no Preists or Deacon shall we are Cassacks like Lay-men, but Ecclesiasti|call robes (casulis) as becomes the servants of

God. And that not any of them permitt a woman to live in his house. 10. Lastly that all Monks and Religious Virgins be carefull to order their Lives as becomes their Profession, according to the Rule of S. BENEDICT.
4. When this Synod was concluded Saint Boniface transmitted to Rome a Coppy of its Decrees, to be approved by the See Aposto|lick. Which being perused by the Pope, he likewise called a Synod,Ap Bonifac. p. 1, 7. in which the said Decrees were read and confirmed:Of all which Pope Zacharias gave information in an Epistle directed to all Bishops, Preists, Dea|cons, Abbots, and likewise to all Dukes, Counts and all Gods servants in the Dominions of the French: Particularly enioyning all due res|pect and obedience to their Arch-bishop Bo|niface.
This he did because many of the French Clergy looked with envious eyes upon him, as being an extern and a Religious man: for which reason his preeminent Le|gantin Authority was displeasing to them.
5. Of all this S. Boniface likewise gave an account in an Epistle to Cuthbert Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury, who the year before had written and sent some presents to him. In which Epistle he gave him a breif of the foresaid Decrees:Adding this moreover, That in that Synodall Meeting all the Bishops present made a Confession of the Catholick Faith,Ib. Ep. 105 and protested their resolution to their deaths to preserve Vnity and subiection to the Roman Church, and that they would be obedient to Saint Peter and his Vicar. That every year they would assemble a Synod: That all Metropolitans would demand from the See Apostolick Archiepiscopall Palls: and that in all things their desire was to be Canonically obedient to the Precepts of S. Peter, that so they might be reckond in the number of the Sheep commended to him. To this Confession, sayd he, we all consented and subscribed, dire|cting it to the Body of S. Peter Prince of the Apo|stles. Which the Pope and Roman Clergy received gratefully.
6. Therto he adds many grave Instructions and Advices beseeming an Apostolick Prelat: As, That all Bishops should denounce to their Me|tropolitan such abuses as they could not amend in their Dioceses: and in like manner the Metropo|litan to the Pope: for so doing, thay shall free their own soules from the guilt of the blood of such as perish. Moreover he signified to him that most of the servants of God with him were much scandalized and displeased upon occasion of a great stain and ignominy cast on the English Church and Nation, which he adiures him to wipe away by a solemn pro|hibition made in a Synod of the Clergy and Nobility, to hinder that frequency of their womens going and coming back from Rome: considering that few of them returned un|corrupted: A proof whereof is, that there were few Citties in Lombardy or France in which there wre not Harlots of the English Nation. He advised him likewise severely to reprehend, and if they amended not, to ex|communicate both alive and dead any of their Princes and Great men who sacrile|giously invaded Monasteries,A. D. 743. possessing their revenews, and governing the Monks, as if themselves were Abbots. And lastly with his utmost endeavours to hinder the intolerable superstition and excesse of cloathing raigning in Brittany, where their vestments were, as they thought, adorned, but indeed defiled with embroidery of Purple and silk Which va|nity, sayd he, is a sign of the coming of Antichrist, and an occasion of bringing luxury and unclean|nes even into Monasteries.
7. It is probable that admonitions so se|vere and earnest from a person of so great authority as S. Boniface,Spelm. l. 1. Conc. Brit. ad hanc annum. being the Popes Legat in so great a kingdom, might be the occa|sion of celebrating a Synod in Brittany at Clo|veshove,Vid. l. 20. c. 6. in which a remedy was found against sacrilegious invasions of Church-re|venews and Priviledges. For after diligent search, the formerly mentioned Law and Priviledge made by Withred the pious King of Kent was found and recited in this Synod: whereupon Ethelbald King of the Mercians by a New-Law confirmed the same in his Kingdom also. Notwithstanding as shall be declared, King Ethelbald himsel became a transgressour of his own Law, for which he was sharply reprehended by S. Boniface, and repenting his iniustice, made satisfaction for it.


XII. CHAP.XII. CHA.

1.2. c. Another Synod at Liptin: In which Adalbet and Clement, Hereticks are censured, and emprisoned.
5.6. S. Boniface imputes Simony to the Pope: who cleares himself.
7. Iurisdiction over all France given to S. Boniface.

1. THE year following S. Boniface cele|brated another Synod at a place called Liptin not far from Cambray, whither Carolo|man who kept his Court there,A. D. 743. called him.In which Synod, besides a Confirmation of the Decrees of the former,Vid. Baron. hic. it was or|dained that a Petition should be made to the Pope to send three Palls for three Arch-bishops newly ordained by S. Boniface, Grimmon in the Citty of Roen, Abel in the Citty of Sens, and a third at Triers.
2. In the same Synod likewise,Ap. Bonif. ep. 144. as appears by Pope Zacharias his Answer, S. Boniface dis|covered and condemned the blasphemies and errours of two Arch-hereticks, Adal|bert, and Clement. Of which the one chal|lenged to himself Episcopall authority with|out Ordination: wallowd in luxury: sett ut Crosses and little Oratories in the feilds, se|ducing the people by false pretended mi|racles,

and withdrawing them from publick Churches. Yea such was his Pride that he would be stiled a Saint, and consecrated Churches to his own honour, affirming that he knew many Angells by name: severall of which names S. Boniface had sert down in his Epistle to the said Pope, which were iudged to be the Names rather of Devills then Angells.
3. The other Heretick was so given over to lust that he kept a Concubine by whom he had two children: yet challenged Preisthood to himself, saying that this was agreable to the Old Testament. Further he affirmed that Christ rising from the dead, took with him all that were then in Hell, not leaving any one behind him. All which most detestable Doctrines and practises the Pope likewise con|demned, saying that S. Boniface rightly stiled the Authours of them Ministers and Precur|sours of Antichrist, and did well in causing them to be shutt up in prison.
4. The reason which made Saint Boniface more earnest against these Hereticks, particu|larly Adalbert, was because though his Er|rours and wicked practises were manifestly contrary to the Doctrin and Tradition of the Church, yet his behaviour was so subtile and hypocritiall, and such a moving per|swasivenes he had in his tongue, that he had almost seduced the Religious Prince Carolman. Now the first time that Saint Boniface entred into disute with him, among others, Stur|mis the first Abbot of Fulda was present: who earnestly ndeavoured to disswade him from that dispute: the like did Lullus and Megin|guazus. But S. Boniface answerd them, He that is in us is greater then he that is in him. Thereupon reasoning with him, he so con|vinced him, that he putt him to silence. After which he enclosed him prisoner in the Monastery of Fulda. But more of these He|reticks, when they shall be sent to Rome, whe|re their Heresies will be more fully detected.
5 But presently afterward by the false sug|gestion of certain unknown persons, there had like to have ensued a breach and divi|sion between the said Pope and S. Boniface, by occasion of a scandalous imputation cast upon the Pope, that he had Simoniacally de|manded money for the Archiepiscopall Palls which he had lately sent. This report being too easily beleived by S. Boniface, he wrote a sharp Letter to the Pope, telling him he was astonished that Simon Magus his poyson should infect S. Peters Chair, which had heretofore thundred out maledictions against that crime.
Ap. Bonif. ep. 143.6. But the good Popes mild, yet grave an|swer prevented all progresse of dissention between them: Dearest Brother, said he, I beseech your Charity that hereafter you would forbear to write in such a stile to us: for it is very offensive and injurious to be accused of that which we doe detest. Far be it from us or any of our Clergy to sell for money the Gift which we have received by the Grace of the Holy Ghost. And as for those three Palls, know for certain that not any money at all hath been received by any of my Officers for them. Yea on the contrary, the Fees which by custome was due to our Coffer for your Confirmation, I freely allowd it out of mine own purse.
7. Besides this, in the same Letter, to shew he had blotted out all resentment of this in|iurious imputation, he not only confirmed the Province granted to Saint Boniface by his Predecessour, but besides Bavaria, enlarged his Iurisdiction through all France, giving him authority in his Name and his Power to correct  reforme whatsoever he found any where to decline from Christian Faith or the Constitutions of Canons.
The year following an occasio~ hapned to S. Boniface to have his turn of reprehension from the same Pope, which he suffred with the same Spirit of Christian meeknes. But before we relate it, certain affairs of Brittany require to be interposed.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. The Brittains furiously invade the west Saxons: and are repulsed.
4.5. The resignation and death of Daniel the Venerable Bishop of Winchester, c.

1. ALL sorts of vices raigning among the English and Saxons, provo|ked Almighty God to punish the Kingdom with a bloody war against an Enemy which though allways full of malice, yet through civill divisions and want of strength had many years given disquiet to none but themselves. These were the Brittains, who this year made an irruption into the Pro|vinces of the English with such prodigious forces, that they seemed to have a design  hope to hazzard the regaining of the whole Kingdom again. The time and successe of the warr is thus described by Henry of Hun|tingdon:2. Cuthred King of the West-Saxons in the fourth year of his Raign,Huntingd. l. 4. saith he, making peace with Ethelbald King of the Mercians, they ioynd both their forces together, to fight against an in|numerable multitude of Brittains which had newly broke into their Provinces. When they were mett, the two Kings, each of them followd by most valiant tryed soldiers, dividing their armies to a reasonable distance, made severall ways so furious an impression upon the Vast body of the Brittains, that though for some time they coura|giously resisted, yet they were not long able to su|stain so terrible a weight, but at length were forced to fly, yeilding their backs to the swords of their pursuers and their spoyles to them retur|ning Victorious. Which being done the two Kings

ith triumph retiring each into his own domi|nion,A. D. 744 were with great ioy received by their Sub|ects.
3 The year following the Reverend and Holy Bishop of Winchester Daniel having with great piety spent forty three years in the ad|ministration of that Diocese,A. D. 744. Malmsb. de ont. l. 2. f. 241. to the end he might conclude his long-lasting age in quiet repose, surrendred his Bishoprick, and became a Monk at Malmbury (Melduni.) Thus writes William of Malmsbury from the ancient Tradition of his own Monastery. But his repose on earth continued a short time, for the year following he happily attained to an eternall repose in heaven. His Succes|sours name was Humfrid, whose name we find among the Subscriptions to a Synod as|sembled at Cloveshove the second time, shortly after. As for the Holy Bishop Daniel though by his great vertues he well deser|ved a nme among our Saints, yet we doe not find him recorded in our Calendar.
4. The same year Milred was ordined Bi|shop of Worcester, the successour of Wilfrid who dyed the year before.Concerning whom we can find nothing in our Ecclesia|sticall Monuments, but what Bishop Godwin produces, Wilfrid Bishop of Worcester, con|temporancy to S. Beda was consecrated Bi|shop in the year of Grace seaven hundred and seaventeen, and dyed in the year seaven hun|dred forty three.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. S Boniface falsely calumniated to Duke Pipin.
3.4. c. His Letter to the Pope: and Anser.
6. Astedius his malicious mistake.

1. IN the mean time Saint Boniface his pa|tience is exercised for his good: for he found adversaryes not only in the Court of Duke Pipin, a proper seat for envy and malignity: but at home also among his com|panions in the work of the Gospell. As for the former sort, he easily made voyd all their designs against him with a Letter writ|ten to the Duke: and his domesticall accu|sers he overcame by his meeknes.
2. Who these were,  what they layd to his charge we find in a Letter written to him by the Pope:Ap. Bonif. Ep. 234. the tenour whereof is this: Virgilius and Sidonius Religious men living in the Pro|vince of the Bavarians have lately visitted us with their Letters: in which they have intimated that your Revered Fraternity enioynd them to rebaptize certain Christians. At the reading of this we were much troubled: and should ex|tremely wonder if it should be true. Among other examples they produced this, of a certain Preist in the same Province who being ignorant of the Latin tongue, he pronounced it wrong in bapti|zing, saying, Baptizo e in nomine Patria  Filia  Spiritua Sancta. And for this, it i sayd, your Reverend Fraternity thought fit that Baptisme should be reiterated. But holy Bro|ther, if he who baptizes, introduces no errour o heresy, but through ignorance only failes in pro|nunciation, we can by no means allow that suc Baptism should be repeated. For as your Holy Fraternity well knows, who soever is baptized even by Hereticks in the name of the Father, of the son and of the Holy Ghost, must by no means be rebaptized, but only be purified by imposition of hands. If the matter therefore stand, as hat been related to us, Holy Brother, abstain here|after from such iniunctions: and be carefull to observe what the Holy Fathers teach.
3. Vpon the receit of this Letter S. Boniface presently without reply acquiesced: An the same year dispatched to Rome his Preist Eoban with Letters to the Pope, in which h suggested many things very necessary for the Churches of France, contained in twenty seaven heads of great advantage to Ecclesia|sticall Discpline.
4. Hereto Pope Zacharias immediatly an|swerd,Bonifac. Ep. 139. adioyning to every one of the said Points his own iudgment.Withall he informed him that the most excellent Prince Ppin had sent likewise to him a Religious Preist named Audoba, with other Points of the like nature, concernng the Rights of Bishops, Preists, c. also touching unlawfull Mariages, inquiring what was to be obser|ved therein according the Rites of the Church, the Dctrine of Holy Fathers and Canons of Councils: And many other things he had proposed relating to the good of soules. To all which likewise he had returned an An|swer. Consequently he enioyned S Boniface to assemble a Synod, and therein to discover to the Bishops his said Determinatins.
5. He gave him moreover order that the forementioned contumacious and Sacrile|gious Hereticks Aldebert, Godelace and Cle|ment should be made to appear before the said Synod, that their cause might again be accurately examined. And in case they were found wholly to swerve from the way o Truth and iustice, and being convinced, would not retract their errours and amend their faults, that then the Princes assistance being desired, they should be proceeded against with all severity according to the Canons of the Church. But if they should per|sist in Pride, and protest that they were in|nocent, then his will was that they should be sent to Rome, and with them two or three Preists approved for their piety and pru|dence, to be their accusers: and there the cause should be with all care examined by the See Apostolick, and judgment given on them according to their merits.
6. Before we declare how S. Boniface ob|served what was enioynd him by the Pope, in

calling a Councill,A. D. 745. and therein convincing again the said Hereticks and doing other matters for the Churches good, all which was done the year following, it will be ex|pedient in the mean time to admonish the Reader of a mistake made by Alstedius a Calvinisticall Chronologist, who affirms, that this year a Synod was assembled in Brittany against the Sodomiticall impurity of the En|glish Clergy: Whereas no Synod was called there this year: and in that which was as|sembled two years after, though many disorders are censured in it, yet this is not named among them.


XV. CHA.XV. CHAP.

1.2. A third Synod assembled by S. Boni|face at Mnts.
3 4 c In which Gevilio Bishop of Mentz is deposed o Homicide, c.
6 S Boniace Ach bishop of Mentz: and Primat of Germany.

A. D. 745.1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred orty five, S Boniface according to the admonition given him by Pope Zacharias, and the command of Duke Caroloman assembled his third Councill at Mentz in Germany:Bonif. Ep. 10. at which were present (according to the account given by himself to Herefrd an English Prelat) eight Bishops,Mirae. Fast. eg 5. Iun. all of the English Nation: But of them those only Names remain which Miraeus hath recorded saying, At the Synod of Ments convoked by S. Boniface were present Abel, Burchard, Willebald, Werbet and Wera (per|haps Wetta, or Wittan.)
2. The Decrees of this Synod touching Ec|clesiasticall Disciplin containd in the fore|mentioned thirty seaven Heads, sent by Saint Boniface to Pope Zacharias, and by him with some correctins approved, are not now extant. But other affairs of great co~sequence agitated and determined,Ap. Sur. in Vit S Bonif. 5. Iunij. are mentioned in the Life of S. Boniface in Surius: Where we read that in the said Synod not only many Ec|clesiasticks infected with Heresy were excommu|nicated; but severall Bishops also infamous for horrible crimes were depofed. The prime Au|thours of all Errours in Germany were the two Arch-hereticks Aldebert and Clement: Whose cause was remitted to Rome, and there with all circumspection iudged, as shall be largely declared.
3. Of Bishops sayd to be deposed in this Synod, the name and speciall demerit of one only is now recorded, and that was Gervilio Bishop of Menz where the Councill was held.Id. bid. The cause of his Deposition (according to the said Authour) was this: At that time the Thuringians implored the ssiance of aro|loman against the Saxons which wasted their countrey. He presently sent an Army, and with it Gerold Bishop of Mentz, who was Father of Gervilio. Gerold in the combat among many others was slain. And his son who at that time was a Lay man attending at Court, to asswage his greif for his Fathers death, was taken into the Clergy, and made Bishop of Mentz in his Fathers place.
4 Not long after Caroloman gathered another Army, which himself lead into Germany, and took Gervilio with him. Whilst this Army lay encamped on both the sides of the River Visurgis (Weser) Gervilio commanded his servant to goe privatly into the enemies camp, and there dili|gently enquire who it was that slew his Father. This he did, and finding the man not far off, he desired him to come and speak with his Master. He came, and assoon as Gervilio had notice of it, he met him on horse back in the midst of the River: Where as they were discoursing togeher, Gervilio taking out a Sword which he caried pri|vily, run the man through, who presently falling into the river, there dyed. Vpon this a mighty clamour was made, and the two Armies began a feirce combat: in which the Saxons were over|come, and Caroloman after the victory retired home. Now this fact of Gervilio, was by none at that time imputed to him as Homicide. He re|turned therefore to Mentz, where, as before, he administred the Office of Bishop.
5. But among other crimes with which he was chared in the present Synode, this was one. And the Holy Pelat Saint Boniface pu|blickly declared, That no man could exercise lawfully the function f a Bishop, who had been polluted with the slaughter o any one. And be|sides this, he obiected to him that he himself had seen him with Hawks and Hounds pu|blickly recreate himself: which was abo|lutely forbidden to Bishops by the Canons Ger|vilio having heard his accusation, and per|ceiving that he could not resist both secu|lar and Ecclesiasticall authority armed against him, reerred himself to the iudgment of the Synod, and was deposed.
6. After whose deposition Saint Boniface (who hitherto had been an Arch bishop at large, without any particular Title or See) was by Caroloman and his Brother Pipin ap|pointed Prelat o the Church of Mentz: And that his dignity might be more eminent, the same Princes determined to exalt the See of Mentz, which at this time was subiect to another, to be the Metropolitan Church of all Germany: which likewise by a Message sent to the Pope, they obtained and effected.



XVI. CH.XVI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Heresies of Adalbert a French man and Clement a Scot: condemned by Pope Zacharias in a Synod.
11. Colen made an Archbishoprick: but subordinate to Mentz.

1. THE cause of Gervelio being thus de|termined, the Fathers of the Synod consulted concerning the two Arch-here|ticks, Aldebert and Clement: Whose Errours though they then condemned, yet they thought meet to send them to the Apostolick See, that their condemnation might be more solemn. They decreed likewise to send with them the forementioned Preist, Deneard, to act the part of an Accuser in the name of the Synod before the Pope: To him likewise they gave Letters and the Acts of the Synod to be presented and confirmed by him.
Bonif. Ep. 132. Being arrived there, Pope Zacharias called together, according to the custom, a Synod of Bishops, before whom Deneard appearing, presented the Epistle of S. Boniface, in which he informed the Pope that since the time that he had conferred on him a Iurisdiction over all the Churches of France, at their own request, he had suffred many injuries and persecutions from false, and adulterous Preists and other Ecclesiasticks. But that his greatest trouble proceeded from the said two blasphemous Hereticks, Adelbert who was a French-man, and Clement, a Scott: Who though they differed in their Errours, yet were equall in the enormity of their crimes. For whose regard he had incurred the en|mity and maledictions of the French, who greivously complaind against him because he had taken from them their great Apostle, Adelbert, their Patron and intercessour with God, a man who was a worker of wonder|full Miracles. He desired therefore the Pope to shutt them up in close prison, after he had given them up to Satan, that none might be poysond by their abominable Heresies.
3. Now we will here more, fully declare the Errours, blasphemies and crimes charged upon Adelbert, and further demonstrated by Deneard, who presented certain Writings to the Synod containing the Life  Acts of that Arch-heretick, together with an Epistle of our Lord Iesus, which he said fell from heaven into the Citty of Ierusalem, and was found by the Ar|changel Michael in the Gate of Ephraim, and copied out by a Preist called Icoras, and by him sent to another Preist in Germany called Thalas|sius, c. and at last by the hands of an Angell was brought to the Sepulcher of Saint Peter at Rome, where twelve persons belonging to the Pope finding is kept that days Vigill with fasing and prayers, c.
4. As for the other Book, it was read, and it began thus:In the name of our Lord Isu Christ, here beginneth the life of the Holy and Blessed Bishop Adelbert, born by the Election of God. He was begotten of simple parents, and crownd by the Grace of God: For whilst he was yet in his Mothers womb, she saw in a vision as it were a Calf issuing out of her right side: Which Calf designed that Grace which he received from an Angell before he was brought forth, c.
5. Besides these the same Deneard presen|ted likewise a Prayer, composed by Adelbert. n which after supplications made to God the Father, he addressed himself to the An|gells saying, I beseech, conjure and humbly en|treat you, c. Angell Vriel, Raguel, Tubuel, Mi+chael, Adinis, Tubuas, Sabaouc, Simichel, c.
6. When these Writings were read before the Synod by Gregory the Notary, Regionary and Nomenclator, all the Bishops concluded that the man was madd, and that those were names of Devills, not of Angells, except only S. Michael, since Divine authority delivers to us only the Names of three Angells Michael, Gabriel Raphael. Therefore, they condem|ned them all to be burnt: Notwithstanding the Pope thought fitt they should be layd up in his Archives with a perpetuall mark in memory of their condemnation and repro|bation.
7. Besides these Writings it was layd to the charge and proved against the same Adel|bert, that from his childhood he was an Hypocrite, saying that an Angell of our Lord in human shape ha from the utmost ends of the world brought him Relicks, he knew not of whom, but such a were of wonderfull Sanctity, by vertue of which he could doe all things whatsoever he asked of Go. Hereby he insinuated himself into the minds o silly women and ignorant peazants, who affirme him to be a man of Apostolick Sanctity. That he had hed unlearned Bishops to ordain him, con|trary to the Canons: and that hereby his heart srelled with such Pride, that he esteemed himself equall to the Apostles of Christ. Insomuch as being appointed to consecrate a Church to the honour of the Apostles and Martyrs, he consecrated it to h own honour, or rather defiled it That he would likewise reprehend those who desired to visit the Shrines of the Apostles, and to hinder them he built Oratories, and sett up Crosses in the feilds, or near Springs, or where soever he thought good, commanding the people there to make their Prayers to him: Insomuch as multudes of seduced people despsing their own Bishops, and Churches gathered meetings in such places, saying, The merits of S. Adelbert will help us. Besides this,  gave to the people the parings of his nayles, and the hayr which fell from his head, bidding tem t mingle those with the Relicks of S. Peter. Yea h presumption came to that point, that wh any came and prostrated themselves at h feet, desirous to confesse their sins, h would tell hem: I know all your sins alrea+dy, your very thoughts are not hid from mee therefore there is no need to confesse the

Goe home in peace, have no doubt at all but your sins are pardond. These and many other like marks of Pride and Hippocrisy did Adelbert shew in his habit, gate, gesture and beha|viour.
8. As for the other Heretick called Clement, his Heresies did more openly destroy the common Faith of the Church: He rejected all the Sacred Canons, all the Writings of the Holy Fathers, and all authority of Councills. He would maintain that he might lawfully be a Catholick Bishop, though he had two children born in adul|tery. Yea he introduced Iudaism, affirming that a Christian might without sin, if he pleased, mary his own Brothers Widow. Moreover in opposition to the constans Doctrine of the Fathers, he taught that Christ the son of God, when he des|cended into Hell, delivered out of that Infernall prison all without exception, beleivers and in|fidells. And many Heresies more he published touching Divine Predestination, contrary to Ca|tholick Faith.
9. These things being made known to the Synod at Rome, The Fathers unanimously deprived Adelbert of his Sacerdotall fun|ction: condemning him to Pennance: and in case he should afterward seduce any, they pronounced Anathema against him, and all that should adhere to him or his doctrines. In like manner they deposed Clement, and actually excommunicated him: and whosoever should consent to his sacri|legious Opinions.
10. Our late Zealous Reformers of Scotland may here discover with gratulation their prime Patriark, who desirous to be an A|postle of a New pure-Religion, made the foun|dation of it to be a contempt of the Do|ctrines of Ancient Fathers and Sacred Canons of the Church. And in the like unhappy at|tempt he will shotly be imitated by another Preist of the same Nation called Sampson, who in despight of Sacred Tradition and the Vni|versall practise of the Church denyed the ne|cessity of Baptism, asserting that by the simple Imposition of hands by a Bishop, without Bap|tism, one might be made a good Catholick Christian.
Ap Bonif. Ep. 138.11. An account of all these Proceedings Pope Zacharias gave S. Boniface in a Letter, re|quiring him to publish through Germany France the condemnation of these Hereticks. He signifyed moreover that he confirmed all things which had passed in the Synod of Mentz: ratifying the erection of that See to a Metropolitan dignity, though he knew that many Schismaticall Preists in France did ear|nestly oppose themselves against it. And whereas a request had been made to him from France that the Citty formerly called Agrippina, but then Colonia, might be erected to be a Metropolitan Church, he signified his ssent, but so that it should be subordinate to hs See of Mentz. He also intimated to him, that in case a certain Seducer, named Geoleob, who formerly had usurped the name  au|thority of a Bishop, should present himself to him at Rome without his approbation, he would treat him as he deserved:
And he en|ioynd likewise S. Boniface not to admitt any Bishops or Metropolitans confirmed by him at Rome, except they brought Commendatory Let|ters from him.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

1.2. c. A Letter of Saint Boniface and the Synod of English Bishops at Mentz to the Mercian King Ethelbald repro|ving him for his incestuous lusts and Sa+criledge.
7. c. Another Letter of the same to Egbert Arch-bishop of York.

1. NEither did S. Boniface's Christian Chari|ty and Pastorall solicitude confine it self to Germany alone: But he thought it his duty to give his best assistance to his Native countrey Brittany, almost over-whelmd with a Sea of vices. There King Ethelbald, the most potent among the English-Saxon Princes, had in a high manner offended God in a sacrile|gious invasion of the rights and revenews of Churches within his Dominions of Mercia, in offring violence to the chastity of Religious Virgins consecrated to God, and many other crimes, and there was a iust fear least such enormities in a King should become exem|plary to his subjects, and draw many to imi|tate them; Therefore S. Boniface and his com|panions in this Synod of Mentz who were all Bishops of English race, thought expedient to admonish the sayd King Ethelbald of his Du|ty as a Christian Prince, by a Letter directed to him in the name of he whole Synod: Which was likewise done by them.
2. This Letter is still extant In which with a modest yet vigorous stile,Bonif. Ep. becoming an A|postolick Spirit they signifyed to hm, that pu|blick fame having informed them that he had all his life abstaind from Mariage: which if he had done out of the Love and fear of God and for chastities sake, they should have much reioyced in it: But they were told that he refused to take a lawfull wife, and pollu|ted himself in adulteries and unlawfull lusts, not abstaining even from devout Virgins the Spouses of our Lord: a sin so horrible, that it is by God esteemed equall to Heathenish Idolatry. Yea the ancient Pagan Saxons did so abhorr adultery that if any woman, though unma|ried were found guilty of it, they would co~|pell her with her own hands to hang her self,  after her death they would consume body with fire, and hang him who had cor|rupted her, over her smoking ashes. Or else they would cause a multitude of women to drive her out of their town with whips, cut|ting all her garment away to her wast, and lancing her body with knives: and thus she

would be entertaind by the women of the next village,A. D. 746. who would use the like rigour towards her till they dispatched her of her Life Now if Heathens have such a zeale for Matrimoniall Chastty, how iealous will our Lord be of his Spouses contracted to him by Vow, and how infinitly more heavy will the punishment be which he will inflict on their Sacrilegious corrupters!
3. They adiured him moreover to con|sider that Gods fury will more feircely be inflamed against Kings who are guilty of un|lawfull lusts, because probably their sub|jects will imitate them: by which means the whole Nation, like Sodom, will become polluted, and thereby leave a posterity effe|minated by lusts, despised both by God and men, and regardles even of their Faith. An example whereof might be seen in the Nations in Spain, Province and Burgundy, which giving themselves to filthy luxury were forsaken by God, who justly suffred the Saracens to come upon them and over|come them, so that now they have lost all knowledge of God and their Holy Faith.
4. Hereto they added another great Crime which publick fame made him guilty of, which was breaking the Priviledges of Chur|ches and Monasteries, and invading their re|venews: n which abominable sin he was followed by his Nobles, who sett no bounds to their rapin and crlty to Ecclesiasticks and Monks, depriving them of their subsi|stence, and bringing them into servitude. They therefore earnestly beought him to consider that among all the Saxon Kings since the Convesion of that Island, not any had been guilty f such Sacrilegious cruelty and unbounded lusts, except only two, Osred King of the Northumbers, and Ceolred his predecessour in the Kingdom of the Mercian: And how horrible their deaths were, he could not be ignorant: particu|larly of this latter, whom the Devill visibly hurried away to hell in the midst of his iol|lity and banquetting,
5. Therefore with humble and Fatherly prayers they besought him not to despise their counsell: but freely and speedily to amend those greivous offences against God: considering how short this present life is, how momentany the delectation of the fil|thy flesh, and how ignominious it is for a Prince after a short life to leave behind him a perpetuall example of sin to poste|rity, c.
6. This Letter being written they did not send immediatly to King Ethelbald, but prudently considering that reproofs or counsels which arrive unseasonably to per|sons of high estate, seldom produce any good effects,Bonif. Ep. 10. but rather harden them the more:Therefore they inclosed it in another dire|cted to a certain Prest named Heresfrid, to whom the King would more willinly hearken, then any other, and who like|wise out of fear to God, would not fear bold+ly to admonish the King. Him therefore they desired to present it to King Ethel|bald, when he saw a fitting opportu|nity.
7. At the same time likewise Saint Bo|niface wrote another Epistle to Egbert the learned Arch-bishop of York,bd. Ep. 8. in which he acquainted him, that having received com|mand from the Apostolick See that in what Nation soever he saw or understood that er|rours were sowed among the people, o the Ecclesiasticall Rules depraved by ill pra|ctises and customes, that he with the Popes own authority should endeavour to invite and reduce into the right any Transgressours who soever they were. In obedience to which command he together with eight other Bishops of the English Nation assem|bled in a Synod at Mentz, had sent an humble admonitory Letter to Ethelbald King of the Mercians which they had given order should be first shewe to him, that he might cor|rect in it any thing which he did not ap|prove, and add thereto what in prudence he should think meet. Withall desiring him that if in his Province of the Northum|bers any such poysonnous root of wickednes was springing, he should speedily pluck it up. He requested him likewise to sen him some Treatises of Beda, who of late brightly shone with divine Light and Grace in that Province. Telling him also that among other small presents he had sent him the Copies of certain Epistles of Saint Gregory, which he beleived had never before ome into Brittany, and if he pleased, would af|terwards send him more: Because he had at his being at Rome copied out of the Popes Archives a multitude of such Writings. Besides all this he with much seriousnes entreats him that he would be his Counsellour and helper in inquiring and finding out the Ecclesiasticall Rules of the Iudgments of God, c.
8 What was the successe of the foresaid Letter of Saint Boniface to King Ethelbald,Bron. hic. it is not known, saith Baronius. But not any Historian hath declared that by these admonitions he any thng amended his life. However certain it is that two years after this (he should have said twelve) he ended his life very unhappily:For thus wee read in the Epitome of the English History: In the year of our Redeemer seaven hundred fifty seaven Edilbald King of the Mercians was by night miserably murdred by his Guards.
Thus writes Baronius. Notwithstanding though none of our Historians expressly mention the amendment of this King, yet wee shall shew probable grounds of it, by declaring his ioyning with Cuthbert Arch-bishop of Canter+bury in restoring the priviledges of the Church and Ecclesiasticall Discipline c. and we may reasonably iudge that this Epistl had a great influence into such a good change.



XVIIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. S. Boniface by the Donation of Caroleman builds the famous Monastery of Falda in Germany.
4.5.6. Successions of Bishops in England, c.

1. SAint Boniface having established for himself and his successours a fixed Metro|politan See at Mentz in Germany, was desirous to find for himself a place of quiet retire|ment in which he might unbend his mind, and recollect it from Pastorall solicitudes and conversation, whensoever his affairs would permitt. For which purpose a certain Seat in the Solitude of Buhonia near the River Fulda seemd to him very convenient and agreable, that there interrupting a while the tumultuous businesses of Martha, he mght at fitt seasons embrace the best part and employment of Mary, to sit at our Lords fee, and in quiet contemplation attend to what our Lord would say unto his soule.
2. But because a Seat to agreable belonged to the right  iurisdiction of others,A. D. 746. he was compelled to have recourse to Caroloman by Petition, to have that place charitably be|stowed on him. Which petition of his was not in vain: For as Baronius from the Au|thour of S. Boniface his Life declares,Ap. Bar hc. Caroloman having read this Petition was much pleased with it, and having called together all his Nobles, he made known to them the Holy Bishops request; and with their consent in their presence he made a surendry of the place to him, saying, What|soever therein belongs to mee, from this hower I transferr it to God, insomuch as all the land which on all sides lyes about it for the space of three miles is to be assigned to his service. Ha|ving made this Assignment, he sent Messengers to all the Nobles in the Territory of Grapheld earnestly desiring them, that whosoever had any interest in any part of the land situated within the foresaid limits, they would freely, bestow it upon God, to be the Seat of a Monastery which S. Boniface had a desire to build. This Request of the Prince being made known to those Noble men, they unanimously and with all devotion gave up all their right to God, to S. Boniface and the Ve|nerable Abbot Sturmis. And to the end the said Assignment and Delivery might remain firm to posterity, Caroloman, who was the princi|pall Beefactour, commanded a Charter to be made in good form, to which he putt his Seale.
Mir. in Fast. Belg. 5. Iun.3. Thus in the year of our Lords Incarnation seaven hundred forty six the famous Monastery of Fulda, saith Miraeus, by the free donation of Caroloman and Pipin Princes and sons of Duke Charles Martel was erected, or at least the foun|dations of it were layd. In which, assoon as it was perfected,A. D. 747. Sturmius having congrega|ted a certain number of Monks was consti|tuted Abbot. This Noble Monastery prooved in after times a source of innumerable bles|sings to the whole countrey of Germany.
4. The same year in Brittany, Inguald Bi|shop of London dying, there succeeded him Egwolf, known only by his name to posterity, and by his subscription to a Synod the year following assembled by Cuthbert Arch-bi|shop of Canterbury.
5 In the Kingdom likewise of the East-An|gles both the Bishopricks of Dumwich and Helmham being vacant by the deaths of Cuthwin and Ethelfrid, there was substituted in their rooms one only Bishop to administer both the Sees. His name was Herdulf, who subscribed likewise to the same synod as Bi|shop of Dumwich and Helmham. Yet true it is, that this does not agree with the order of Bishops of those Sees found in William of Malmsbury, who assigns two Bishops succee|ding at this time in the foresaid Sees, namely Lamfert and Albrith. But concerning these two, we shall treat, and of their succession many years after this.
6 At this time also the Kingdom of the East-Saxons was deprived of their King Seled by a violent death, after he had raigned twenty eight years. All that wee can find concerning it is this short account given by Henry of Huntingdon,Huntingd. l. 4 King Seled, saith he, this year was taken out of this Life for ancient Writers affirm that he was slain at this time: but how or by whom he was slain, they say nothing at all.


XIX. CHAP.XIX. CH.

1.2. c. A third Synod at Clovesho in Kent for reforming abuses: and the De|crees of it.

1. THE year of Grace seaven hundred forty seaven brought much good and spirituall proffit to the English-Saxon Chur|ches in Brittany,A. D. 747. by the happy reformation of Ecclesiasticall Disciplin made in a famous Synod a third time assembled at Clovesho by Cuthbert Arch-bishop of Canterbury. Which place seated in Kent, is at this time called Cliffe, by reason of a high mountain or cliffe (anciently named Clivas) and a smll territory interiacent between the Rivers Thames and Medway called  from which two names arose the word Clivetho, or Clovesho.
2. The cause of assembling this Synod was the miserable decay of piety, and Or|der through the whole Kingdom, suggested to Arch-bishop Cuhbert by Saint Boniface in an Epistle sent him five years before,

as hath been declared. For rectifyng which disorders the Arch-bishop seriously treated with Ethelbald King of the Mercians, to whom the Kings of Kent were subiect and tributary, desiring that himself would assist in Reformation of the Church by a Synod to which he would please to afford his own presence. This being obtained, the Synod was called, in which twelve Bishop were present, all of them contained within the Province of Canterbury, for of the other Province of York, not one appeard. And besides them, King Ethelbald with his Princes and Nobles was assistant.
3. The Acts and Decrees of this Synod have out of a very ancient Manuscript in Saxon letters,Spelm. tom. 1. de Concil. been faithfully extracted by Sir H Spel|man. In the Preface where of is expressed the generall design and motive of the present Meeting to have been, that with good advice order might be taken for restoring Vnity in the Church, concord among one another and Reforma|tion of the State of Religion. After which Cuth|bert Arch-bishop of Canterbury presiding in it caused to be read two Writings of Pope Za|charias translated into English in which were contained Prescriptions for reforming abuses, regarding persons of all degrees and condi|tions, with terrible denunciations against the disobedient. The reading of which cau|sed great thoughtfullnes in the minds of the Bishops, who began mutually to exhort one another by rectifying of their own lives to afford good example to the rest of the Clergy and Seculars of the kingdome: and that they should sett before their eyes the Homilies of the Holy Pope S. Gregory and Cano|nicall Decrees of the Fathers, as a fitt Rule by which they might reform themselves.
4. Then followd severall speciall Canons, one and thirty in number, written in an ab|struse stile, which argues the Antiquity of them. The Reader may at large peruse them in Sir H. Spelmans first volume of our ancient Saxons Councils: It will suffise in this place breifly to sett down the sence of each in or|der, as followeth:
5. It was ordaind therefore. 1. That Bishops should be carefull to shew themselves by the sanctity of their lives good examples to others, and to exercise their Pastoral Offices according to the Canons of the Church. 2. That they should preserve the Vnity of Peace among one another. 3. That every year they should visit their Dioces. 4. That they should take care that Abbots and Abbesses govern their Monasteries Regularly. 5. That since at this time Monasteries by the avarice and Ty|ranny of Great men were miserably oppressed and depraved, yet Bishops should at least take care that the poor Monks should not want the Ministery of a Preist, for the necessity of their soules. 6. That no Monks should be exalted to Preisthood till after due tryall of their vertue and capacity. 7. That Bishops take order that in Monasteries there should be Schooles for the trayning up the young Religious in the love of Sacred knowledge, to the end they might become afterwards prof|fitable to the Church. 8. That Preists should always be mindfull of their Office and voca|tion to attend to the Altar in celebrating Masses to Reading, Prayer, c. 9. That they should be diligent in preaching and bapti|zing according to the lawfull Rites of the Church. 10. That they should be studious to understand aright the Creed, Pater noster, and the Holy Mysterious words in the cele|bration of Masse: and that they should inter|pret them to the people, and explain them in the English tongue. 11. That they should all agree in the manner and order of baptizing, Teaching, c. 12. That they should sing in the Church with modesty, and if they were unskillfull, they should content themselves with reading. 13. That they should celebrate the Office of the Church uniformly, and in like manner solemnize the Feasts of the Church 14. That our Lords day should be cele|brated by all, and that the people should be obliged to repaire to Church, c. 15. That seaven Canonicall Howers should be obser|ved uniformly both in Churches and Monaste+ries. 16 That Litanies and Rgations should be performed by all the people uniformly ac|cording to the Rite of the Roman Church on the seaventeenth before the Calends of May, and three dayes before our Lords Ascension with celebration of Masses and Fasting till three in the after noon, without admixing vanities playes, running of horses, feast, c. 17 That the Feasts of S. Gregory Pope, and of S. Augustin sent by him the Apostle of the Kingdom should be solemnly celebrated 18 That the Times of Fasting in the fourth, sea venth and tenth month according to the Roman Rite be neglected by none: and that the people be admonished before those times come. 19. That Religious men and woe|men observe their Regular Instituts modestly, and abstain from vanity in apparrell. 20. That Bishops take care that Monasteries, especially o women, be places of silence and devotion: and that the entrance into them of Poets Mu|sicians, vain ieasters, drinkers and feasters be utterly forbidden: since great scandalls and suspicion arise from such. 21. That all Eccle|siasticks and Monks fly particularly the Sin of Drunkennes. 22. That such likewise live in a fitt preparation for the Holy Communion: and that when occasion is they confesse their sins c. 12 That Lay persons also, young and old dispose themselves so as to be fitt to receive the same Holy Sacrament. 24. That Seculars be not admitted to Religious Profession, till after fitt examination and probation. 25. That after every Synod Bishops promulgate to their Clergy the Decrees there made. 26. That the people be exhorted to Almsgiving by which their sins may be redeemed: but withall that they be taught not so to trust in their Almes, as from thence to take a licence to sin. 27.

That in the Holy exercise of Psalmody,A. D. 748. whether in the Latin or Saxon tongue, men be carefull to ioyn their hearts to their voyces: And that those who doe not understand the Office in Latin, should however be carefull to have their minds and affections fixed upon God and Spirituall things. 28. That Monasteries be not burdned with a greater multitude then they can maintain: That Superiours doe not over-presse their Religious with labour: and that both Men and women Religious abstain from secular vanity and fashions in appa|rell. 9. That Monks and Nunns be not per|mitted to inhabit among Seculars. 30. That since there is a suspicion entred into the minds of Kings and Princes, that Ecclesiasticks, Bishops and Preists doe not bear them inward affection, nor wish their properity, but ra|ther the contrary: The said Ecclesiasticks in this Synod doe protst that such suspicion is without ground; and i it were iust, they should be guilty o sins not only contrary to their sublime Profession, but even to the com|mon Duty of Christians To shw therefore that they wre free from a vice so detestable, it was ordained, Tat all Ecclesiasticks and Monks in every Canonicall Hower should inces|santly implore the Divine lemency for the safe|ty of their Kings, Dukes, Nobles and all Chri|stian people, as ell as for themselves. 31. That ey be all unanimons in Faith, Hope and Charity both to God and one another: and diligent in Praing both for the Living and the Dead, celebrating often the Propitiatory Sacrifices for their repose c.
6. To this effect were the Canons of this worthy Synod. After the conclusion where|o Cuthbet the Arch-bishop of Canterbury sent a Copy of all the Acts and Decrees by his Deacon Knebert to Saint Boniface: there|by shewing him that he had not been un|mindfull of his admonitions, nor of the Precepts of Pope Zacharias. And it is not to be doubted but now King Ethelbald renewd tht respect to Gods Church, which he shewd so worthily in his younger years: a further proof whereof he gave two years after this, in restoring the Priviledges and immunities thereof, which had by himself and others been so much in|fringed.


XX. CHAP.A D. 749
XX. CH.

1. Succession of Kings in Kent.
2. Kenred a hopefull Prince of the West-Saxons, unhappily slain.
3. The Monastery of Bredon in Worcester|shire, founded.
4 5 c. Of Sampson a naughty Scottish Preist.

1. THE year following Edilbert King of Kent and eldest son of Withred,A. D. 749. after a raign of three and twenty years, dying with|ot issue, his Brother Edbert succeeded him. Some of our Historians account Edbert the elder Brother, and affirm that he dying this year, Edilbert the next succeeded The E|rour on which side soever it lyes, is not much materiall. And indeed these Princes o Kent to whom the Titles o King are given, wre so obscure, that no wonder, both their names and actions should be delivered to poterity uncertainly. In the late Snod at Clove in Kent, among the subscriptions none  na|med as King but Ethelbald King o the Mercians, to whom these Princes were tri|butary, and therefore those three Brothers, Edilbert, Edbert and Alc, wo raigned suc|cessively in Kent, are to be esteemed s rec|kond under the Tiles of Princes and Des, Subscribers to the said Synod. As touching the Prince who now dyed, all that is recor|ded of him, is that he bestowd on the Mona|stery of Religious Vrgins at Menrey in the sle of Thanet certain lands, as Harpsfeild de|clares.
2. The same year, which was the ninth of the Raign of Cuthred King of the West-Saxons, saith Huntingdon, his Son Kenric was slain a Prince of wonderfull hopes: tender in years, but vigorous and eirce in combats, and ioy|full to find any occasion to exercise his va|lour. This young Prince in a certain expe|dition being too eager in pursuing his good successe, through immoderat heat discon|tented his own soldiers, and in a edition raised by them was slain.
3. To thi year is referred the new erection of a Church and Monastery at a Town called Bredon, in the Province of Worcester by a cer|tain Noble man of the Mercian kingdom cal|led Eanulf Concerning which Camden thus writes:Camd. in Worcest. At the root of the said Hills is seated a Town called Bredon where was a Monastery founded: Concerning which wee read this passage in a Charter made by Offa, who was afterwards King of the Mercians, I Offa King of the Mer|cians doe give land containing thirty five acres of tributaries to the Monastery named Breodun in the Province of the Wiccians (Worcestershire) to the Church of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles

built there,A. D. 748. which my Grand-father Eanulf foun|ded to the praise and glory of God who lives for ever. This devout Charity of Eanulf Al|mighty God rewarded by exalting to the throne of the Mercian Kingdom his grand|child Offa, who held it illustriously the space of nine and thirty years, as shall hereafter be declared.
4. This is all which occured memorable in Brittany this year. Passing therefore over into Germany, wee shall find there the whole care of the late planted Church to lye in a manner upon Saint Boniface alone. Who being much disquieted with false Teachers pretending to be Preists, and spreading per|nicious errours touching the Sacraments of the Church, his best remedy was to consult the See Apostolick: for which purpose he sent this year Burchard Bishop of Wirtzburg to Rome with Letters to acquaint Pope Zacharias with the impediments which he mett with in propaating the Faith.
Ap. Bonif. Ep. 140.5. What those speciall impediments were, does appear by the Popes Answer:In which wee find that great numbers of false Preists who never had been ordained by Bishops, and confounding all Ecclesiasticall order, refu|sed to be subiect to Bishops, against whom they armed popular tumults, making separated Con|gregations, in which they taught doctrines con|trary to Catholick Faith, not requiring before Baptism an abrenunciation of Satan, and re|fusing to sign with the Crosse, yea not so much as instructing such as were baptized in the Faith of the Blessed Trinity.
6. And among such Ministers of Satan a principall one was a certain Scott, named Sampson, who also had the impudence to teach that without the Mysticall invcation of the Blessed Trinity, yea without any baptism at all, a man might becom a good Catholick Christian only by the imposition of the hands of a Bishop.
7. Now to prevent any further contagion by such guilefull seditious Ministers, the Pope advised S. Boniface to collct a Synod, and there not only depose them, but likewise shutt them up in Monasteries, there to doe Pennance to the end of their lives. For which purpose he should require the assistance of the Noble Dukes and Potentats of France And particularly as touching that naughty Scottish Preist (Nequissimum virum) Sampson, he re|quired him not to content himself with only deposing him but that he should also ex|communicate and expell him out of the Church.


XXI. CHAP.A. D. 749.
XXI. CH

1.2. A Noble Charter confirming the Pri|viledges of the Church, by Ethelbald King of the Mercians.
3.4. c. A famous Miracle in Germany by the Intercessin of S. Swibert.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred forty nine Ethelbald King of the Mercians touched with a remorse for his Sins,A. D. 749. made worthy satisfaction to the Church for his forme Sacriledges, by publishing a Noble Charter to confirm its immunity. Which Charter may be read in Sir H. Spelman, thus inscribed by him:Spelm. de Concil. The Priviledge of Ethel|bald King of the Mercians, granted to Monaste|ries and Churches. In which being mindfull of the reprehension given him by S. Boniface in an Epistle fore mentioned, and repenting his former Life, he made all the Monasteries and Churches of his kingdom free from all taxes, labours, bur|dens, gifts, c. And at the end of it is signi|fied, that the said Charter was signed by seve|rall Bishops and Noblemen in the three and thirtieth year of the said Kings raign, at a fa|mous place called Godmundsleech: Which place is at this day called Godmunchester, and it is seated in the Province of the Icens (or Hun|tingdon shire.)
2 At the same time dyed Ethelwold King of the East-Angles, called by some Elfwald, by others Ethelred: to whom succeeded his his son Ethelbert, or as some Writers: name him, Albert: who was born to him by his Quee~ Leosruna. Concerning whose admirable ver|tues  Sanctity wee shall treat at large when wee come to his Mariage and death, or more truly his Martyrdom immediatly attending it.
3. Here wee ought not to omitt an illu|strious testimony which God was pleased this year in Germany to give to the Sanctity of our glorious Saint and Apostle of the Ger|mans Saint Swibert. It is faithfully related in an Epistle sent by Saint Ludger Bishop of Munster to Rixfrid Bishop of Maestricht, in which Epistle a large description is made of the affairs of the Authours own tim tou|ching the Apostasy of the Frisons. But that which concerns the glory of S Swibert, is there thus related:4. It hapned in the year of our Lord seaven hundred forty nine that the illustrious Prince Pipin after a glorious Victory obtained against the Saxons and Westphalians,Ap. Sur. in Append. ad vit. S Svvb. Mars. i hastned his return to Colen with his wearied Army. But the Westpha|lians, though utterly routed by the triumphant sword of this Noble Prince, had such indigna|tion to be under the dominion of Christians, that without delay they gathered a new powerfull Ar|my, and marching by paths unhaunted and

more compendious they gott before the Princes army near to the town of Werda,A. D. 750. where they cunningly layd ambuscades with a resolution furiously to rush upon him in his march.
5. When this came to the Knowledge of Pipin by the relation of his Scouts, he was some thing troubled by reason his Army was much dimi|nished, and had in it many wounded unservice|able men: Notwithstanding calling to mind the many great Miracles which by the intercession of Saint Swibert, whose body lay there at Werda, had been performed, and having a firm confi|dence in God, he lighted from his horse, and prostrating himself on the ground, he with great devotion implored the help and Patronage of that most holy Bishop, withall vowing to God and Saint Swibert, that if by his intercession and merits he might obtain a Victory over the Pa|gans, and bring his Christian Army safe home, he would in a solemn Procession attended by all his Nobles with great devotion make a Pilgri|mage to his shrine at Werda.
6. This Prayer was no sooner made, but im|mediatly a wonderfull light shone over the Chri|stian Army, which not only dazeled, but quite blinded the Pagans, insomuch as in a ter|rible fright least the God of the Christians should from heaven consume them, they dispatched away to Prince Pipin two of their cheifest Princes to beg peace and make profession of subiection to him: Who withall constantly related to him what they had seen, and how much they were amazed at it.
7. Assoon as the Prince heard this, being assu|red that so great a delivery came by the interces|sion of S. Swibert, with great ioy he adored and gave thanks to God: and having received from the Pagans hostages for performance of conditions, he attended by his whole army entred in an humble manner into Werda: and there both himself and his Nobles putting off their shooes he visited the Shrine of S. Swibert, and there offred Royall Gifts to Almighty God and S. Swibert, for that without any effusion of blood he had gott the upper hand of his perfidious enemies. And from that time he chose S. Swibert for his speciall Patron and Prote|ctour. Niether did his piety rest there, but a few years after this he treated solemnly with the Pope for his Canonization.


XXII. CHXXII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Of. S. Richard an English King: the Father of S. Winebald, c. He dyes at Lucca.
5. The death of S. Tecla an English woman, and Abbsse in Germany.
8. Of S. German an English Missioner in Germany: and Martyr.

A. D. 750.1. THE year of Grace seaven hundred and fity is consigned by severall Writers to the death of an English King called Ri|chard, memorable to posterity for his Sanctity: A breif of whose life is represented in an Epitaph to this day extant in a Church of the Citty of Lucca in Italy, where he dyed and was enterred, the tenour whereof is as fol|loweth:2. The sister of King Offo was Mother to S. Ri|chard. This King S. Richard was King of England,Ap. Baron. hic. a voluntary exile from his countrey, a despiser of the world, a contemner of himself. He was Father to the two holy Brethren S. Willebald and S. Wini|bald, and of their Sister S. Walburgis a Religious Virgin. He made an exchange of an earthly king|dom for an heavenly: He quitted a Kings Crown for a life-eternall. He putt off his Royall Purple, to take a mean habit: he forsook a Royall throne, and visited the shrines of the Saints: He layd by his Scepter, and took a Pilgrims staffe. He left his daughter S. Walburga in his kingdom, and went into a forrain countrey with his Sons. Them also he left with S. Boniface the glorious Martyr, the Arch-bishop of Mentz a man of wonderfull san|ctity, and born in his own kingdom England. Th same holy King extended the bounds of his banishment further, and visitted the shrines of the Holy Apostles beyond the Alpes: and afterwards reti|red himself into other uninhabited places to the end he might more freely there attend to God. At length after a long continued exile, after many internall combats, after frequent and painfull suffrings by hunger, thirst and cold, all his conflicts ended in the Province of Italy and Citty of Lucca there he received his rewards, thence his soule was received into heaven: and his Sacred members were placed near the Body of S. Frigidianus in a Church dedicated to his honour where his glor shines abroad by many miracles. His Festivity  solemnized on the seaventh day before the Ides of February.
3. The observations made by the illustrious Cardinall Baronius in his Annals this year upon this Inscription, particularly to dis|prove the Title of King of the English attri|buted to S. Richard, doe not seem to mee con|cluding. For though it be true that his name is not found in the Catalogue of the Saxon or English Kings that is no sufficie~t proof against him: Since wee read very many examples or the like:Bedl. 3. c. 23  l. 4. c. 23 So in S. Beda mentioned is made of Edilward son of Oswald, King of the Dier like|wise of Elbuin: and of Osri King of the Wiccians And Cissa in his Charter in Harpsfeild calls himself King of the West-Saxons.Harpsf. saec. . c. 9. Bonif. Ep. 49 S. Boniface also mentions Sgald King of the same Province and Ina, a King called Balred: Lastly in the Life of S. Botulph wee read of one Ethelmun King of the South-Saxons, yet not the name of any of these appear in the Catalogues o the Kings of those severall Kingdoms. And whereas he affirms that Philip of Eyslat a Ger|man is the first Authour who gives the Title of King to S. Richard, it is a mistake For Wolf+hard an Authour much more ancient,Wolfard. in vit. S. Wal|burgae. who lived in the next Century to this, and with great fidelity wrote the Life of Saint Walburga, affords him the same Title;tuart. in Not. 3. ibib. and Stuartius in

his Notes upon the same Life affirms, that all Authours almost with one consent make him a King of England,Senart. in Not. 3. ib. insomuch as none in his sound witts will deny it. And indeed hereto agree the Roman Martyrologe,Martyrolog. Rom. 7. Febr. Gres. ad vit. vit. S. Wil|baldi. Philip Bishop of Eystat, Trithemius, Molanus, Yepes, Gualter and very many others. Yea Gretser in his observations on the Life of Saint Wilibald son to this Saint Richard prooves by many arguments the same, as from common Tradition, from ordi|nary Images of him, from severall Missals, Breviaries and Authours. Notwithstanding, that he did not actually, at least not long, enioy this Title and power, may be granted. Now the right which he had thereto may be shewed out of our Ancient Monuments.
Vid. l. 18 c. 18.4. For wee have before declared how Lothere King of Kent succeeded to his Bro|ther Egbert, to the prejudice of his Brothers son Edric. And after eleaven years raign being dispossessed and slain, his son was also debarred the Succession,  never mounted the Throne. Now this Prince Richard according to the opinion of some Writers, and particularly of the learned Annalist, R.F. Alford was that disinherited son of Lothere, who content with the security and sweetnes of a private Life, never sought nor desired soveraignty though iustly due to him.
5. But more probable it is, that this Richard was a King of the West-Saxons immediately after King Ina. For though Ethelard be the the onely King named his Successour: Yet Saint Beda sayes expressely, that King Ina left his Kingdom to severall young Princes, among who~ this S. Richard probably was one. This is con|firmed by what we read in the life of this Prince,Vit. S. Ri|chardi ap. Capgr. that he recommended his children Winne|bald and Willebald to S. Boniface, because he was of his kingdom: Now it is certain that S. Boni|face was born at Kirton near Exceter in the Kingdom of the West-Saxons. But Ethelard being a Prince of high spirits seems to have excluded the rest: and S. Richard, whose am|bition lay another and better way, was wil|ling to employ his thoughts and endeavours in pursuing the hopes of an Eternall King|dom, to be obtained by peaceablenes and ne|glect of temporall Glory.
6. And God was pleased to reward this his love with a far greater Blessing, in giving him three children worthy of eternall memory, S. Willibald, S. Winibald and S. Walburga. These three children in the year of Grace seaven hundred twenty five were sent by their Father to S. Boniface in Germany because he was born in his kingdom, as the Authour of S, Ri|chards Life writes, twenty years before the said S. Boniface was Arch-bishop of Mentz neither did their Father accompany them at that time, as the Authour of the Inscription mistaking writes: But severall years after followed them thither, out of a desire to en|ioy their happy conversation, and end his Life in the society of so many Saints. Not|withstanding out of a Motive of Devotion very fashionable in that age, he undertook a Pilgrimage in a mean habit to visit the Shrines of the Blessed Apostles at Rome: After which in his return this year through Etruria, or Tuscany, God was pleased in the Citty of Lucca to putt an end to his iourney, and restore to him with advantage a heavenly Crown. And we are obliged to that Noble Citty for pre|serving his Memory in so Noble a Monument.Martyrolog. Rom. 7. Febr. His name is both in the Roman and English Martyrologe recited among the Saints on the seaventh of February: Where likewise he is stiled S. Richard King of the English: because perhaps he had a right, though never any possession of the Kingdom.
7. The same year dyed the Holy Virgin Tecla Abbesse of the Monastery of Kirzengen at Ochnafort in Germany, for so doe the Centu|riators of Magdeburg stile the place And write concerning her and her holy companions in this manner:Magdeb. Cent. 9. fol. 342. This age or Century likewise had women famous for their learning: some of which Boniface sent for out of England into Germany to preach the Gospell; namely Chunitude, Tecla, Lioba Waldoburga, Chunilda, and Beragytha. We doe indeed acknowledge that these Holy Virgins were sent for out of England into Ger|many: but not to be Preachers: It is no Catho|lick custom to make women overseers and disposers of Ecclesiasticall matters: The end for which they were invited out of England was indeed to teach German Virgins the In|stituts of a Religious Conversation. As touching S. Tecla in particular, she had her devout education in the Monastery of Winborn: wherein she proffited so well that S. Boniface thought her fitt to teach others what she had so well learnt, and to govern others, having been so perfect in Obedience her self. This Office after she had piously and di|ligently exercised fifteen years, she was cal|led to the embraces of her heavenly Bride|groom, on the fifteenth day of October: on which day she is commemorated among the Saints in the Roman Martyrologe.Martyr. Rom. 15. Octob.
8. Our Martyrologe likewise mentions a certain English man a Bishop called German, who went over Sea to preach the Gospell to the Brabanters and Frisons. Which Office ha|ving performed in an Apostolick manner, he received an Apostolick reward, which was a Crown of Martyrdom this year Roseyds a lear|ned Iesuit mentions him in the Calendar on the second of May. Whether this were a per|son distinct from him who was Brother to S. Ediltrudis, is uncertain: Concerning whom William of Malmsbury makes mention,Malmb. de Pont. l. 2. f. 240. saying, In the Church of S. Edmundsbury these lye the Bodies of two Saints, German and Botulf: whose Gests I cannot find in the Antiquities of that Church, nor any where else. Only this I find of them, that the former was Brother to Saint Ethel|dritha, and the second a Bishop.



XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2. Edilhun a Valiane Consul rebells against the King of the West Saxons: and is sub|dued.
3.4. The King of the Northumbers persecu|tes a holy Bishop.

Huntingd. l 4 f 341. Wgorn. hc.1. THE same year there were commo|tions both in the Western and Nor|thern Provinces of our Island. For in the West-Saxons Kingdom, as Huntingdon relates, Cuth|red in the eleaventh year of his Raign fought a furious combat against Edelhun a Noble man (Consulem) of a most bold courage: Who raising a sedition against his Lord, and both their Armies meeting in the feild, though Edilhun was far inferiour to the King in number of soldiers, yet he maintaind the combat a long time with admi|rable courage, for his single valour supplied the place of many bands of soldiers. And when the victory was ready to declare it self for him, an unfortunat wound peircing his body made the Kings iust cause to triumph over his perjury and infidelity.
2. Edelhun with the blood issuing out of this wound expelled likewise Pride and contumacy out of his heart. So that volun|tarily submitting himself to his King, and re|penting his rebellious Treason, he not only found pardon, but was admitted into his Lords favour and freindship.
3. But in the Kingdom of the Northumbes wee find a vertuous King persecuting a wor|thy Bishop and another innocent person: and what the offence or provocation was, not any of our Historians mention. The Story is thus breifly touched by Mathew of Westmin|ster and Hoveden:Westmon. hic Hoved. hic. Godvv. in Dunelm. Eadbert (or Egbert) King of the Northumbers took Renulphus Bishop of Lin|desfarn Prisoner, and lead him Captive into the Citty called Bebba, where he was cast into chains,  in that state remained a long time. Likewise he commanded the Church of S. Peter in Lindesfarn to be besieged. The motive of which siege is further declared by the same Houeden,Hoved. ib. saying, Offo the son of Alfred, an innocent young man was compelled for avoyding the fury of King Ead|bert to seek sanctuary at the Relicks of the Holy Bishop S. Cuthbert, where he remained till being almost starved to death by famin, he was without armes taken out from thence. As touching the Citty where the said Bishop was so straitly imprisoned, and which in this Narration is called Bebba, it is seated in the Province of Northumberland near the Isle of Farne, and is at this day called Bamborow:
4 Now though wee find expressed in no Historian the cause of the Kings displeasure against the said Bishop, yet wee may perhaps probably collect it from other actions of the same King performed this year. To which purpose the Authaur of the Epitome at the end of S. Beda's History relates how King Ead|bert this same year by force annexed to his Domi|nions the territory of Cyel,A. D. 751 Ep. past. Bed Hist. with other regions. Now this Territory at this day called Keile or Coyle was possessed by the Scotts: and was seated at the Frith of Cluid (Glottae aestuarium:) where the Citty Alcuit, and the Castle now called Dunbritton lyes. Notwitstanding since the King of the Northumbers pretended to all the right which the Romans formerly enioyed in those parts, which extended as far as the said Frith: King Eadbert might think he had iust cause to recover it. Now it is probable that the pious Bishop Renulf opposed the Kings ambition and avarice, and so incurred his displeasure.


XXIV. CHAP.XXIV. C.

1.2. c. Pope Zacharias resolves severall Doubts of S. Boniface, c.

1. THE following year nothing occurrs to furnish our History either in the Ecclesiasticall or Civill state of Brittany,A. D. 751. but only the death of two Bishops in the Kingdom of the Mrcians: of Witta Bishop of Lichfeld, to whom succeeded Hemel: And of Alwy Bishop of the Lindesfari, whose place was supplied by Aldulf.
2. But in Germany S. Boniface affords suffi|cient matter.Bonif. Ep 141.For he this year sent Lul or Lullo in a message to Pope Zacharias, to desire of him a resolution of certain difficulties oc|curring in his Province: and also a confirma|tion and Priviledges to his Archiepiscopall See of Mentz, and his new founded Monastery of Fulda.
3. As touching the Doubts proposed to the said Pope,Ap Bonif. Ep 14. the Resolution of them is found in his Answer: where he tells him. 1. That he could not condemn him for refusing to communicate with the French Bishops, who refused to keep the Promises made by them. 2. That Christians ought to abstain from ea|ting the flesh of Choughs, Crows, Storks, and much more of wild horses. 3. That the Roman Rite was, upon Maundy Thursday after the ma|king of Chrism, to cause three Lamps to be lighted, capacious enough to burn three days:  that upon Saturday the Vigil of Easter other Lamps to be lighted fro~ thence for the ceremony of blessing the Font. As for the ma|king use of fires taken from burning glasses, they had no such Tradition at Rome. 4. Concer|ning such as had the falling-sicknes, if it came from their birth, they were not to be ad|mitted into the Church, for fear of infecting others: But the same rigour was not to be used to such as had it afterwards: those might be admitted to the Com|munion, yet so as that they must come when all others had communicated.
5. That there was no prohibition for Reli|gious Virgins to wash one anothers feet,A. D. 752. as well as men. 6. That it is more congruous not to admitt to Preisthood any till they be of good years and such as have a good testi|mony: and that the age prescribed by Canons is thirty years: Notwithstanding in case of want, and necessity, such may be taken as have passed five and twenty. 7. As touching the Question how long men are to stay from eating Lard after the beast is skilld, this was not found in Tradition: yet his counsell was not to eat of it till it had been dryed well in smoke and then boyld: Yet in case any desired to eat it unboyld, let him at least abstain till after Easter. 8. That concerning the revenews of the Church, he need to make no scruple to require a shilling of every house (solidum de casa) and that would suf|fise. 9. That in case any had been received into the Clergy, who at their Ordination had conceald such Capitall sins as they had for|merly been guilty of, and such sins came afterward to be discovered: such were to be deprived and condemned to Pennance. 10. That in insupportable persecutions by Pa|gans, it is permitted to fly. 11. That Tribute might be exacted from the Slavi inhabiting in that countrey. 12. That by his Messenger Lul, he had sent him a Roll, signifying where, and how many Crosses are to be made in ce|lebrating Masse.
Ap. Baron. hic.4. For as much as concerned the Privi|ledges to be given to his Archiepiscopall See of Mentz, he in a distinct Letter declared in this Form, By the Authority of the Blessed A|postle Saint Peter wee doe ordain that the fore|said Church of Mentz be for ever to thee and thy Successours erected and confirmed a Metro|politan Church, having under it these Citties, Tongres, Colen, Worms, Spire and Troyes (Tre|ctis, or Trecas,) as likewise all the Nations of Germany which by thy preaching thou shalt con|vert to the Light of the Gospel.
Ap. Sr. l. 2. c. 1.5. Lastly whereas Saint Boniface had signi|fied to the said Pope that he had built a Mo|nastery dedicated to the honour of our Saviour, in a forest of vast extent, in which he had pla|ced Monks who lived under the Rule of Saint Benedict in great austerity, abstaining from flesh and wine, who had no servants, but contented themselves to live by their own labour: in which Monastery he purposed with the Popes leave to retire himself some times to rest his old weary limbs, and after death to be buried: and con|sequently desired his Holines to patronize it and endue it with convenient Priviledges: Hereto the Pope condescended, subiecting the said Monastery immediatly to the See A|postolick, forbidding any Bishop or others to exercise any authority in it, or so much as say Masse, unlesse invited by the Abbot: and confirming for ever all lands of which it was possessed at that time, or should accrue to it afterward.
A. D. 752.6. These were the last Letters which passed between Saint Boniface and Pope Zacharias, for he presently after dying, and Pope Steven the next year succeeding in his place: who held that See onely three days, after whom another Pope of the same Name, and stiled Steven the third,Ap. Bonif. Ep. 19. being consecrated, Saint Boniface wrote an Epistle to him professing his Duty and obedience as he had done before for the space or thirty years to three Popes his Predecessours, and in conclusion he asked his pardon for the delay of sen|ding that Letter, the cause whreof was his necessary occupation in repairing Chur|ches, which to the number of thirty had been burnt by the malice and fury of Pagans.


XXV. CHAP.XXV. CH.

1.2 The Bodyes of Saint Kiliam, Saint Colman and S. Totnan translated by Saint Boniface.
3 4 c. Their Gests: and Happy Martyr|dom: and wonderfull discovery of their Relicks.

1. THE same year Saint Boniface with great devotion took up the Bodies of Saint Kilian formerly Bishop of Wirtzburg, Saint Colman a Preist, and Saint Totnan a Dea|con, all which had come out of their Na|tive countrey Ireland, to preach the Gospell in Germany, where they were blessed with the Crown of Martyrdom. Their Sacred Bodies, I say, Saint Boniface now took up, to expose them to the veneration of devout Christians, and afterward to bury them more honoura|bly: a happy presage of the honour himsel was shortly after to receive.
2. Now though heir Gests doe not pro|perly belong to our present History: Yet so much interest this piety of Saint Boniface gives us in them, that a breif account of their actions and Martyrdom will not be iudged altogether impertinent here: which wee will collect from a very ancient Anony|mous Authour in Surius.
3. Saint Kilian,Ap. Sr. 8. Iulij. saith he, was born of a Noble Stock in Ireland and from his child|hood was brought up in learning: But shortly by Gods preventing Grace despising curious study, and worldly enticements, he retired himself into a Monastery where with great perfection he gave himself to Prayer and the observance of Regular Disciplin. Such progresse he made hereby in all piety and vertue, that he was esteemed worthy in due time to be promoted to the Degree of Preist|hood, and afterward to the Government of his Monastery.
4. The same of his Sanctity being far spread, and drawing very many to see and admire it, the Holy man fearing the ten|tation of vainglory, began to meditate

how he might retire himself from the knowledge of freinds, and withall the Spi|rit of Charity to the soules of others, in|flaming, among so many others in this age, his heart likewise, he took with him certain companions, and passing over into Brittany, he from thence sailed into France: and travelling through severall Regions he entred into Germany as far as Wirtzburg determining there to sow the precious seed of the Gospell. Which that he might doe with better successe, he went to Rome to demand from the See Apostolick, in which at that time Conon sate ope, a licence and power to preach to Pagans. And having obtained this toge|her with Episcopall dignity, he returned o the same place in Germany.
5. At his going to Rome he had left Saint Gallas the famous Abbot, in Germany: and at his return he left Saint Columban in Italy: so that there remained to attend him only Saint Coloman a Preist, and Saint Toan Deacon. And being arrived at Wirtzburg  found a new Duke there, called Gozbert. Now after he had spent some time in prea|ching the Gospell with great efficacy, the said Duke sent for him to appear before him, and demanded what New Doctrine that was which he taught. To whom the Holy Bishop freely revealed the Summ of Christian Doctrin touching the Blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God,  other neces|sary Mysteries of our Religion. At that time the Duke, though convinced of the un|conquerable truth of his Doctrin, yet de|ferred the acknowledging of it. But not long after seeing the Holy mans perseve|rance, he came privatly to him to be more perfectly informed, and, forsaking the Ido|latrous worship of Diana, who had been held in great veneration by him, he gave up his name to Christ, and on the next so|lemnity of Easter was baptized. Whose example was followed by great multituds of his Subiects in Franconia.
6. Now the said Duke had formerly ta|ken to wife a Lady named Geilana, who had been maried to his Brother and remai|ned still a Pagan. The unlawfullnes of which mariage the Holy Bishop delayd to dis|cover to the Duke, fearing it might be a hindrance to his embracing the Faith. But when he saw him well established therein, he then told him sincerely that such a Ma|riae was forbidden by the Religion he pro|fessed. The Duke at the hearing of this was much afflicted and astonished for he loved his wife with great passion. Yet his answer was, That he resolved not prefer the love of any creature before God: But tat at present preparing for an expedition against his enemies, he could not suddenly effect a busines of so great importance: but at his return he would perform his duty.
7. But when these things came to the knowledge of the Duchesse Geilana, her rage was horribly inflamed against the Men of God, and she meditated conti|nually how to destroy them in her hus|bands absence, and so as that it might not come to the notice of any. Present|ly therefore by the Devills suggestion she found two fitt Ministers of her cruelty, who for a certain reward promised to sa|tisfy her. At this time it hapned on a cer|tain night that Saint Kilian being not per|fectly awaked fom sleep, there appeard to him a certain man in glorious apparell, who said, Freind Kilian, arise, thy labours are almost at an end: there remains onely one conflict more, and then thou thalt come home to mee with victory. Having said this, he presently vanished out of his sight. And the Holy Bishop arising, called to him his two companions, knowing this to have been a divine Visitation, and said to them: My Brethren, Now let us watch, for our Lord is at hand, to knock at our dore: Let us take heed he find us not unprepared. At mid|night therefore as they were devoutly busy in prayer, the two bloody executio|nes entred the room: Whom assoon as the Holy Bishop saw, he said to them, Freinds, Wherefore come you hither? Doe you execute what you are commanded, and we will finish our course. Assoon as this was said, they were all three murdred, and buried in the same place: likewise into the same grave were cast their Books and Vestments, that no sign of their death might appear, but it should be thought that they were travel|led to some other place. The abominable Duchesse likewise made a Stable be built over the place where the Sacred Bodies had been buried, to prevent any sign of what had been done.
8. Shortly after the Duke returning, went to the house where he had left the Holy men: and not finding them, he en|quired diligently whither they were gone: the Dutches told him, that they being at li|berty without any restraint, were gone whither they thought good. With this an|swer the Duke was satisfied, and enquired no further. But not long after one of the Murderers was suddenly possessed by the Devill, and cryed out with a loud voyce, O Kilian, thou pursuest mee terribly, I am consumed with fire: I see over my head a sword dropping with thy blood. Thus roaring out, and tearing his own flesh with his teeth, he from a temporall torment was carried to torments everlasting. The other likewise becoming raging-mad, cast himself on his own sword, and so in despair dyed. At last the execrable Duchesse seeing these things, was seised on and terribly tormented by Devills, and with all her power cryed out, I am iustly tormented, for it was I who sent Murderers to destroy the Holy men. O

Kilian, thou pursuest mee terribly: O Kolo|man, thou burnst mee: O Totnan, thou addest fewell to the fire. Thus raging and blasphe|ming, she was so horribly vexed, that the force of many men could scarce hold her: and in the end after intolerable torments, she went to the place of endlesse incon|ceivable torments.
9. After these things were past, the ge|nerall report is that the Duke Gozbert was murdred by his own servants, and his Son deprived of the Dukedom, yea and all his kinred and freinds so persecuted by the in|habitants of the countrey, that they were scarce permitted to live in it. But the cause of all these disorders is not known, whe|ther it was for their constancy in the true Faith, or some other Motive.
10. The Martyrdom of these holy Saints hapned in the year of Grace six hundred eighty nine,Marty. Rom. 8. Iulij. three years after they retur|ned from Rome. And their name is cele|brated among Gods Saints on the eighth of Iuly. Their Bodies were discovered to a certain man called Atalongus by his young schollars, who by a Divine im+pulse cryed out, that three Holy men were buried in such a place. For which Ata|longus reprehending them, was strook with blindnes, and miraculously recovered his sight, when the acred Bodies were taken up From his relation Saint Boniface was informed of these things, who therefore caused them to be honourably removed to another place: And in respect to them pro|cured the Town of Wirtzburg to be erected into an Episcopall See.


XXVI. C.XXVI. CHAP.

1.2. Cuthred the West Saxon King frees himself from subjection to the Mer|cian.
6. Prince Caroloman becomes a Monk: and his Brother Pipin crowned King of France in the room of Childeric, who is deposed.

1. AT this time began the decadence of the Mercian Kingdom, and the ad|vancement of that of the West-Saxons. Before this year the Mercian was both in largenes of dominion, riches and power incomparably surmounting any other in Brittany, inso|much as except the Northumbers, all the other States, even that of the West-Saxons, were tributary to him. But God, whose Providence had ordained that the whole En|glish-Saxon Nation in Brittany should be re|duced into one Monarchy under the West-Saxon race, inspired courage into Cuthred King of the West-Saxons, and a resolution by arms to ree hi elf from dependance on the Mercian Crown. Whereupon having composed all matters at home, and recei|ved into Grace the valiant Captain Edilhun, he assembled all the forces of his Kingdom against Ethelbald, who mett him with an equall Army at a place called Beorsord, pro|bably the same which his now called Bur|sord in Shropshire: where the preference between them was determined. Henry of Huntingdom beyond any other of our Histo|rians relates most exactly the circumstances of this war: in this manner:2. Cuthred King of the West-Saxons in the thirteenth year of his raign,Huntingd. hic not being able longer to support the imperious exactions and insolencies of the Mercian King Ethelbald, raised an Army and boldly mett him in the feild at Beorford, chusing much rather to ex|pose himself to death, then to suffer his li|berty to be any longer restrained. He brought with him the valiant Captain Edilhun, whom he had lately received into grace, on whose courage and prudence he did so much rely, that he the more confidently undertook this warr. On the other side Ethelbald, who stiled himself King of Kings, came into the feild attended wh a potent army composed, besides his own Mercians, of Kentish-men, East-Sa|xons and East-Angles.
3. Both these armies being ranged in Order, and marching directly towards one another, when they were almost ready to meet, the Cou|rageous Edilhum who went in the front of the West-Saxons, carying the Kings Ensign, which was a golden Dragon, struck the Enemies Stan|dard bearer through the body: upon which the West-Saxons gave a great showt, and received great encouragement. Then the Armies mett, and the battell began with incredible fury, and a thundring noise of clashing of arms, resoun|ding of strokes, and crying out of wounded men trampied under feet. Each part fought the more eagerly, because they were assured that the Victory would for ever make either the Mer|cians or West-Saxons Masters of the other. One might see there two Armies which a little be|fore had dazeled the sight with the shining of their Armour, and which looked like two fo|rest, by reason of innumerable spears erected, pre|sently after all defild and obscured with dust and blood, dissipated and torn asunder, and their beautifull Ensigns so rent and defiled, that they could scarce be known to their own party. On each side those who were most daring and coura|geous kept close to their Standards, and most fu|riously rushed upon one another, doing horrible execution with their swords and battell-axes: Neither of them had any thought of yeilding, yea each party assured themselves of Victory.
4. But wheresoever the Valiant Edilhun made an impression, ruine accompanied him on all sides, his battle-axe like a thunderbolt clove asunder both bodies and arms. And on the other side wheresoever the courageous Mercian

King Ethelbald rushed in, he made a horrible slaughter, for to his irresistible sword arms were as thinn cloaths, and bones as soft flesh. Whilst therefore these two warriers, like de|vouring flames, wasted their enemies on all sides, it hapned that they both mett one another. Each of them, then gnashing his teeth with rage against his opposite, stretched forth their arms, and with all their strength struck-terri|ble blows at one another, with little advan|tage for awhile on either side. But God, who re|sists the proud, and from whom alone strength, courage and magnanimity proceeds, then putt an end to his favour formerly shewd to King Ethelbald,  deprived his soule of his usuall con|fidence. Therefore perceiving that his customed forces and valour faild him, a terrour from heaven assaild his mind, so that he was the first in his army who began the flight. Neither from that day to the last moment of his life did God afford him a prosperous successe in any of his un|dertakings.
Id ib.5. Thus describes the foresaid Authour this terrible decisive battell: and for a con|clusion adds, That from that time the King|dom of the West-Saxons became very po|tent, and so continually prospered, till it brought all the rest into subiection to it. But this was not till the beginning of the fol|lowing Century, when King Egbert became Monark of the whole Kingdom, charging its Name into England. Thus passed matters in Brittany.
6. And at the same time a far greater change was made in France. For the worthy Prince Caroloman having the year before quitted his Principality, and out of a strange fervour of Divine Love retired himself into the Monastery of Saint Benedict at Mount Cassin, there to serve God the re|mainder of his Life in poverty and solitude: the Nobility of France contemning their ef|feminat King Childeric, with one consent determined to raise Prince Pipin, in whose onely hand the whole power and manage|ment of the State remained, into the Throne: And to give a greater authority to the Change, they thought good to consult Pope Zacharias, to whom they represented the im|potency and vicious effeminacy of their King, and the admirable courage, prudence and all Royall endowments of Pipin, withall the necessity in which that Kingdom stood of an able supporter against the Saracens and other terrible enemies, which threatned the destruction of it. Hereupon the Pope gave his sentence according to their desires,Regin. A. D. 750. and appointed S. Boniface to annoint and sett the Crown on the Head of Pipin: which he accordingly performed in the Citty of Sois|sons. As for Childeric, who was the last of the Merovingian race, after his deposition he was thrust into a Monastery.


XXVII. CHAP.A. D. 755.
XXVII. C

1. The Brittains invade the West-Saxons: and are repelled.
2.3. c. King Cuthred dying, Sigebert a Tyrant succeeds: and raigns but one year.

1. THE year next following the terrible battell between the Mercians and West-Saxons in Brittany,A. D. 753. the Brittains, think|ing this a fitt season for them to enlarge their Dominion, when the West-Saxons, though conquerours, had much dimi|nished their forces to gett a bloody victory, with a great Army made an impression into the Western parts: But their successe was not according to their expectation: for as Huntingdon relates,Huntingd. l. 4. Cuthred in the four|teenth year of his raign fought against the Brit|tains, who, not being able to resist him who had lately conquered King Ethelbald, pre|sently began to fly, and for their folly and cowardice deservedly suffred a great slaughter, without any dommage done to the West-Sa|xons.
2. This was the last exploit of this Noble King:A. D. 754 Id. ib. for as the same Historian writes, the great and renowned King Cuthred after so great prosperities and victories, the next year by the cruelty of death was taken out of this world, lea|ving a successour unworthy to fill his Throne. This his Successour was his kinsman Sigebert, who held the Crown a very short time. For swelling with pride because of his Predecessours victories, he became insolent and intolerable to his own subiects, whom he treated ill all manner of ways, and for his particular proffit depra|ved all his Lawes. Hereupon a principall man among his Nobles called Cumbra, was enduced by the generall complaints of the people to intimate their greivances to their New King: Which he faithfully performed, earnestly beseeching him to make his govern|ment easier to his subiects, and quitting his former inhumanity to shew himself amiable both to God and men. But these exhortations were so far from producing a good effect, that he commanded Cumbra should cruelly and uniustly be putt to death: yea and encrea|sed the insupportable fiercenes of his Ty|ranny.
3. This behaviour of his did so in|flame with rage the minds of the West-Saxons,A. D. 755. that within the space of one year they deprived him both of his king|dom and life. The manner whereof the same Writer thus proceeds to declare. Sigebert being incorrigible both in his pride and other vices, the Nobility and common

people assembling themselves together, with prudent deliberation and unanimous consent drove him out of his Kingdom, and chose for their King an excellent young man of the Royall family called Kinewolf. As for Si|gebert after he was thus expelled by his Sub|iects, and fearing yet greater punishment for his former demerits, he in great fear hidd himself in a vast forest called Andreads|wald: where a certain Swineheard of Cumbra, (who had been so unworthily slain by him) finding him, he revenged on him the uniust death of his Lord. Thus ended his unhappy life King Sigebert,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2. a man, saith William of Malms|bury, horribly cruell to his subiects and contemptibly cowardly to his Neighbours.
4. Yet among the vices and impieties of Sigebert, one good action of his is recorded, which was his charitable li|berality to the ancient Monastery of Gla|stonbury. For in an Appendix to the life of Saint Patrick and in the Antiquities of the same Monastery wee read,App. ad Vit. S. Patric. Antiquit. Glaston. how the Danes at this time cruelly wasting the Nor|thumbers, a certain Abbot called Ticca who lived in those parts, fled the countrey, and coming among the West-Saxons, there he retired himself into the Monastery of Gla|stonbury. Where after he had for some time lived with much edification, he was chosen Abbot this year. A powerfull mean whereby he gaind the love and favour of the Monks, was his enriching that place with many precious Relicks which he brought with him out of the Northern parts, as the Sacred Bodies of Saint Adrian Bishop, Saint Ceolfrid, Saint Benedict Biscop, Saint Efterwin and Saint Sigfrid Ab|bots of Wiremouth and Girwy, of Saint Beda Preist, of Saint Ebba, Saint Bega and Saint Hil|da Abbesses, of Saint Boisil, and Saint Idan Brother to Saint Fursey, of Saint Vltan Bishop, and Oyle from the Tombe of Saint Nicholas, some Relicks likewise of S. German Bishop of Auxerre.
5. To this Abbot Ticca (or Tictan) and to the Monks of Glastenbury did King Sige|bert for the valew of fifty peices of Gold bestow two and twenty Hydes of land in Pohelf. The Same Abbot likewise at the fame price bought of this King six hydes of land remaining there in the Western part.


XXVIII. CHAP.A. D. 752.
XXVIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. Saint Boniface preparing his iourney to the Frisons, become Apo|states, resigns his Arch bishoprick of Mentz to S. Lullus, c.

1. NOthing illustrated this present year so much as the last labours and bles|sed Martyrdom of S. Boniface.Baron. hic. Thirty years had he now spent in cultivating our Lords vineyard, employing all his strength and vi|gour both of mind and body in so laborious a work. He had often petitioned the See Apostolick in vain to allow him in his old age to appoint a Successour in his See of Mentz, that he might enioy a quiet repose in his Monastery of Fulda. But of late hearing that the barbarous Nation of the Frisons had renounced the Christian Faith, which had been so diligently taught them by S. Willi|brord and his Disciples, the zeale of Gods house did so burn in his heart, that instead of seeking repose, he resolved to renew his former labours, and to expose himself to the extremest dangers among those ingratefull Frisons, whilst he endeavoured to rebuild Gods Church there demolished.
2. But before he would execute this New purpose, he iudged necessary to provide for the Security and quietnes both of his Church of Mentz and Monastery of Fulda. For the former he wrote a Letter to Pope Steven si|gnifying to him his intention of endeavou|ring to replant the Faith among the Frisons: and least by his absence his Church of Mentz, should be deprived of a head and dire|ctour, he begged his permission that he might resign it to his faithfull companion and assistant in his labours, Lul or Lullo, a man both for his learning, piety and pru|dence most eminent among his Disciples.
3. It seems it was the Divine Will that this Apostolick Bishop should conclude his life in the laborious exercise of his Charge: For though his hitherto so ofte~ renewd requests for this favour would never be granted him, when the motive thereto was a quiet retire|ment: Now assoon as he demanded it to the end he might more freely engage himself in new travells and dangers, the Pope easily granted his request. Whereupon he imme|diatly consecrated Lul Arch-bishop of Mentz: whom also he enioyned to be dili+gent and faithfull in preaching to the peo|ple and doing all other Offices belonging to his charge of so many soules. He re|quired him likewise to finish the building of the Church which he had begun at Fulda, and there to bury his body, wheresoever it

was Gods will he should dye.A. D. 755. Moreover to provide all things necessary for his iour|ney, and particularly that in a chest of his Books he should enclose a Sheet to enwrapp his body after his death. For by many to|kens he signified that his death was ap|proaching: the apprehension whereof did not at all discourage him notwithstan|ding from this his dangerous iourney.
Magdeb. cent. 9. f. 80.4. Now this Lul, say the Centuriators of Magdeburg, was by nation an Englishman, of a Citty called Maldubia: brought up in learning and piety by the holy Abbot Eata, and had for his Sirname Irtel, as appears by an Epistle of Hereca to him. He was one of the twelve Monks which Egbert Arch-bishop of York sent into the countrey of the Frisons. From whence Saint Bo|niface as soon as he was delegated into Germany called him: Who made no delay to attend him; He planted severall Churches in Hassia, Thu|ringia and Erford: and instituted in Regular Discipline Monks in the Monastery of Fulda. Notwithstanding in this Narration there is a mistake: for Saint Lullo was not sent by Egbert. but called out of England with many other devout Preists by Saint Boni|face in the year of Grace seaven hun|dred twenty five as hath been decla|red.
Bonif. Ep. 92.5. Now Saint Boniface having thus or|dained Lullo by the consent of Pope Steven, as likewise of King Pipin and the Nobility of the countrey: he further wrote a Letter to a certain Preist called Fulrad who was Chaplain to King Pipin, and had great power with him. Him he earnestly desired to ob|tain from the King his Protection of this his Son and now fellow-Bishop, as likewise of all the people committed to his charge, that after his death they might not by the rage of confining Pagans be dispersed and loose the Faith they had embraced.
Ib. Ep. 151.6. In the next place for the security of his beloved Monastery of Fulda, he had re|course to King Pipin for his protection of it: that the Secular power might be ioynd to the Ecclesiasticall which he had formerly obtain'd of the See Apostolick. And accordingly the devout King gave him a lage Charter, rati|fying all the Immunities and Priviledges which the Pope had formerly granted to the said Monastery. A Copy of which Charter is still extant among the Epistles of Saint Boni|face: In which likewise the said King confir|med for ever the possession of all the lands with which his Brother Caroloman had en|dowd it.
7. Such preparation being made, S. Boniface was ready with an undaunted courage inspi|red by the Grace of Gods holy Spirit to begin his iourney, when one obstacle more presen|ted it self,Ib. Ep. 97. a removall whereof he was forced to begg of Pope Steven, in a Letter which is the last that ever he wrote. That Obstacle was, a pretention which the Bishop of Colen made to the Church of Vrecht, the principall See of the Countrey of the Frisons, as be|longing to his Province, and consequently that S. Boniface had no right to enter into it. In opposition hereto S. Boniface informed the Pope, that though indeed anciently King Dagobert had bestowd the Castle of Vtrecht with a Church there demolished on the Bi|shoprick of Colen, yet it was with a condition annexed, that he should undertake the charge of preaching and converting the Na|tion of the Frisons: which he had never done: but that people remained Pagan till the co|ming of S. Willebrord and his companions, sent thither and ordained Bishop by his Pre|decessour Pope Sergius, who built there an Epis|copall Church consecrating it to the honour of our Saviour. And after his death Prince Caroloman had recommended the same See to himself, desiring him to take it into his care and constitute a Bishop therin, as he thought fitt. Therefore he concluded that the said See did of no right belong to the Bishop of Colen, but was immediatly subiect to the See Apostolick. In conclusion he besought the Pope that search might be made in the Archives at Rome for the writing and Commis|sion given by Pope Sergius to Saint Wille|brord, by which might appear the insuffi|ciency of the pretentions of the Bishop of Colen.
8. The Answer hereto from Rome is not now extant: but by the proceedings of S. Boniface it appears that the cause went on his side: For he administred the affairs of the See of Vtrecht, without any dependency on the Bi|shop of Colen.
9. Being ready to begin,Rodolph. in vit. S. Liob. his iourney, he sent for the Religious Virgin S. Lioba (one of those which he had invited out of England to esta|blish Regular Discipline in Germany) and ex|horted her earnestly not to desert this coun|trey in which she was a stranger, nor to faint in a vigorous pursuit of her holy em|ployment, but to perfect the good work be|gun by her: He told her, that bodily weaknes and infirmities were not considerable, nei|ther was an age, esteemed by us long, to be regarded if compared with eternall Rewards which shall crown all our good endeavours. Having said this, he commended her earn|estly to Bishop Lullus and the Seniour Monks of the said Monastery, admonishing them to shew all care and respect to her: Telling them with all that it was his resolution that after both their deaths her bones should be layd near to his in the same grave, that they may expect the day of Resurrction together, since they had served our Lord with the same desire and affection. When he had said this, he be|stowd on her his Monasticall Cowle; once more admonishing her not to forsake that Land of her pilgrimage. Thus all things being pre|pared for his iourney, he went into Frise|land. These things are extracted out of the Life of S. Lioba written by Rodolphus, at the request of Rabanus Maurus.



XXIX. C.XXIX. CHAP.

1.2. c. The last Gests and Martyrdom of S. Boniface and his Companions.
11.12. c His Body translated from Vtrecht to Mentz, and thence to Ful|da.
15.16. That S Boniface was an English|man: not a Scott.

1. WEE are now come to the last and best passage of this glorious Saints life, which was, his willing offring of it to our Lord as a Sacrifice of sweet smelling Sa|vour. The manner of it wee will here sett down as wee find it extracted out of the Gests, of S. Boniface, by the illustrious Cardinall Ba|ronius.
Baron. hic.2. After the holy Bishop had sett all things in order in Germany, he, attended by such persons as he had made choice of, entred the boat, and descending by the Channel of the Rene, arrived safe into the region of the Frisons: Where from place to place he preached the word of God with great fer|vour, and carefully built Churches. And so great successe did God give to his labours, that within a short time he, assisted by Saint Eoban, converted and baptized many thou|sands of men and women. Now the said Eoban he ordained Bishop of Vtrecht, to the end that in his old age he might have one to ease him by sustaining a great part of his burden There were present likewise and assistants to him severall Preists and Deacons; Among the Preists the principall were Win|truge, Walter and Aalher: and among the Deacons, Strichald, Hamunt and Boso. More|over there were certain Monks also, Wac|car, Gunderhar, Williker and Adolf, which attended him. All these unanimously la|boured with him in preaching the Gospell, and with him also attained the crown of Martyrdom.
3. Now all these after they had passed through severall parts of that countrey, and were come to the River Bortna in the confines of East Friseland. S. Boniface ha|ving none with him but his own compa|nions, commanded their Tents should be pitched: because there he intended to ex|pect the coming of those who after Baptism were to receive Confirmation: For the day ap|pointed thereto was at hand.
4. But when it was come, and the Sun was mounted to its height, all those which were expected by him with the same ten|dernes of attention that children are expe|cted by their fathers, were become utterly unworthy to receive the Grace of Gods Holy Spirit which that day was to have been conferred on them by the Sacrament of Con|firmation: For of freinds they were turned into enemies, and of Neophytes into Ser|geants and Executioners. They came run|ning then with great rustling of armour to the Tents of these defenceles Saints: Which when the Servants saw, they be|took themselves likewise to their wea|pons, endeavouring to defend the holy men against the rage of that furious mul|titude.
5. But Saint Boniface when he heard the noise of this tumult, in the first place he had recourse to his Spirituall Sanctuary and for|tresse, for he took the Sacred Relicks, which in all his iourneys he caried with him: and then calling to him all his Ecclesiasticks, he went with the~ out of the Tent, and restraind the servants who were ready to resist, saying to them, My children, abstain from fighting, de not combat with your adversaries, but rather render them good for evill. Now the long wishd for day is come, in which wee are from this miserable world invited to eternall ioys. Why would you then debarre your selves from so great a grace and happines? On the contrary be coura|geously chearfull in our Lord, and with thank|full minds receive the inestimable gifts of Di|vine Grace now offred to you. Put your trust in our Lord, and he will deliver us out of all dan|ger. With such speeches as these he with-held his servants from setting upon their enemies.
6. Then addressing himself in a fatherly manner to the Ecclesiasticks of each degree, My most dear Brethren, said he, if the memory of my former admonitions be not utterly defaced out of your minds, shew now that you have not forgotte~ them. Call to mind those words of our Saviour, Fear not those who kill the body, but can not hurt the soule. Fixe the anchor of your Hope in God one+ly, who after this momentany life will give you an eternall Crown among his heavenly Saints. Doe not, I beseech you, in this point of time loose the everlasting rewards of Victorious soules: Be not therefore either corrupted with the flatteries of these Pagans, or terrified with their threat|nings: but courageously and manfully suffer this present danger of death for his love who for us suf|fred infinitly more, that you may for ever reioyce with him in heaven.
7. The holy Bishop had scarce ended this exhortation, when the furious multitude ar|med with swords and all kinds of weapons rushed upon them, and with bloody hands in a barbarous manner murdred them all. Having done this, they hastily ran into their Tents, and took with them all their Books and coffers in which were enclosed the Sacred Relicks, thinking they should find in them great treasures of Gold and silver. Thence with hast they went to their Boats, loaden with all the provisions of meat and wine, of which they dranke with great ioy. After this they fell into debate a|bout dividing the treasure which they

vainly hoped they had found. And when after long and earnest disputes they could not come to an agreement, on a sud|den a furious quarrell arose among them, which became so inflamed, that with the same madnes, and with the same arms with which they had slain the Holy Martyrs who came among them only to save their soules, they now destroyed one another.
8. This slaughter being at an end, those which remained alive, moved with the same hope of treasure, ran to the coffers: which when they had broken up, instead of gold and silver, they found nothig but books and other papers of Spirituall Doctrine. This fayling o their expectation did so enrage them, that they threw away the Books in the feild, and among the fenns, and other in|commodious places: Yet notwithstanding through a marveylous Providence of God, and for a Proof of the sanctity of his servants, the same Books and papers a long time after, were found entire and undefaced: and so caried to the Churches, where they remain to this day.
9. Among the rest there was found one Book of the Gospells which the Holy Bishop for his comfort always caried with him: This Book though it was cutt quite through with a sword, as may still be seen, yet with such cutting not one letter of it was abolished; which truly was a wonderfull Miracle. It is reported that S. Boniface, when the murdrer was ready to strike him with his sword, held up that Book to defend his ead, as nature sugests in such a danger: by which means it came to be cutt thorough. The Murderers being thus frustrated of heir hopes, went sorrowfull to their homs.
10. But when the Nighbouring Christians heard of the Martyrdom of these holy men, they with armed forces entred the countrey of those barbarous Murderers, who preparing themselves for defence, were so oppressed with the guilt of their crime, that they could nothing resist, but fled away and were slain by the Christians, so suffring a double destru|ction, of their bodies in this world, and their soules in Hell
11. Not long after, the Ecclesiasticks of Vtrecht came and took the Sacred Body of S. Boniface, which they caried back and ho|nourably buried in their Church. This being known to S. Lullo Arch-bishop of Mentz, he called together a great number of his Clergy and of secular men of a higher condition, and declared to them the death of S. Boniface, and how his Body was enterred at Vtrecht, contrary to the expresse order which he had given. He desired them all therefore to ioyn with hm in executing the holy Bishops last will. Hereupon they all went to Vtrecht, and having receivd the Sacred Body, they rought it back with great pomp and solemne Pro|cessions to Mentz, from whence to the great greif  vexation of Saint Lullo, it was con|veyed to Fulda, where with great honour and veneration it was reposed.]
Thus writes Cardinall Baronius from the Au|thour of Saint Boniface his life taken out of Saint Willebalds Narration: Where likewise is a declaration of many wonderfull Miracles wrought there by his Intercession: Which the devout Reader at leasure may peruse. He with his Companions suffred this year on the Nones of Iune, thirty six years after he had received the Charge and Apostolicall Office of preaching to the Pagans.
12. Concerning the place where these holy Martyrs suffred, Miraeus calls it Ostracha, in the Eastern Friseland. And as for the Number of them, a different account is given by severall Authours. He who prosecuted the Epitome of Saint Beda's History reckons fifty three: Hubaldus fifty two: Rxfrid Bishop of Virecht, fifty one: and the Gallican Martyrologe onely two and twenty: but perhaps there wee are to understand, that only so many Names of them have been recorded by ancient Writers.
13. The foresaid Authour of S. Bonifaces his lie among these Martrs names only two Bishops. S. Boniface himself and S. Eoban: but in the Gallican Martyrologe it is expressly sayd, that S. Adelbar was also a Bishop,Martyr. Gal 20. April. probably ordained after they parted from Mentz. For thus wee find his commemoration, In Pse|land on the twentieth of April is celebrated the Translation of S. Adelbar Bishop of Erford and Martyr, who was consecrated Bishop by S. Boni|face, and together with him crownd with an illu|strious Martyrdom on the fifth of Iune.Miraeus in ast Belg. 5. Iunij. His Body saith Miraeus, in a manner entire is at this day with great veneration kept as Erford in the Cel|legiat Church of Cano~s dedicated to the most Blessed Virgin: where they celebrate anniversarily his Me|mory on the twelfth day before the Calends of May.
14. Though the Body of S. Boniface was for the greatest part of it entombed at Fulda, yet that some considerable Relicks of it were de|posed at Bruges in Flanders is testified by the Gallican Martyrologe on the thirteenth of March in these wards,Marty. Gall. 13. Martij. At Bruges the deposi|tion of S. Boniface Bishop and Martyr, a man truly Apostolicall whose glorious Trophee, together with that of S Eoban Bishop and other twenty (two) servants of God, is yearly colebrated by the Ca|tholick Church on the Nones of Iune, being the day in which they finished their happy conflict.
15. Now whereas some Writers will make it a doubt whether S. Boniface was of the En|glish-Saxon blood,Bonif. Ep. 10. to iustify which they en|deavour to make a collection of some to themselves seemingly probable proofs that he was a Scott: The contrary is expressly de|clared by S. Boniface himself in his Epistle written in his own of name  seaven other Bishops in a Synod at Mentz to Heresfrid a Preist and Chapleyn to King Ethelbald, where he says that they were all of the English Na|tion: so that they also who affirm that Abel a Bishop one of the same Synod was a Scott, are manifestly mistaken. In

anoter Epistle likewise of Saint Boniface to Pope Zachary we read this passage,A. D. 752. Ib. Epist. 10. In the Church wherein I was born and had my educa|tion, that is, in Transmarin Saxony (so England was anciently call'd, for distinction from the other Saxony in the continent) a Synod at London was assembled by S. Augustin Arch-bishop, by S. Laurence, S. Iustus and S. Melli|bus Bishops, Disciples of S. Gregory, in which, c.Ib. Epist. 6. Yea he writes plainly that he was (Ver|naculus Gentis Anglorum) a Native of the En|glish Nation: and that the Saxons were wont to tell him, We are of one and the same blood.
16. These Testimonies sure are more then sufficient to disprove the impudence of Dem|pster the Scottish Historian,Dempst. Hist. Scot. l. 2. c. 130 who affirms that in a Book a little before published by him he had by nine most firm arguments demonstrated out of Marianus and twenty other Authours,Marian. ad A. D. 717. that Saint Boniface was no Englishman, but a Scott. Whereas the same Marianus in expresse words writes, that he was (Natione Anglus) by Nation an Englishman.Simpson. l. 2. Cent. 8. And Simson a Scottish Protestant Historian shews far greater sinceri|ty then Dempster, who says, Boniface was born in England, not far from Exceter:, at a town an|ciently called Cridiadunum, now Kirten.





THE FOVR AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. An Anniversary Commemoration of the Martyrdom of S. Boniface, c. or|dained by a Synod in England.
3.4. c. Letters out of Brittany to Saint Lullus Successour of S. Boniface.

A. D. 756.1. _A Year was scarce passed after the Martyrdom of Saint Boniface and his devout Companions, when the English-Saxon Church in Brittany by a common Decree ordained an Anniversary Commemoration of them. For assoon as Cuthbert Arch-bishop of Canterbury heard of their said Martyrdom he assembled a Synod of the Bishops and Abbots of his Pro|vince: in whose Names he wrote a Synodicall Letter to Lullus the Successour of S. Boniface in the Archiepiscopall See of Mentz which to this day remains among the Epistles of E. Boniface:
Ap. Bonifac. Ep. 70.2. In which Epistle he acquaints him:1. With their sincere affection to him and his fellow-bishops in those barbarous new-converted Regions: how ioyfull they all were of their prosperity, and how great a part they took in any calamity befalling them. 2. He adds that it was a great subject of ioy to them that their Nation of Brittany should have the Happines to send forth so many illustrious Preachers and Apostles, en|dued with such Spirituall courage as not to fear to encounter with Nations so feirce in their superstition; and with such spirituall Wisedom and knowledge as to perswade and induce them to forsake their ancient Idola|try. 3. He tells him that in this their General Synod they had unanimously decreed to ce|lebrate with an annuall Feast the fifth day of Iune, in commemoration of the glorious Martyrdom of Saint Boniface and his compa|nions, whom they chose, together with Saint Gregory and Saint Augustin, as their speciall Patron, and Intercessour with our Lord. 4. He desires that the same Charity and propinqui|ty may continue between both their Chur|ches, which was begun in the life time of S. Boniface, and that mutuall Prayers, and celebration of Masses on both sides may dayly be made for one another, both living and dead. 5. He admonishes him, that whereas in many places of late the State of Religion began to shake by the rising of New-Sects,

whilst unconstant and sensuall men deser|ting and contemning the Decrees of An|cient Fathers and Ecclesiasticall Laws,A. D. 755. invent and according to their own inventions pu|blish new Doctrines, prejudiciall to soules: therefore he and his Churches together with them ought to begg the intercessions of the Holy Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, that he would give them grace to continue con|stant in the Orthodox Faith, and Vnity of the Church. A good pattern and example of which constancy ought to be the late Fa|mous Doctour and Martyr of our Lord S. Boni|face, who willingly suffred all incommo|dities and dangers for the Faith: and who being now admitted as an houshold servant into the presence of God, as he will be a powerfull Defender of those who follow his example, so on the contrary he will be a ter|rible accuser before the Supreme Iudge of all such as shall forsake that Rule and Commu|nion with the Roman and Apostolick Church, which he allways followed.
Ap. Bonif. Ep. 74.. Other Letters likewise out of Brittany were written t this time to the same Holy Archbishop Lullus: one from his kinsman Kineara Bishop of Winchester, who two years before this succeeded in the place of Hum|frid: In which he desires him that the same Communion of Prayers and charitable Offices may continue between then which had in|tervened between Saint Boniface and S. Daniel and Humfrid his Predecessours.Ib. Ep. 78. A second from Milret Bishop of Worcester, signifying how a little before he had passed over into Germany to enioy the conversation o S. Boniface, and presently after his return heard the news of his deth: for which though at first he wa sad, yet the consideration of the great glory which he now enioyes, and what a glorious Patron and Pillar to all of his countrey he is now becom, his sorrow was quickly turned into ioy and thanks giving. He further exhorts him that the same mutuall Charity which S. Boniface had conciliated between them, may still continue, and that he would afford him his instructions, and Prayers, promising all Obedience to his commands, c.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. The unhappy death of Ethelbald King of the Mercians: and severall iudgments touching his future State.
5 6. Beornred, his murderer succeeds: and is expelled by Offa.

1. THE same year Ethelbald King of the Mercians after a raign of forty one years with great vicissitude of fortune, was taken out of the world by a violent death.Huntingd. f. 342. Huntingdon writes that Ethelbald figh|ting a second time against the West-Saxons at Se|cundune,A. D. 757. Westmon. A. D. 756. a wonderfull slaughter was made of his Army, and he disdaining to flye, was slain. Another Historian sayes, that though he fled, he could not avoyd being slain. Now this place of the Battell then called Secundun, is seated in the borders of Staffordshire and Warwickshire, about three miles from Tam|worth, and is now called Serkington.Epit. Bed. A. D. 757. Notwith|standing the Authour of the Epitome at the end of S. Beda's History affirms, that he was by treachery miserably slain in the night time by his own guards: So that it is probable this mis|fortune hapned to him after his flight from the said battell.
2. Being thus unhappily slain, his Body was buried at Repandun in the County of Darby:Camden in Darby f b. Which Town, saith Camden, wee now call Repto, which in ancient time was very ample and re|nowned, but now is straitned to a small village. It was formerly famous as having been the buriall-place of Ethelbald the good King of the Mercians, who by the treachery of his own servants was slain.Ingulf. f. 858. And Ingulfus adds that there was then at Ripedune a most famous Monastery where this Kings body was buried: But what became of his soule, the iudgments of God are uncertain to us.
3. The iudgments of men likewise con|cerning him are uncertain.Huntingd. . 4. f. 3.2. Huntingdon iudges hopelesly of his future state: For after he had related the sad, but iust death of the Tyrant Sigebert, he ioyns him thus with Ethel|bald, Behold (saith he) the manifest iudgment of God: Behold how our Lords justice retributes worthy punishments to mans demerits, not only in the world to come but even in this life also. For set|ting up wicked Kings for the punishment of their subjects: one he suffers to rage a long time for their longer vexation, and that such a King becoming by so long a continuance in wickednes more de|praved, he may in Hell be more sharply tormen|ted: as the forementioned King Ethelbold: An|other he quickly exterminates, c.
4. Yet other Writers passe a more favou|rable iudgment of his state. Camden calls him a good King: and certain it is that he shewed great signs of Repentance. Hence William of Malmsbury after he had produced S. Boniface his sharp letter to him,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 4. addes: Neither could the Letters of so great a Saint want effect which with so much circumspection and zeale he sent to him, as became the duty of an Apostolick Legat, and his Charity to his countreymen.
5. There succeeded in his place Beornred,A. D. 757. who yet by others is not reckoned among the Mercian Kings, because he impiously slew King Ethelbald, and uninstly usurped his place: from which he was cast by his worthy Successour King Offa. This is breifly thus rela|ted by Hoveden:Hoved. hic. In the year of Grace seaven hun|dred fifty seaven a civill warr was raised in the Kingdom of the Mercians, between the usurping Tyrant Beornred and Offa. But coming to a battell, Beornred was compelled to fly, and Offa by this vi|ctory became King.
6. Beornred being thus deposed, could find

no security among the Mercians, who all hated him, both high and low. He seems therefore to have fled into the Kingdom of the Northumbers: For twelve years after this wee find him acting the last exploit of his cruelty in that countrey, which was the bur|ning of the Citty called Cataract (now Catte|ridge.) But himself scaped not punishment long: for the same year he through the iust iudgment of God, perished likewise by fire: Thus writes Mathew of Westminster.


III. CHA.III. CHAP.

i 2. Pope Paul's Letter to Egbert King of the Northumbers.
3 4 King Egbert becomes a Monk.

1. THE same year Pope Steven dying there succeeded in his place Paul first of that name: From whom wee find an Epistle not yet published, directed to the two Nor|thumbrian Brethren, Egbert (or Eadbert) King of that countrey, and Egbert Bishop of York.In which he signifies to them how a certain Abbot called Fordred was lately come from thence to Rome, where he made his co~plaint to him, that whereas a certain Abbess had bestowed three Monasteries upon him, the names of which were Staning, Frago or Cucha|wald, and Donemade, the said King had vio|lently taken them from him, and bestowed them on his Brother the Prince Mol. In case this complaint was true, he desired the King to consider how great a crime and how dan|gerous to his soule it was, to invade places dedicated to the service of God, taking them from him who was ready to perform that service, and bestowing them on another who was wholly immersed in worldly cares.
2. What successe this Epistle had, it does not appear Onely this is certain, that at this time the Kingdom of the Northumbers was full of disquiets. The year before this, the King with the help of the Picts had taken from the Northern Brittains, or Cumbrians, the Strong Castle of Dunbritton, as he had a little before, from the Scotts, the Territory of Coyle, or Kie by which means probably his treasure being exhausted, he was forced to reward his Brother Mollo's services out of Church re|venews. However it is not to be doubted but that a King so pious as Egbert was, would not resist the Fatherly admonitions of so worthy a Pope.
3. An irrefragable proof that he would not persist in such injustice was this, that pre|sently after he heroically contemned all worldly glory to serve God in solitude and devotion. Which is thus related by Hunting|don (with whom generally all other Histo|rins agree.) In the third year of the raign of Kernulf King of the West-Saxons (saith he) Ead|bert King of the Northumbers seeing the un|happy lives and miserable deaths of the two Kings Ethelbald and Sigebert,Huntingd. Westmon. hic. Wigorn. hic. and with them compa|ring the landabe life and glorious death of his Predecessour Ceololf, he wisely chose the better part, which shall never be taken from him. For re|linquishing his Kingdom (which he resigned to his son Osul) and receiving a Monasticall Ton|sure which would procure for him an eternall Crown, cloathing himself likewise with dark simple rayment, for which he should afterward receive vestments hining with a heavenly splen|dour, he retired into a Monastery. This now is the eighth of those Saxon Kings who for the Love of Christ quitted, or to speak more truly, for the hope of an infinitly more glorious celestiall Kingdom willingly exchanged an earthly throne: And no doubt the eight Beatitudes shall be their rewars which are promised to voluntary Poverty. Now the Tonsure which he received is by the Au|thour of the Epitome of S. Beda's History called the Tonsure of S. Peter:Epit. S. Bed. hic. from whence some would inferr that he did not become a Monk, but a secular Clark. But besides that all our Historians almost affirm expressly that he li|ved afterward and happily dyed in a Mona|sticall Profession: That phrase of the Tonsure of S. Peter signifies that it was not the Scottish, but Roman Tonsure which he received, and which then was common both to the Se|lar Clergy and Religious persons also. Yet withall that in his Monastery he was adopted to an Eclesiasticall State and order is testified by Hveden.
4. Ten years this good King lived in his solitude and poverty: after which he recei|ved the reompence of his Piety. His memo|ry remained in benediction with posterity:Martyr. Ange 11 Iunij. Ap Capgr. in vit. Saint Cuthbert. and his Name is in our Martyrologe comme|morated among the Saints on the eleaventh day of Iune. Wee read in the Authour of S. Cuthberts life in Capgrave, that there was a great freindship between this good King  th famous French King Pipin, who likewise sent many Royall presents to him.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2. Of S. Agatha a devout English Ab|besse in Germany.
 4 c The Gsts of the Holy Virgin Saint Lioba, an Abbesse also there.
14 Blasphemies of the Lutheran Centuria|tors.
15.16 c Of Saint Tetta an English Abbesse of Winburn: Mistresse of S. Lioba.

1. THE same year two Holy Virgins Dis|ciples of S. Boniface, happily followed

him to Heaven.A. D. 755. These were S. Agathe and S. Lioba: both of them educated in the Mona|stery of Winburn, and both esteemed fitt to be invited out of Brittany to establish Mona|sticall Discipline and piety in Germany, where they were likewise both of them constitu|ted Abbesses of the same Monastery succes|sively.
2. The name indeed of S. Agatha is not found among those who at S. Boniface's in|vitation went into Germany in the year seaven hundred twenty five: so that it seems she was sent afterward. Little is spoken of her in ancient Writers, but only that she was Abbesse of the Monastery of Bischosheim after that S. Lioba had resigned that Office, to undertake another nearer to Mentz. It is a sufficient Proof of her piety that her Name is commemorated among the Saints on the twenty eighth of Iune.Martyrolog. Angl 28. Iun
3. But the Name and Sanctity of S. Lioba was much better known in the Church. Her Life was first written by Mogon a Monk of Fulda, and afterwards better digested by Ro|dolphus another Monk there, at the command of his Abbot, Rabanus Maurus. And out of him Haraeus thus compendiously recounts her Gests:Haraeus 28. Septemb.4. At the time when the Venerable Abbesse Tetta Sister to King (Ethelhard, Kinsman and successour of Ina in the kingdom of the West-Saxons) governed the Monastery of Religious Vir|gins at a place called Winburn (in Dorcetshire) there lived in the same Monastery a spirituall daughter of that devout Mother, called Lioba: Whose Gests my purpose is breifly here to relate.
5. The parents of S. Lioba remained a long time after their mariage without children. Her Fathers name was Dimo, her Mothers Ebba: both of noble race, and both of great piety. At length God bestowed on them this daughter: (to whom they gave the name Truthgeba: but her or|dinary sirname was Lioba which in the Saxon tongue signifies Beloved: Which sirname continuing, made the other forgotten.) Assoon as she came to mature years her mother recommended her to the education of the foresaid Venerable Abbesse Tetta: under whom she em|ployed her self entirely in the studies of heavenly Disciplin. She was diligent also in imitating what soever vertues and graces she observed in any of her Religious Sisters. Hereby she attained to that Perfection, that in succeeding time God was pleased to honour her with a celestiall Vision signifying to her under the semblance of a purple thread issuing out of her mouth (in such abun|dance, that she wound it into a large bot|tom, as much as her hands could contain) that the Doctrine of Divine Wisedom should by her be communicated to many soules abroad.
6. At that time S. Boniface laboriously spread the Gospell among the people of Germany: Who among other works of Spirituall industry had an intention to erect a Monastery of Religious Virgins in that Region. And being desirous to constitute Superiour and Abbesse of it a Spirituall Mother of eminent piety, he sent messengers with Letters to the foresaid Abbesse Tetta,A. D. 750. desiring amon others that this Religious Virgin Lioba might be sent, being one whose Sanctity and learning was in great esteem. Her Spirituall Mother was very unwilling to have her depart from her: Notwith+standing for accomplishing the foresaid Vision God enclined her mind to send her honourably to the Blessed Bishop. He with great veneration re|ceived her, and appointed her Abbesse of a Mona|stery in a place called Biscoffsheim: where a con|siderable congregation of Religious Virgins was gathered together, which by the example and in|structions of so holy a Mistresse diligently gave themselves to the study of heavenly Disciplin, in which by her assistance they so much proffited, that scarce any other Monasteries of Virgins were founded, which did not desire from this some of her disciples to be Mistresses of spirituall and Re|gular Disciplin.
7. For indeed S. Lioba was a woman of ad|mirable vertues, eminent in prudence, boundlesse in Charity, and for her aspect of Angelicall beauty She allways had a chearfull smiling look yet never so as to break forth into unseemly laughter. Never did any one hear proceed from her lips a word of reproachfull or bitter speech against any. Though she was very kind and liberall in her allowance of meat and drink to others, yet to her sef she was extremely sparing: insomuch as the little Cup which contained her measure of drink was by her Sisters commonly called the Small Cup of the Be|loved (for so the name of Lioba in the Saxon tongue signifies) But withall it was wonder|full to observe the diligence which she always shewd in reading. From her infancy she was per|fectly instructed in the knowledge of Grammar and other Liberall Sciences. And afterward she in a manner incessantly with great sharpnes stu|died and medicated on the Sacred Books of the Old and New Testament, diligently committing to her memory the divine Precepts therin contai|ned. Moreover for a plenitude of perfect knowledge she added thereto the Sayings of the Holy Fathers, the Decrees of Synods and the entire Ecclesiasti|call Laws. She was a mistresse to all, and yet bot in heart she esteemed, and in behaviour shewed her self as the meanest of all.
8. It cannot be doubted but such a specta|cle of all vertue and piety was most greivous to the Enemy of all good, and that it horribly inflamed his envy and malice. He used all his arts to corrupt the purity both of such a Mistresse and her Disciples. And that no succeding, he endeavoured to cast a stai upon them in the worlds opinion: For which purpose this Infernall Tempter incite a certain poor woman who had had a child by for|nication,d. ib. to cast it into a river which passed through the said Monastery. But this being discovered what does that chast Congregation doe? They al betook themselves to prayer, unanimously and earnestly beseeching God to remove that infamy from them. Every one of them lifting up their arms in manner of a Crosse, stood unmoveable till they had recited the whole Psalter in order: Th

they did when all the neigbouring people were ga|thered to see that horrible spectacle of the mur|dred infant And our mercifull God did not delay to discover and punish the injury and scandall done to his devout Hand-maids.A. D. 757. For presently after, that wretched woman possessed by the Devill whose captive she had made her self, ran among them, and loudly calling the Holy Abbesse by name, openly confessed the crime which she had committed. At which the whole multitude asto|nished made great clamours, and the Religious Virgins wept for ioy. In a word the merit and Sanctity of the Holy Virgin Lioba was celebrated by all.
9. In the mean time the Blessed man of God S. Bo|niface by a Martyrdom, much desired by him, putts an end to all his labours. Notwithstanding the want of so worthy and Venerable a Master does not discourage this holy Virgin, who continued un|moveable, fixing her hope in the assistance of God alone.
10. She was held in great reverence by all that knew her, even Princes also, Pipin King of France and especially his illustrious son Charles, who often invited her to his Court, and honoured her with many magnificent presents. The Queen Hildegar|dis likewise respected her with a pure affection,  as earnest with her to make her aboad at her Court. But she detested the tumult of a Palace, as poyson. Princes loved her, Nobles honoured her, Bi|shops with great ioy vencrated her: yea moreover considering her prudence in counsell, and perfect knowledge in Scriptures and Sacred learning, they often consulted her about Divine Mysteries and Ecclesiasticall Instituts.
11. But she employed her principall solicitude about mattes belonging to her own charge which she had undertaken. Therefore as became a spiri|tuall Guide of soules, she diligently visited the Monasteries under her care, inciting her Religious Virgins to a holy emulation in aspiring to the glo|ry of Perfection This was her continuall exercise and employment, till being weakned with old age, after she had putt into good Order all the Monaste|ries commended to her care, by the advice of the Holy Arch-bishop Lullus Successour to Saint Bo|niface, she retired her self to a Monastery called Schoversheim, four miles distant from the Citty of Mentz southward: Where she abode till her death, with devout Virgins there serving our Lord, spending nights and days in fasting and prayers.
12. This Blessed Virgin dyed on the twenty eighth day of September: and the Monks of Fulda recei|ving her Sacred Body, caried it in solemn Proces|sion, at which many Noble persons attended, to their own Monastery, where according the or|der formerly given by the Holy Martyr S. Boni|face, they entombed it and there it became glo|rious by many Miracles. Notwithstanding whereas S. Boniface had commanded that her Body should be layd in his own Sepulcher, the said Monks his Disciples not thinking it expe|dient to open his Tomb, and discover his Sa|cred bones, durst not presume so far to obey him: for which reason they reposed her Body in a Tomb near adioyning thereto. And this was the only Body of that Sexe which ever was permitted to enter into that Monastery. Her Memory is celebrated both in the En|glish and Roman Martyrologe on the fourth day before the Calends of October,Martyrolog. Rom.  Ang. 28. Sept. Bonif. Ep. 31. Ib. Ep 36. on which day she dyed.
13. Her name is also written Liobgytha, and so S. Boniface writes it in a short Epistle to her, and herself also in an answer to him, in which she shewes that he had formerly been ioynd in a great league of freindship with her Father, whom she calls Tinne, who lived in the Western parts of Brittany; and that he was also a kinsman to her Mother Ebbe.
14. This is the Summ of what we find recor|ded concerning this Blessed Virgin, the miracle of her age for her learning and sanctity, the object  universall admiration and affectio~ of Princes, Queens, Nobles, Bishops and all that knew her: Onely envied and hated by the Devill because she was a Virgin consecrated to God: this incited him to endeavour, but in vain, to cast a spott upon the opinion of her Chastity: and the same likewise has of late in|cited his Ministers the Lutheran Centuriatours of Magdeburg to renew his calumny, yea and to enwrap S. Boniface also in the same suspi|cion.Magdeb. cent. 8. f. 796.  801. Because he erected Monasteries and taught Prayer for the dead, they call him a Mi|nister and slave of Satan: And because he brought Religious Virgins out of Brittany into Germany, they write thus: He drew out of En|gland with him a flock of women: among whom the prinipall were Chunitruda Aunt to Lullus Archbishop of Mentz, and Valdopyrga, these he placed in Bavaria: Then Chynilda and Beregi|tha, whom he left in Thuringia: lastly Tecla and Lioba, whom he settled in France: to the end that in all his perambulations up and down, he might every where find lascivious Mistresses. What a horrible Religion must that be which such men as these professe, which even ac|knowledges it self to be odious to God and man, unlesse the Teachers of it can demon|strate, that the consecrating of soules to Gods service in continuall fasting and prayer, the mortifying of all lustfull passions, the dedicating both soule and Body to devotion and chastity, and such Chastity attested by Divine Miracles, the converting of many Nations to Christ from abominable Idolatries, and lastly the offring of ones life to God by Martyrdom be sinfull crimes, and proofs that such persons are slaves of Anti-Christ!
15. Wee have placed the Gests and death of S. Lioba in this year, therein complying with our Martyrologe though certain it be that she ourlived it many years: as appears by the freindship she had with King Charles the Great, and his Queen Hildegardis, who long after this began his raign and was ma|ried.
16. Before wee take off our pen from

writing of this Holy Virgin, wee will adde some thing in relation to her concerning her Venerable Mistresse the devout Abbesse Tetta: The little wee know of her name, and that to her was committed the instruction of S. Lioba, we have not received from our own Monuments, but wee are obliged to strangers who wrote her daughter and Dis|ciples Gests, for it: particularly to the fore|named Religious Preist Mog, who had parti|cular knowledge of her Disciples, Agatha, Tecla, Nana and Lioba, from whose relation he received what he wrote of her.
17. From him therefore shall here be re|lated only two particulars concerning her: the first is the speciall Institut of her Mona|stery: the Second, a worthy example of her Charity to her daughters after they were dead and her care of the living.
Vit. S. Liobae ap. Sur. 28 Sept.18. As touching the first: Whereas at Win|burn there had anciently been built by the West-Saxon Kings two Monasteries, one for men, and the other for women: and in that age of innocent simplicity and fervour of Devotion mutuall free society between per|sons of different sexes did not render them exposed to tentations, or suspicions: Yet in her Monastery an inviolable Law was obser|ved that no accesse was permitted for either to the others enclosure. And this speciall In|stitut the Venerable Abbesse Tetta so rigo|rously observed, that she would not so much as admitt the Bishops entrance among them.
19. In the next place among many examples of the Devout Abbesse Tetta's vertues, her daughter Lioba related this one to her Dis|ciples for their instruction: There was, said she, in the Monastery of Winburn a certain Re|ligious Virgin, which for her extraordinary stri|ctnes in Regular Observance was oft made the Mistresse of the younger Virgins. But in that Of|fice she shewed such indiscreet rigour, that there|by she incurred an extreme aversion and hatred from them which she never endeavoured to qua|lify by meeknes: but on the contrary persisted to her death in her obstinacy to contemn their bitter displeasure against her, and not to remitt any thing of her severity towards them. In this perti|nacy she dyed, without seeking any reconciliation with them. But their passions did not dye with her: on the contrary they could scarce look on the place where she was buried without expressions of hatred to her memory: yea some of them would not abstain from shewing their indignation by trampling upon her grave.
20. This being come to the knowledge of the Venerable Abbesse Tetta, she called them together about the grave, where she with vehement sharp|nes reproved their uncharitable presumption. But withall observing that the loose earth cove|ring the dead Virgins body was unmeasurably sunk below the pavement, she was much affrigh|ted at it, fearing that such depression against the ordinary course of Nature, argued no good state of her soule: She renewed her rebukes therefore against those implacable Virgins,A. D. 758. and enioynd them to cast out of their hearts all bitternes against her Memory: Yea she required the whole Congregation to ioyn with her in earnest and assi|duous Prayers for their departed Sister, that God would forgive her all her offences committed by indiscretion or obstinacy. She moreover ordaind among them a three-days Fast, adiuring them to employ that time in watching, Prayers and Psal|mody. On the third day she with all her spirituall children lying prostrate before the Altar in de|vout Prayers with many sighs and tears, assoon as they rose up they saw the earth upon the grave raised up to its naturall height: which they did not doubt but was a sign that their Prayers were granted.


V. CHAP.V. CHAP.

1. Troubles among the Northumbers.
2.3. c. The Gests of Offa King of the Mer|cians.

1. IN the kingdom of the Northumbers,A. D. 758. as|soon as the pious and devout King Ead|bert had hid himself in a Monastery, all vertue and piety seemed to disappear with him: and in the place to succeed nothing but tumults, rage and treasons. His young son Osulf to whom he had surrendred the kingdom, in the space of one year,Hoved. hic. saith Hoveden, held it and lost it: For on the ninth day before the Calends of August the year after his Father had instituted him in it, he was impiously slain by his own fami|ly: His tender age and innocence rendring him obnoxious and exposed to treachery. His Successour was his Vncle Edilwald, sirna|med Mul or Mollo, mentioned before: who is sayd to have contributed to his Nephews murder. And though he was a man of great courage and prudence, yet he found there could be no security in power obtaind by crimes: for not long after he likewise came to a tragicall end.
2. But among the Mercians a far more pro|sperous fate attended the new King Offa, who had driven the Tyrant Beorred out of the kingdom, and was by the unanimous con|sent of the people placed in his Throne, which he held the space of thirty nine years. His Royall descent is thus described by Hun|tingdon:Huntingd. l. 4. The most Noble Prince Offa (saith he) was the son of Wingferd, the son of Eanulf, the son of Osmod, the son of Epus, the son of Wippa, the son of Creada, the son of Kinewal, the son of Knibba, the son of Icel, the son of Eomer, the son of Agel|then, the son of Offa, the son of Weremond, the son of Withald, the son of Woden. Mathew of West|minster stops not here in his Genealogy, but goes on till he brings him up to Adam.
3. As for Mathew a Monk of Saint Albans,Math. Alban. Mon. his fictions either contrived or beleived

by him wee will neglect,A. D. 759. who out of a par|tiall affection to Offa the founder of his Mo|nastery recounts how he being the only son of his Father was born blind and dumb, for which cause he was at first called Pinered: But afterward God miraculously restored his sight, and gave liberty to his tongue, more|over bestowing on him a beautifull wife, happy children and great triumphs over his enemies:
In acknowledgment for which blessings he founded the said Monastery.M. Paris in Offa. 2. f. 11.
4. As soon as King Offa was crownd and esta|blished in his Throne, saith Mathew Paris, peace and prosperity flourishd again among the Mercians: the people were eased of their former pressures, the Regal Blood was restored, Laws for publick tranquillity were enacted, and the Nobles formerly banished out of the Kingdom by Be|ornred, were recalled.
5. We shall have occasion very frequently to treat of the actions of this Noble King. Therefore at present we will only adioyn the Character in generall given to him by William of Malmsbury:Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 4. King Offa (saith he) the great grand child of Penda was a man of mighty courage and magnanimity, who reso|lutely undertook whatsoever design he once con|ceived in his mind: and he raigned the space of nine and thirty years. When I revolve in my mind his Gests, in which there was great variety, I am in great doubt whether I should recken him among the Good or evill Kings, such an inter|changeable vicissitude there was of vertues and vices in him, who like another Proteus was always changing his form and features.


VI. CHA.VI. CHAP.

1.2.3. Cuthred Arch-bishop of Canter|bury dying, gave order that his body should be buried in the Archiepisco|pall Church: to the prejudice of Saint Augustins Monastery.
4. Bregwin succeeds him.
5.6. S. Eadburga Abbesse. Six Saints of the same name.

Malmsb. l. 1. f. 198.1. THE same year Cuthred Arch-bishop of Canterbury, after he had admi|nistred that See seaventeen years, dyed. When he was ready to dye, saith William of Malmsbury, he commanded his servants to bury him privatly in his Archiepiscopall Church which was built within the walls of the Citty. And because the Monks of S. Augustin, whose Monastery was seated without the said Citty, by an Ancient custom which they were stubboraly constant to observe, did challenge as their vn|doubted right that the Bodies of the Arch-bi|shops should be buried in their Church, in so much as they would probably endeavour even by vio|lence to take away with them his Body after he was dead: therfore he enioynd his family, as soon as he was dead to abstain from any noise in beway|ling his death, both in the Citty and Palace, so that no notice of his death being given abroad, there might be no concourse of people, and by that means they might without disturbance bury him in the Archiepiscopall Church, and not apprehend any danger that the Monks would take him out of the ground, when they should perceive how they had been overreached by cun|ning.
2. But B. Godwin relates,Godvv. de Archiep. Can|tuar. that the Tradition was that the Body of Arch-bishop Cuthbert was not buried in the Archiepiscopall Church it self, called Christ-Church, but in another lesser Church seated near it and dedicated to S. Iohn, which he had built on purpose for baptizing infants: and which both himself and his successours vsed in their life time for a Consistory, and for a place of buriall after they were dead. Moreover that this Church in after ages having been consumed by fire together with the Cathedrall Church, was never after rebuilt.
3. The motive inducing the Arch-bishop to make this change,Spelm. de Synod l. 1. f. 29. was, in the iudgment of Sir Henry Spelman, a kind of indignation that his Cathedrall Church should be deprived of the honour of being a sepulcher of eminent persons, and particularly of Arch-bishops who had performed all Episcopall duties in it. Therefore in as much as till that time there had no buriall places been permitted within Citties,Ib. f. 11. he had recourse to the Pope for a dispensation from that obligation: and to the King for a change of the place of buriall both for Arch-bishops and Kings.
Notwithstanding if the foregoing relation be true, what need was there of that subtilty to circumvent the Augustinian Monks, who doubtlesse would not have had the boldnes to contradict the Orders both of the Pope and King?
4. The year following there was substitu|ted to Cuthbert in the Archiepiscopall See,A. D. 759. Godvv de Arch. Cant. Bregwin, who was consecrated on the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel. This Bregwin, according as we read in the Antiquities of Brittany,Antiq. Brit. in Bregvvin. was born in old Saxony of noble pa|rents: After he had passed his childhood he be|took himself to the study of sacred learning: to which he had so great an affection, that for ad|vantaging himself in his studies he passed over into Brittany, quite forsaking his native soile. After some abode in Brittany, he was for his modesty and vertue so much in generall esteem and favour, that he had the priviledge of na|turalization. And he made so great progresse in sacred knowledge, that he alone was esteemed worthy to be the successour to Cuthbert in the Archbishoprick. After which he did so excell in all good works, that not any in his time ap|proached within many degrees to him.
5. At that time the Holy Virgin and Ab|besse Eadburga, sirnamed Buggan, also dyed, It is no wonder there should be some con|fusion in Writers touching her and other Saints of the same name: Of which no lesse then six are recorded in our Ecclesiasticall Mo|numents.

The first was S. Eadburga of Win|chester, commemorated on the fifteenth of Iune: The second S. Eadburga the Elder of Kent: the Third, S. Eadburga of Peterborough: the Fourth S. Eadburga of Glocester: the Fifth S. Eadburga of Aylsbury: And this sixth Saint Eadburga sirnamed Buggan, of whom we now treat. There will follow still another Saint Eadburga, the daughter of King Edward the elder.
6. It is hard to discover who were her parents. Probably this may be the Buggan who was daughter to Kentwin King of the West-Saxons, and who is mentioned by Aluin in his Poems as a great Benefactrice to the Abbey of Glastenbury, where she built an Altar dedicated to the twelve Apostles. The same likewise who sent to S Guthlac a Coffin of lead, in which his body was deposed: To her S. Boniface being then a Preist, wrote concerning the strange Visions of one who had been dead and was restored to life, among which Visions one was touching the damnation of King Coenred. And another in which he requested her to send him the pistles of S. Peter in golden Letters. Her Mo|ther Eangitha who was Abbesse of a Monaste|ry in Kent in a Letter written to the same S. Boniface in the year of Grace seaven hun|dred twenty five, gave him an account of the great persecutions which her self and her daughter suffred, as likewise the pover|ty of their condition, having neither Father, Brother, Son nor uncle to support her. And she not long after dying, her daughter Saint Eadburga, or Buggan, was constituted Abbesse in her place. Once, with the permission of S. Boniface her Spirituall Father, she un|dertook a pilgrimage of devotion to Rome, where also she found him, who from thence returned to Germany, and she to her Mona|stery in Brittany.
7. Most of these particulars we have in passing touched already: and little more is to be found of her but her death, which was like her life precious in the sight of our Lord. In her last sicknes she seems to have been assisted by the new consecrated Bishop Bregwin, of whom the Holy Virgin ear|nesty requested his prayers for her after her death, and that he would recommend the same request to S. Lullus the successour of S Boniface in the Archrepiscopll See of Mentz:Ap. Bonif. ep. 103. which he faithfully performed, as appears by an Epistle of his to the same Lullus, to the conclusion of which this Postscript is added: We doe now celebrate the day of the deposition of the Religious servant of Christ Buggan which is the sixth before the Calends of Ianuary. Before she dyed she desired me with great earnestnes that I would transmitt this to your holines.Martyr. Ang. 18. Iulij. Therefore as she hoped and beleived, I beseech you be carefull to perform, in consideration withall that her Spirituall Father and Patron in Christ was the Holy Bishop Boniface. In our Martyro|loge she enioys a place among the Saints on the eighteenth of Iuly:A. D. 760. if this be the same S. Eadburga who gave the name to a Village called Eadburton near Ailesbury.


VII. CHAP.VII. CHA.

1.2 c. The Gests and happy death of S. Liebwin an English Apostolick Missioner in Germany.
14. Gregory Arch-bishop of Vtrecht dying Alberic succeeds him.

1. WE formerly declared how among the twelve Apostolick Prests which in the year of Christ six hundred and ninety by the exhortations of S. Egbert passed over into Germany,A D. 760. one was called Liebwin. Besides whom there was a second of the same Name, who with the same design followed, about the time of S. Boniface his Martyrdom: who after a zealous discharge of his Apostolick Office, dyed with great sanctity in the year of Grace seaven hundred and sixty: Whose Life was anciently written by a Monk of the Monastery of Marchien (Elnonensis) at the request of Baldric Arch-bishop of Vtrecht, and much commended by Peter Arch-deacon of Cambray. From whom we will here ad|ioyn an account of his Gests.
2. He was born of English Parents in Brit|tany,Hcbald vit. S. bain. ap. Sur. 12. Nov. whose names are not recorded, but their piety was shewed by his good educa|tion in learning and vertue. He was in his younger years adopted into an Ecclesiasticall condition, having received the Clericall Ton|sure: Afterward in due time he was exalted to Preist-hood; to the end he might commu|nicate to others such graces and gifts as God had bestowed on him. And considering the greater necessity which other forrain Nations, particularly Germany, had of the fruits o his knowledge and zeale, then his own countrey, and invited thereto by that which would deterre a lesse courageous servant of God, which was danger: he left his kinred and freinds and passed over to Vtrecht, an|ciently called Wittenburg.
5. The time of his arrivall there, was pre|sently after the Martyrdom of S. Boniface: and there finding a Venerable man, the third Bishop of that place named Gregory, who had been newly ordained there, having been a Preist and disciple of S. Boniface, he declared to him the occasion and design of his iour|ney. Whereupon the Holy Bishop much re|ioycing in our Lord to see the operation of his Grace, encouraged him to be constant, and giving him for a Companion the Venera|ble Disciple of S. Willebrord, Marcellin, he directed them to a place designed by Al|mighty God near the Rver Isel, in the confines between the Saxons and French.
4. Being come thither, he lodged some space of time with a certain Widdow called Abachilda: and there with touch charity

and confidence preached the Gospell to the neighbouring Pagans: many of which he in|duced to forsake their Idolatry, and embrace the Christian Faith. By the assistance of these new Converts he built a little Oratory at a place called Wilpa, on the Western bank of the River Isel. And not long after, the multitude of Beleivers encreasing he built another greater Oratory on the East side of the same River, together with a convenient habita|tion adioyning. There the Man of God with great devotion and chearfullnes celebrated Masses, and mortifyed himself with assiduous watching and Fasting: and withall entertai|ned with much chearfullnes all that came to him, feeding their soules with the Word of Grace; by which means he wan the affection of persons of higher condition living near that place.
5. But the Dewill enraged to see the number of his adorers diminished, suggested and communicated to his servants, devoted to him, a great proportion of his envy and ma|lignity: who first complayning, afterward conspired to destroy the Man of God, and to burn the Sacred House, which they called a Scene of Magicall Superstitions. And this they effected: for rushing on him in great multi|tudes, they sett fire to his Oratory and house: But God would not permitt them to execute their malice upon him, but preserved him unhurt for the salvation of many.
6, The Holy man was so far from being disheartned by this, that he attempted an exploit far more Herocall. The Nation of the Saxons had no King or generall Supreme Go|vernour, but consisting of three degrees or orders, the Nobles, whom they call Edlingen: Free-men, whom they called Frilingen: and Servants whom they called Lass: every Bo|rough or District was governed by a Noble man to whom the Freemen and Servants were Subjects. Now every year once, their cu|stome was to hold a generall Assembly of all these Boroughs and all degrees of Inhabitants. The place of their meeting was called Marklo nea he River Weser.
7. Now this great Assembly being ready to meet, the Man of God S. Leibwin had a resolu|tion to present himself before it, and there either to gain a good number of Converts to God or Martyrdom to himself. It hapned that at this time he was entertained in the house of a certain Noble man of great Power, to whom he communicated his intention. But the said Noble man (whose name was Folbert) endeavoured to disswade him, telling him that though there were some to whom he was very dear, yet the greatest part would shew themselves enemies, and endanger to take away his life. He besought him there|fore during the time of the Assembly either to return home, or to goe to the house of his dear freind Davo: after which he might come and visi him again. But the Holy man replied, That he neither ought nor durst neglect to perform the work which our Lord Iesus Christ had commanded him to doe. The Noble man hea|ring this opposed no further, but remained very sad.
8. The Assembly then being mett, the cou|rageous soldier of Christ, taking all his Spi|rituall Armour, and withall cloathing him|self with his Preistly Vestments, and taking a Crucifix in one hand, as our Lords Ensign-bearer, and in the other a Book of the Gospells, presents himself in the midst of the Assem|bly, where they were offring Idolatrous Sacri|fices and devotions to their false Gods. Which the Holy man seeing, with an inflamed zeale  loud voyce condemned their Superstitions, telling them that they were Devills which they worshipped, which would reward them with eternall torments. Whereas if they would turn to the only true God the Creatour of all things and Saviour of men, and repenting of their Idolatries embrace the true Faith and be baptized to the remis|sion of their Sins, he would grant them tran|quillity and plenty in this world, and ever|lasting glory in the next. He added hereto, That if they neglected to follow his whole|som and saving counsell, God had preordai|ned for their present punishment a King not far distant from them, of wonderfull prudence, courage and power, who would avenge the cause of God by their destru|ction.
9 When they heard these words, they be came inflamed with rage against him, cal|ling him Seducer and Impostour: and not con|tent with this, they snatchd out of the hedges stakes of wood, which they sharpned, inten|ding to kil him with them: for they wore no weapons at such assemblies. But the Holy man protected by Supernaturall assistance, pas|sed through the midst of them undiscerned, and so escaped.
10. Yet among them some there were whose earts Amighty God touched with his Grace Of whch the principall was one called Buo, who ascending to an eminent place, boldly told them, that since they never refu|sed to receive and hearken to Embassadours sent from their barbarous neighbours: much lesse ought they to stop their ears against the speeches of an Embassadour sent from the Su|preme God, who to procure their good was willing to sacrifice his own life. That they might iudge of the power of that God, since he had delivered his servant from the fury of so great a multitude. Therefore no doubt the threatning which in the name of his God he had made against them, would certainly be executed. The mind of the Multitude hearing these things, was deeply struck with fear: and thereupon they decreed by common consent, That none should hurt or disquiet that Messenger of God, but suffer him freely to passe whithersoever he thought fitt.
11. Saint Liebwin therefore seeing such a

visible proof of Divine protection over him gave due thanks to God: though he was not without some greif that the blessing of Martyrdom was denyed him. But since he could not suffer from others, he spared not to afflict himself, mortifying and cruci|fying the flesh and sensuall affections of it with Watching, Fasting and Prayer: by which mean without persecution he suffred a long Martyrdom. And as for the Apostolick Office enioynd him, he incessantly employed his time in teaching, exhorting and baptizing great multitudes which dayly gave up their names to Christ. This he ceased not to doe till Almighty God this year thought meet to call him to receive the reward of a good and faithfull servant, on the day before the Ides of November: on which day his memory is celebrated both in the English and Gallican Martyrologe.Martyr. Augl 12. Novemb.
12. After his death certain malicious Pa|gans among the Saxons envying so great a Congregation of Christians as assembled in his Oratory, first despoyled the place, and then sett it on fire. They had a great desire to exercise their rage by some indignities to his Sacred Body, but with all their diligence in seeking it, they could never find it.
13. Not long after the said Oratory was again restored. It was built in the haven of the Citty called afterwards Daventry: Which name it took from the foremen|tioned person Davon, a Noble man of Sa|xony, and most cordiall freind and Disciple of S. Liebwin.
14. In the mean time the devout servant of God Gregory dyed, and Alberic succeeded him in the Archiepiscopall See of Vtrecht. By his directions and command a certain Preist, (afterward a Bishop) named Ludger was sent to seek out the Sacred Relicks of this Holy man of God: which at last by a vision in sleep he was directed to find: and having taken them up, he with great veneration deposed them in the Church new built. Many years after this, Bertulf accounted the twentieth Bishop of Vtrecht, is said to have been the founder of another Magnificent Church in the same Town, which was consecrated to the honour of God and his faithfull servant Saint Liebwin.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of Saint Winne|bald.
5. And of Saint Sola.

1. THE same year likewise gave an end to the labours of two Disciples of S. Boniface, S. Winnebald and S. Sola. As touching the former, he was, as hath been sayd, Son to Saint Richard the English King; and Brother to S. Willebald. There little remains in Ecclesiasticall Monuments recorded of him, but that he was one of those Preists which in the year of Grace seaven hundred twenty five were called out of Brittany to assist S. Boniface in preaching to the Frisons. He was by the same Saint afterward made Abbot of the Monastery of Heildesham. Which Office did not so wholly employ him, but that he travelled the countrey about to root out Idolatrous superstitions.
2. The greatest difficulty he found was in reprooving and correcting the errours and vices of false Christians, especially such as took on them the title and Office of Preists: Many of which were most horribly depra|ved, and defiled with all manner of un|cleannes These were so impatient of re|formation, that they endeavoured many wayes to destroy him, who spared no labours to save them. But God defended his servant from their malice.
3. After many years spent, and divided between the exercises of Martha and Mary, sometimes attending in the solitude of his Monastery to Prayer and Contemplation, as like|wise to the establishing perfect Regular Ob|servance: and sometimes travelling abroad to win soules to Christ: At last a greivous infir|mity seized on him, nowithstanding which he would needs undertake a iourney to vi|sit his fellow Disciple Megingant then Bishop of Wizteburg, with whom he staied only three dayes: For returning homeward, his infir|mity encreasing he retired to a Monastery in the way dedicated to S Benedict. Being there, he sent to his Brother S. Willebald who was a Bishop, and to other his freinds, desiring them to visit and assist him in his last sicknes. Who being come, exhibited to him all re|quisit Offices of Christian Charity. At last the Holy man perceiving his last hour to ap|proach, after many pious exhortations made to all that were present, quietly yeilded up his soule to God.
4. S. Ludger who wrote the life of S. Gre|gory the third Bishop of Vtrecht,Ludger. invit. S Gregor. ap. Sur.
Marty. Angl. 24. Sep. his Master, af|firms that S. Winnebald was very dear to him, who by many Miracles after his death, shewd how great the sanctity of his life had been. His memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the four and twentieth of September: but in the Gallican on the first of May: Where men|tion is made of his Relicks translated to Furnes a town in Flanders.
5. The other Disciple of S. Boniface was S. Sola, an English-Saxon likewise: who emu|lating the piety of his Master, taught the Counsells of Christian Perfection to such as S. Boniface had converted to the Faith. He accompanied S. Winnebald and S. Willebald in their pilgrimages to Rome: And was after|ward the first Abbot of a Monastery founded by himself,Ap. Sur. 10. Decemb. in a place from him called Solen|hoffen. His Life is extant written above eight

hundred years since by Ermenold a Deacon and Disciple of Rabanus Arch-bishop of Mentz:A. D. 762. Wherin wee read how he became a Father of a great congregation of devout Monks: and after many blind, lame, dumb and deaf miraculously healed by him in the name of Iesus, he at last full of all vertues in a good old age gave up his Spirit to God. About a hundred years after his death, Altimus Bi|shop of Eysat obstained of Pope Gregory the fourth, that his name shuld be written among the Saints. Molanus affirms that his Feast is celebrated on the third of De|cember.


IX. CH.IX. CHAP.

1.2. c. A Rebellion among the Northum|bers, c.
4.5. Bregvin Arch-bishop of Canterbury dying: Iambert succeeds.
6.7. c. Severall Episcopall Sees vacant, supplied.

A. D. 761.1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred hundred sixty one, which was the third of the Raign of Ethelwald Mol King of the Northumbers,Hoved. hic. a certain Nobleman of that kingdom named Oswin raised a rebellion against the said King: and Armies on both sides being brought into the feild, a terrible battell was fought at a place called Edwins|cliff: in which Oswin was slain.
A. D. 762.2. The year following the same King in the Citty of Cataract took to wife his Queen called Edilthrida. As touching the Citty where this Mariage was celebrated Camden writes,Camd. in Richmond. that at this day nothing remains of it great, but its name, being a very small village called Ca-Catarick, and Catarick bridge: The antiquity whereof is demonstrated by the large Roman way and old broken monuments there digged up.
3. No more is found touching the fore|named Queen Edilthrida: unlesse this be the same to whom an Epistle of Alcuin is found directed with this inscription,Alcuin. Ep. 30 To the devout servant of God, formerly a Queen, now a most beloved Religious Sister Aedilthrydis, the humble Levite Alchuin wisheth health. Which Epi|stle is full of pious exhortations and instru|ctions suitable to the state professed by her: and likewise of thankfullnes for her mu|nificent liberality to him then living in France.
4. The same year Bregwin Arch-bishop of Canterbury after he had governed that Pro|vince only three years dyed. Concerning whom this Elegy is found in Capgrave, Bregwin was appointed by God as a Mirrour,Capgrav. in Bregvvin. so brightly shining with all vertues, that in his life every one might find what he ought to imitate.A. D. 764. At length in the third year of his Bishoprick being full of good works and examples of vertues, he depar|ted this life to eternall happines, on the seaventh day before the Calends of September: and was bu|ried in the Church of S. Iohn adioyning to the Ca|thedrall Church.Marty. Ang. 12. August. But in our Martyrologe his De|position is commemorated on the ninth day before the said Calends. In B. Godwins Cata|logue of Bishops wee read that the Monks of S. Augustin with armed men entred the Archiepiscopall Palace, endeavouring by force to take away the dead Body of Bregwin: and that their Abbot Lambrith, or Iambert went to Rome to make complaint of the wrong done to that Monastery.
5. But besides that none other of our Hi|storians mention this: the relation is pro|bably disproved, because the same Iam|bert was by the Citty Monks elected to succeed in the Archiepiscopall See: who two years after either went to Rome, or from Rome re|ceived the Archiepiscopall Pall.
6. The year following the Episcopall See of Candida Casa,A. D. 763. or Witern, being vacant by the death of Frithwald, Pectwin was immediatly ordained his successour. As yet that Bishoprick pertained to the Iurisdiction of the English, and was subordinat to the Metropolitan See of York:Malmsb. de Pont. f. 272. and so it remaind (saith William of Malmsbury) all the time of Pectwin, Ethelbrith and Beadulf the succeeding Bishops: after whom no more can be found, because the said Bi|shoprick quickly failed, being seated in the utmost Northern coast of the English Territory, and exposed to the violence of the Scotts and Picts.
7. Assoon as Iambert Arch-bishop of Canterbury had received his Archiepiscopall Pall,A. D. 764. he consecrated four Bishops the same year: One in Kent, and three in the king|dom of the Mercians. In Kent, the See of Rochester being vacant by the death of Dunn, there was substituted in his place Eardul. From whom, together with a Kentish Prince of the same name there is among the Epi|stles of S. Boniface found one directed to te Holy Arch-bishop of Mentz,Ap. Bonif. Ep. 77. Lullus, to renew a charitable correspondence, which had past between him and the others his Prede|cessours. Withall as a testimony of such Cha|rity he desired him in his holy Prayers and Sacrifices to be mindfull of three Religious Virgins lately dead in Kent: their names were Irmigy, Northry and Dulicha.
8. There interven'd a great commu|nication of affections and Christian Offi|ces between Saint Lullus and our En|glish Bishops, yea Kings also: For wee find an Epistle likewise sent to him from Kenulf King of the West-Saxons, by a Messenger formerly directed from Saint Lullus upon some affairs.
9. In the Kingdom of the Mercians Sees now vacant, were Lichfeild by the death

of Hemel:A. D. 766. Lindissa by the death of Ea|dulf, and Leicester by the death of Totta: To the first was substituted Cuthfrid: to the second Ceolulf, and to the third Edbert.Westmon. hic. But wheras Mathew of Westminster affirms that he cannot find the names of the Citties where the said Bishops sate: It cannot be denyed but that anciently those Episcopall Sees were moveable: yet in this age by the munificence of Kings, they seem to have been fixed: As that of Lichfeild, where many Bishops had already successively remained. Likewise the See of Leicester was established. But as for Lindissa, the See was ordinarily at Dorchester, a Town (saith William of Malmsbury) in the Country of Oxford,Magdebur. de ont. l. 4. small and unfrequented:But the Majesty of the Churches, either of old or la|tely built, was great. In that See after Hedhead there sate Ethelwin, Edgar, Kinebert, Alwi, Ealdulf and Celnulf.
Yet true it is that these Bishops sometimes sate at Sidnacester, a place the memory of which has faild.


X. CHAP.X. CHAP.

1.2. The (unhappy) death of Ethelwald Mol King of the Northumbers.
3.4. c. Also of Egbert Arch bishop of York: at which Alcuin was present.
10. A strange Charter of King Kenulf to the Church of Welles.
11. Severall Episcopall Sees vacant: and supplied.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred sixty five Ethelwald sirnamed Mul,A. D. 765. King of the Northumbers dyed, after he had raigned six years: though William of Malms|bury assigns to him eleaven years. Hoveden relates certain terrible apparitions in the aire which hapned in the beginning of this year, presaging the unhappy death of this King, who on the twenty seaventh of Octo|ber was slain by the treachery of Alred at a place called Wircanheate.
2. The condition of these Kings in this age was very sad: few of them dyed naturall deaths: This Ethelwald gott the Kingdom by the murder of Osulf: and by the like means lost it: And the same fate will attend his successour Alred.
A. D. 766.3. The year following gave an end to the worthy actions of Egbert Arch-bishop of York, after he had nobly administred that See the space of one and thirty years. A per|son he was descended of Royall progeny and im|bued with divine knowledge:Epit. Bed. Of whose ver|tues and memorable actions we have trea|ted already. Our Historians doe vary in the account of the years in which he continued Bishop: the ground of which uncertainty is because it does not appear whether the time be to be reckoned from the resigna|tion or death of his Predecessour Wilfrid the younger.
4. There was present and assistant at his death his famous Disciple Alcuin, whom a little before he had made Deacon: and who having hitherto all his life composed all his actions by his rule and order, was desirous to receive his commands and instructions at his death also, for the future disposing of his actions. Thus wee read in the Life of the said Alcuin, prefixed before his Works, and taken out of an ancient Manuscript be|longing to the Church of Rhemes: whence we will here extract the following passage:S. Albinus (or Alcuinus) proceeding from one vertue to another,Vit. Alcuini. was consecrated Deacon on the day of the Purification of our Blessed Lady: for before on the same Feast he had re|ceived the Clericall Tonsure. And perceiving that his Blessed Father Egberts infirmity encrea|sing shewed that his death was at hand: having hitherto done all things by his counsell, he was earnest to enquire of him what his pleasure was he should doe, and how he should dispose of him self, after that death should separate them.
6. Hereto the Holy Bishop returned this An|swer, suggested to him, as the event showd, by a supernaturall direction of God:I would have you (said he) first goe to Rome, and in your return to visit France. For I know that there you will produce much good. Our Lord shall be the Guide of your journey, and will bring you back in safety. Be diligent in impugning the late abomi|nable Heresy which endeavours to assert that Christ is only an adoptive Son of God: and be a constant defender of the Mystery of the Holy Tri|nity: this Doctrine cease not clearly and solidely to preach.
After he had spoken thus, he gave him his fatherly Benediction, commending him to our Lords safe protection: and presently after he with chearfullnes departed to our Lord on the sixth day before the Ides of November.
7. He was buried in the Porch of the Church of York:Malmsb. and near to him was also layd the Body of his Brother King Egbert (or Eadbert) who exchanged his Royall Purple for a poore Monasticall habit, and dyed two years after him.
8. The Arch-bishop left behind him severall Monuments of his learning, to enrich the Noble Library which he made at York. Among which are reckoned A Book of Penitentiall Canons, likewise Collections out of the Canon Law of the Church, and others mention'd by Sir H. Spelman. To those we may add, A Dia|logue of Ecclesiasticall Institution, lately printed with an Epistle of S. Beda to him: and other Treatises, by the care of Sir Iames Ware.
9. His successour in the Archiepiscopall See of York was Aldebert,Ap. Bonif. Ep. 109. Ib. ep. 99. otherwise called Coena: To whom, by this latter name, re|mains an Epistle from Saint Lullus Bishop of Mentz, with his Answer to it. The subiect whereof is only the renewing of Ancient

Freindship, sending of presents and entrea|ting of Prayers for dead freinds.A. D. 769.
Godvv. in episc. Bathe Wellens.10. There is extant a Charter of Kenulf King of the West-Saxons by which he this year gave to the Church of Wells and Colledge, formerly built there by King Ina, certain Lands there adiacent, the bounds whereof he setts down. These possessions he gave for the love of God, for the expiation of his sis, and for sme vexation to his enemies of the Cornish Nation. These are the words of the Charter. What he meant by this last Motive, I leave to the Reader to iudge.
A. D. 767.11. This year dyed Frithebert Bishop of Ha|gustaldt: whose Successour was Almund: a Pre|lat of great piety and prudence. And shortly after Cuthwin Bishop of Dumwhich dying, his place was supplied by Aldbert: Like as upon the death of Ethelfrid Bishop of Helmham, there was substituted Lansert. I know not by what fate these two Episcopall Sees of the East-Angles for the most part loose and get new Bishops at the same time: at least so we are in|formed by the Ecclesiasticall Chronicles of that Church And the following year Edbrith,A. D. 768. who is reckoned the ninth among the London Bi|shops, after he had governed that Church eight years, dying, left it vacant to his Successour Eadgar.


XI. CHAP.XI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The beginning of the Raign of the Charlemagne, c
4 Of two learned English Virgins.

A. D. 769.1. THE year of Grace seaven hundred six|ty nine is notable through the whole Church, for the beginning of the Raign of that most famous King, and afterward Em|perour, Charles sirnamed the Great:Hungtingd. f 341. Hoved hic. Hunting|don and Hoveden doe thus write o it: In the said year, which was the fifteenth of the Raign of Kenulf King of the West-Saxons, began a great change of the right hand of the most High: For then did Charles the Grea King of France upon the death of his Father King Pipin, begn his raign: to whom thirty years after the Roman Em|pire which had been glorious so many ages, became subject: and continues so to his Successours to these times.
2. We declared before how a great league of freindship and Royall presents interven'd between the two late Kings Pipin and Egbert King of the Northumbers: The like freind|ship and society did Aled now King of the Northumbers demand of Charles the glorious Successour of King Pipin. This we collect from a Letter written by him and his Queen Ogfu to S. Lullus Arch-bisop of Mentz.Ap. Bonif. ep 90.In which he desires him to assist with his counsell and fa|vour the Embassadours which he had sent to his Lord and Patron the most glorious King Carl, that peace and freindship many be esta|blished between them.
3. In the same Epistle likewise which is an answer to one sent him from S. Lullus in be|half of the disquietted Churches in his domi|nion,A. D. 772. Ibid. the same King and Queen not only humbly begg the Holy Bishops prayers for themselves, but likewise send him a Cata|logue of the Names of their speciall kinred  freind lately dead, of whom they desire him to be mindfull at the Holy Altar: assuring him that the same Charity shall be extended to all his relations in their Churches. Indeed we can scarce meet with any Epistle written in thee times but this is generally on clause and part of the busines.
4. About this time saith Harpsfeild,A. D. 770. Harpsf saeci 8 c 6. there flourished in Brittany two Religious Virgins, famous for their piety and learning calld Ri|ctrudis and Gisla, Disciples of the famously learned Alcuin, who taught very many a this time in Brittany. He was not unmindfull of the advice given him by his Master, Arch|bishop Egbert, of going to Rome and thence returning into France: But seeing how use|full and even necessary his abode was in Brit|tany, he delayd the said iourney, till a fitt op|portunity was presented him, as we shall de+clare. And as touching the foresaid Illustrious Virgins we shall in due time mention the kind and learned Letters which passed be|tween them and their Master, when he lived in France.


XII. CHAP.XII. CH.

1. Succession of Bishops.
2. Of Pope Adrian: to whom the King of the Northumbers sends Embassadours
5. The Church of S Boniface miraculously preserved from fire.
6 7 c Offa King of the Mercians invades and subdues severall Principalities. Fi|ctions of Mathew Paris.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation sea|ven hundred seaventy one the two Bi|shops of the East-Angles luckily again dy together,A. D. 771. and to Aldebert Bishop of Dum|wich is substituted Eglafe to Lanfet Bishop O Helmham, Athelwolf. In the next following age these two Sees were united into one, which first remaind at Helmham, thence wa translated to Thetford, and lastly to Norwich.
2. The year following to Pope Steven suc+ceeded the worthy and learned Pope Hadrian first of that name:A. D. 772. to whom Alfred King of the Northumbers sent an Embassadour to congra|tulate his assu~ption, and for other Ecclesiasti+call affairs, not recorded. To this Embassadour Alcuin gave an Epistle direted to the same Pope full of humble respect to him, and con|gratulation to the Church for enioying the happines of so worthy a Pastour. The Emba+sadours name was Angilbert, whom Alcu calls his most beloved Son to wom he c|mitted

certain requests to be presented by word of mouth.A. D. 774.
Antiquit. Glast.3. The same year Kenulf King of the West-Saxons added to his former liberality towards the Ancient Monastery of Glastonbury, the Mannor of Compton. This he gave to the Abbot thereof called Waldun who newly succeeded to Guban.
A D. 773.4. Afterward the See of London being va|cant by the death of Eadgar, in his place suc|ceeded Kenwalck: Nothing remains of the Gefts of either: Neither can any account be given more of the names of Cuthrid Bishop of Lichfeild who dyed at the same time, to whom was substituted Bertn. Hoveden calls them by other names, as likewise the Episco|pall See too. It is a difficulty not worth the penetrating.
5. It will not be impertinent in this place to relate how miraculously God gave testimony to the Gests, Doctrine Sanctity of S. Boniface of late happy memory by defending his Church of Fritzlar fro~ the fury of the Saxons.They making an invasion into the confines of the French dominions,Baron hic. besieged a certain Strong Castle called Barimburg. During which siege they wasted with sword and e the countrey circumjacent. Their principall rage was directed against the Church of Fritzlare built by S. Boniface, and concerning which he had prophecied that it should never be con|sumed by fire. Whilst the furious Pagans were execising their utmost diligence to make this a false Prophecy, and were heaping wood and casting firebrands to sett it on fire there appeard to severall Christians in the foresaid Castle, and to some Pagans likewise, two men in white shining raiments, who protected the Church from fire: so that by no diligence or pains taken within or without the Church could the Pagans effect their desire: On the contrary, a terrour from heaven seising on them, they fled away, none pursuing them. When they were gone, there was found one Saxon Soldier stark dead, upon his knees, with fire and wood in his hands, bowing down in the posture of one blowing the fire with an intention to burn the said Church.
Thus did God shew his power and favour to his faith|full servant. And though shortly after he permitted the Church of S. Swibert at Werda to be consumed by fire yet so terrible a punish|ment he inflicted on the Authours, that it became evident that the said Blessed Bishop preached the true Orthodoxe Faith.
6. In the year of Grace seaven hundred seaventy four Offa King of the Mercians a Prince of high Spirits,A D. 774. Hoved. ad A. D. 771. began troubles which in successe of time endangerd the ruine of severall petty kingdoms of Brittany. For having three years before this subdued the Nation of the Hestings in the Southern parts of the Island, or Sussex; he extended his ambition to add also the kingdom of Kent to his conquests. And because Lambert (or as some Copies write, Lambert) then Archbishop of Canterbury endeavoured to defeat his am|bition, he turned his indignatio~ against that Church also, the dignity and revenews of which e sought to diminish:Gerva. D robor- For he took from it severall Mannors, as Cherring, Sele|berts, Chert and severall others: which were afterward restored.
7. This wart between Offa and Alric is thus breifly described by Huntingdon: In the twen|tieth year of Kenulf King of the West-Saxons,Huntingd. f 342. saith he, Offa King of the Mercians fought against the Kentish men at place called Ottanford where the slaughter was most horrible, especially on the Kentish part So that King Offa by this victory became fa|mous and terrible. William of Malmsbury adds, that Alric King of Kent by this unhappy battell against the Mercians, did cast a great clowd upon the glory of his times.
8. It is probable that by such great successe  enlargement of power which this victory gave to Offa, the other Saxon Kings might be so terrified as to seek assistance from abroad, es|pecially from Charles the illustrious King of the French. But surey there is small truth in the relation made by Mathew Paris,M. Paris hic how not only Alric King of Kent was slain in this battell, but that thereupon five Kings of Brittany should in a pompous manner writte a com|mon letter to the said Charles in which cal|ling themselves the most powerfull Kings of Brit|tany, they demanded his aid and strict socie|ty, giving him the Title of Imperiall Maiesty and that he in his Letter to King Offa should stile himself the most potent of all Kings: These seem to be groundles fictions borrowd by that Authour from some such fabulous Wri+ters as began to abound in this age. However certain it is that King Charles had not the Ti|tle of Emperour given him till many years after this time.
9. And as groundlesse is another Story of the same Authour,Id. how after the conquest of Kent the same King Offa subdued all the other Saxon Kings, and particularly Alred King of the Northumbers, whom he compelled to fly into Wales: And that thereupon some hostility began between Offa  the French King Char|les, who is sayd to have written to Offa a threatning Letter, containing imperious demands and that King Offa should answer What have I doe with Charles the beyond-Sea King I he offer any iniury to mee, I will in hostile manner invade him, and endeavour to make him tributary to my Crown. These are triviall inventions which the said Hstorian borrowd from some ob|scure Writer, who straind his witt to sound forth in an immodest, indiscreet manner the praises of King Offa.
10. As for that clause which regards Alred King of the Northumbers, it is true that this year in Easter-week his subiects compelled him to fly out of York,Huntingd f. 242. Hoved. hic. and afterward out of his Kingdom, as Huntingdon relates And Hove|den more expressly declares that King Alred by the unanimous consent of the Northum|bers was deprived of all power and priviledge of a

King,A. D. 776. and that he changed the Majesty of a Prince into the miserable condition of a banished person. First he fled into the Citty Bebban attended with a very small train and afterward he had recourse to Cynotha King of the Picts. This misfortune therefore was not brought upon King Al|red by Offa, as the foregoing fabulous narra|tion pretends: Neither did he fly into Wales, but into the Province of the Picts.
amd. in Dor+setsh.11. Alred being thus compelled to for|sake his kingdom, there was chosen in his place Ethelred son to the late King Edilwald Mul. But neither did Ethelred sitt quiet any long time in his throne: but by another fa|ction of his Subjects was expelled, and the same misfortune hapned to severall succee|ding Princes there, by a fatall giddines then possessing the minds of that Northern Nation.
12. This same year Kenulf King of the West-Saxons extended his liberality to the Church of Shirborn, upon which (as Camden from his Charter declares) he bestowed a posses|sion of one Mansion seated on the Westside of the River Lym, not far from the place where it enters the Sea. This land he gave to the end that salt might there he made for the necessity and mani|fold use of the said Church.


XIII. CH.XIII. CHAP.

1. The Monastery of Bathe founded by King Offa
2. Succession of English Bishops.
3 4 c. The happy death of S. Walburga Virgin and Abbesse.

A. D. 775. Malmsb. de . l. 2.1. THE following year Offa King of the Mercians founded a Monastery at Bathe. This Monastery being afterward burnt and utterly ruined by the Danes, was restored by King Edgar, being delighted with the magnifi|cent situation af the place: and because there he first received the Crown of his Kingdom.
Godvv. in epist. Roff.2. The same year Eadulf Bishop of Rochester dyed, and was succeeded by Diora, to whom a certain Noble man in Kent named Egbert gave so much land, as ten ploughs could labour, besides certain woods. To Milred likewise Bishop of Worcester was substituted Weremund: And to Efna Bishop of Hereford, Ceolmund.
A. D. 776.3. In the year of Grace seaven hundred seaventy six the Blessed Virgin Walburga made a happy change of a mortall life for an im|mortall. We have a ready shewed that she was daughter to Richard by right a King, and Sister to S Wintbald, and S. Willibald: and that together with them she went into Germany to S. Boniface. She was constituted Abbesse of a Monastery at Heydenham, the same town where her Brother S. Winnebald governed a Monastery of Religious men. There she lived with wonderfull Perfection, both by her words and example teaching her spirituall children to live the life of Angells.
4. Her Life was written by Wolfhard a de|vout Preist who lived in the next Century,Wfhard. ap. Sr. 10. Maij. and who recounts many wonderfull Miracles wrought by her intercession: to whom I refer the devout Reader. But one ought not to be omitted, since it is related by an Au|thour that writes what hapned to himself. This is Philip Bishop of Eystadt, who also wrote her Life.Philp. Eysta+dns in vit. S Walburg. He relates how her Sacred Bo|dy was first buried in her own Monasteay of Heydenham, and afteward translated (at least a great part of it) to Eystadt, and reposed in a Monastery consecrated to her Name. There saith he, to this day (which was five hundred years and more after her death) there flows from her chast Relicks a precious Oyle of soveraign and universall vertue to cure all manner of diseases. The wonderfull vertue whereof I my self had ex|perience of. For being cast down by a vehement disease, of proof against all Art of Physick or natu|rall remedies, I commanded some of that Sacred Oyle to be brought to me, which with earnest Prayers to God, and begging her intercession, I drunk: Which was no sooner done, but to the admi|ration of all I presently recover'd my perfect health.
5. Her Sanctity was so famed, that many Churches ambitiously sought and obtaind some portion of her Relicks. Thus in the Gal|lican Martyrologe on the fourth of August we find a commemoration of the receiving the Relicks of S. Walburga Virgin Abbesse,Martyr. Gall. . August. which with great honour were brought out of Ger|many to Furnes in Flanders, by Baldwin sirna|med Ferreus, Count of the same countrey. And in the same place,Haraeus 2 Maij. saith Haraeus, there was built a Monastery of the Order of S. Benedict to her honour, wherein since hath been placed a Colledge of Canons.
6. Again in the Gallican Martyrologe on the second of May there is at Anwerp said to be an anniversary celebration of the memory of this Holy Virgin,Martyr. Gall. 2. Maij. from whose tomb doth flow an oyely liquour, which restores health to very many who desire her assistance and intercession. A parti|cular reason why her veneration is great in that Citty,Miraeus dd 2 Mj. is given by Miraeus, Because, saith he, it is a constant Tradition of that Church that this same holy Virgin in her way from England into Germany made some abode in Antwerp And to this day there is seen in the most ancient Church of that Citty a certain Grott, in which she was wont to pray: for which reason the same Church formerly called the Castle Church, was afterward by our Ancestours dignifyed with the Title of S Walburgis. And indeed before the receiving of the Roman Office there, the same Church was accusto|med to celebrate the memory of S. Walburgis as their peculiar Patronesse four times every year but since that time they keep her Feast but once.
7. It is very probable that this Holy Virgi was entertained for some time at Antwerp by the Disciples of S. Willebrord, as being of the same Countrey. For it appears by the Testament of the same Holy Bishop that he possessed to his death the Church built in the Castle of Antwerp near the River Scald, together with

a third part of the custom or tribute belon|ging to it,A. D. 778. Id. ib. as we have before declared.
8. The same Authour adds, that in the foremen|tioned vault of that Church there is preserved a part of S. Walburga's awbone, which, saith he, in the year of Christ sixteen hundred and fifteen, was visited and reverently kissed by the pious Archdukes Albert and Isabella.


XIV. CH.XIV. CHAP.

1.2. Succession of Bishops.
3. The Northumbers rebellious.
4.5. King Offa's victory over the West-Saxons.

A. D. 7771. PEctwin the Bishop of Witern (or Candi|da casa) dying in the year of Christ seaven hundred seaventy seaven, after he had administred the same See seaven years, there was substituted in his place Ethelbert: who twelve years after was translated to the See of Hagustald.
A D. 778. Godvv. in Catal.2. The year following in the place of Ethelmod Bishop of Shirborn, Denefrit was or|dained in the same See. Of these two Bishops, saith B. Godwin, besides their names I can find nothing in our Ecclesiasticall monuments.
3. The Northumbers still persist in their seditious tumults: For Ethelred whom they had five years before this placed in the thro|ne, out of which they had eiected Alred, they now also drive into exile, or, as some write, detain i prison, and in his place substitute Alfwold. The principall movers of this sedi|tion were two great Northuusbrian Dukes, concerning whom Mathew or Westminster thus writes:Westhem. hic. Ethelwald and Herebert (saith he) who were Dukes in the kingdom of the Northum|bers, rebelled against their King, and at a place called Kings-clive, they slew Ealdulf who was Ge|nerall of King Ethelreds army: and a while after the same Dukes in a great battell slew two other Generalls of the same King, Kenulf and Eggen: As for King Ethelred he was forced to fly out of the Kingdom, in whose place they constituted Alfwold King, a Prince of great piety and iustice who raigned ten years. After which time Ethel|red was again restored.
4. In the Western parts likewise there arose great commotions. For anciently the West-Saxon kingdo~ had extended as far as Oxford|shire: Where among other strong places a Castle had been built at a place anciently cal|led Bensigetun,Huntingd. f 343. Malmsb. de Reg. l 1. c. 2. now Benson. But Offa king of the Mercians unwilling any longer to suffer his neighbour Prince to enioy such an ad|vantage to incommodate his countrey, rai|sed an Army, and besieged the said Castle. To raise this siege Kenulf King of the West-Saxons approached with other forces: So that they came to a battell: In which Kenulf was defeated and compelled to fly. By which means King Offa took and possessed the Ca|stle. This was the only misfortune which hitherto had befalln Kenulf: who was a Prince renowned both for his vertues and warlick exploits. But after this, continuall calami|ties oppressed him, till his death, which was also very unhappy.
5. Kenulf after this defeat endeavoured by the assistance of the Brittain to repair his losses: But Offa to prevent the entercourse between the West-Saxons and Brittains cau|sed a mighty trench for the space of ninety miles between the Rivers Dee (Deva) and Wey (Vaga) to be made: which though it was the occasion of many contentions, yet in them all Offa had the advantage.


XV. CHAP.XV. CHA.

1.2. c. Miraculous Iudgments of God against the Pagan blasphemers of Saint Swibert, and Sacrilegious destroyers of his Church and Monastery at Werda.
9.10. c The Writer of that Narration is Saint Ludger: whose Holines, together with the Doctrine of the Veneration of Saints, is asserted.

1. WHilst these troubles afflicted Britta|ny. Almighty God in Germany fought for the defence of the Faith planted there by the English-Saxons, miraculously puni|shing the Sacriledge committed by the Sa|xons and Westphalian Pagans against the Mo|nastery or Werda built by his servant S. Swibert: as we find written in an Epistle of S. Ludger Bishop of Munster written to Rixfrid Bishop of Vtrecht.
2. Whilst the glorious King of the French,Append. ad Sur. 1. Mar. Charles sirnamed the Great was fighting in the Southern parts of France against the Sara|cens then raigning in Spain, the feirce and perfidious Saxons and Westphalians iudging this to be a fitt time to revenge themselves of the losses which they had formerly suf|fred from the Christians, raised a mighty army, with which they wasted all the coun|treys as far as the Rhene, expressing their rae principally against the Churches of God, and sparing neither sexe nor age. With this fury they came to Werda where was the Church of S. Swibert. There they utterly de|stroyed and burnt to the ground both the Town and Church: all the inhabitants and Preists they killed which had not escaped by flight: and all the Sacred Books and orna|ments they burnt. Only the Sacred Body of S. Swibert was preserved from their fury, though with all possible diligence they made search for it. Yea many of those Sa|xons who were Christians, had a desire to ex+presse their hatred against this Holy Bishop, because many years before this, by his in|tercession

the French had gaind a memorable victory against them.
3. In this detestable Army there was not any one so execrable in his malice and cruelty as a certain Officer called Ogell Oster|bach of Paderborn. This man was the princi|pall instrument of the Devill in all mischeifs committed, in which he took excessive pleasure: And particularly he it was who with great labour and diligence heaped wood for burning the said Church, which with much adoe at last by Gods permission he performed.
4. After he had among many other abo|minable actions executed this, being at dinner with his companions in a meadow ad|ioyning to the same place, he with great ioy and triumph recited to them what he had done, particularly insulting upon S. Swibert the Protectour of the French, and blasphe|ming God: But behold in the middst of his laughter and ioy the heavy wrath of God came upon him, so that he fell backward before them all upon the plain ground; and broke his neck: by this horrible death paying a fitt punishment for his sacrilegious cruelty.
5 Neither did Almighty God iudge this a sufficient testimony of the honour which he would doe to S. Swibert in the sight of the Pagan Army. For three howers after the accurted body had lyen on the ground covered with a garment, a trumpet soun|ding to the remove of the Army, certain kinsmen of this execrable Ogell and others his associates in mischeife carye it into the Church-yard of S. Swibert, to bury it there. But they could not effect it by any means: For assoon as ever they had digged a grave, presently the earth would fall into it, and no sign of a trench would appear. Again and again they made tryall in other places there, but still the ground became plain and even immediatly. This caused a wonderfull astonishment in them: and they all conclu|ded that he was unworthy of buriall there, who had so sacrilegiously profaned the place and burnt the Church. Moreover when they took the garment off from his face, it appard so horrible to them that in a greivous fright they left the body, not knowing what to doe with it: When some other Saxons of that Army heard this, they with indignation took the carkeyse and cast it into the Rhene.
6 This prodigious accident being by some of these companions with much greif told to the two principall Rulers of the Army, Nothelin and Occo: they answerd, This was an accident to be imputed to chance, and not to any power of S. Swibert, who was not able to de|fend his own Church. After many the like blas|phemous speeches the said Noble men depar|ted from one another, and Nothelin as he was boasting of the mischeif done to the Chri|stians, was immediatly struck blind, and tor|mented with unsufferable pains in all his members: Which continued and encreased upon him; till by the advice of certain sober men, he with many sighs  teares acknow|ledged the crimes which out of pride and malice he had committed against God and his Saint: Moreover he upon his knees in the sight of his army made a vow that if God would please by the intercession of that Ho|ly Bishop to restore his sight, and take away his torments, he would humbly visit the Shrine of S. Swibert, and employ his riches for rebuilding the Church. He had no sooner publickly made this vow, but immediatly he recovered his sight and health. And shortly after attended by his whole family, he ac|complished his vow.
7. As for the other Noble man called Occo, he returning nomewards, not knowing any thing which had hapned to Nothelin, as he was beasting in the way of his exploits against the Christians, and especially how they had been revenged upon S. Swibert, in whose protection the Christians had put so much confidence: He presently in the pre|sence of his whole troop was by Almighty God struck both deaf and dumb. In which case he was caried to his house: and a good space of time after, recalling to mind his cruelties and blasphemies against God, he acknowledged himself iustly punished, of which he heartily repented, and hoped by Prayers and Almes to obtain a removall or that punishment. Notwithstanding his Prayers and Almes had not that effect which he expected.
8. But when he was informed how Nothe|lin by the intercession of S. Swibert had been cured of his blindnes and pains, he presently conceived a great hope in God and his Saint: and in like manner vowed that he would visit the Saint at Werda, and addict himself wholly to his service, if he likewise might recover his speech and hearing. The same hower he also was healed by the Heavenly Physicion: and setting his house in order, he with his whole family solemnly went to Werda to the Church of S. Swibert, and with great devotion and revernce performed his Vow. Moreover disdaining to return home to worldly employments, he remaind there and ioyning with the foresaid Nothelin and other devout persons to furnish costs, he the next year rebuilt the Church which had been burnt, so that it was more beautifull then it had been before. Yea moreover re|nouncing his Government and dignity, he spent the rest of his life at the Monastery of S. Swibert at Werda, with great fervour serving our Lord and S. Swibert..
9. Thus writes the Holy Bishop Ludger, re|lating the affairs of his own age. Now what will the Sectaries of our age oppose he|reto, those I mean, who are as great enemies to the veneration due to Saints and honour to their Shrines, as Ogell or the two Noble men

had been? They will perhaps say, that Saint Ludger was too credulous, or not rightly informed in the occurrents of those times.
Baron. hic.10. Let Baronius then inform them what a person S. Ludger was: S. Ludger (saith he) was by birth a Frison, descended from Christian parents, and bred up under the disciplin of Saint Gregory disciple of the holy Martyr S. Boniface, in the Church of Vtrecht. Assoon as he was ado|pted into the Clergy, he was by him sent into En|gland, where Alcuin did publickly professe the teaching of Sacred learning. He staid then onely one year with him: after which he returned to S. Gregory, by whom he was ordained Deacon. Then he went back into England, where during the space of three years and a half he heard the Lectures of the same famous Doctour, well known to Charles the Great, insomuch as Letters passed frequently between them. From thence, after the death of S. Gregory, he was in a vision called by S. Lebwin who had preached the Gospell at Daventry: Whereupon thither he went, and repaired the Church which had been burnt by the Saxons. From Daventry he was sent by Albinus the Successour of S. Gregory into the countrey of the Frisons, where he Zealously preached the Christian Faith, and destroyed many profane Temples of Idols, even when the Idolatrous Pagans were present, and withheld by a Divine hand from opposing or hur|ting him: so that he may truly be called the Apostle of the Frisons. This testimony does Baronius give of S. Ludger, which he collected out of his ancient Acts written by the Monks of Werda.
11. But though it were supposed that Saint Ludger was misinformed: and the like may be said of S. Gregory the Great, S. Augustin, S. Gregory Nazianzen  other Fathers who write such like Stories, confirming the Doctrine so much opposed by Sectaries, of Invocation and Veneration of Saints: It may be they were credulous a little too much, at some times. But the Miracles, of which they professe themselves to have been eye-witnesses, cannot be suspected. And however, this may be said in generall, that how incredu|lous soever any one may pretend to be of the speciall stories related by them, yet none can be so unreasonable to affirm that they related any Stories which contradicted or destroyed the Faith which they maintained: and which appears likewise to have been the common Faith of the Church in their res|pective ages, since their Writings have been generally approved and admired, and not any but professed Hereticks, such as Vigilan|tius and Iovinian, ever opposed the Doctrines confirmed by such Stories.


XVI. CHAP.A. D. 780.
XVI. CH.

1.2. c. Severall Successions of English Bishops.
4.5. c. The Gests and Death of S. Stur|mis first Abbot of Fulda.

1. THE year following severall Episcopall Sees were vacant in Brittany:A. D. 779 In the kingdom of the East-Angles Eglaf Bishop of Dumwih and Athelwolf of Helmham, as it were by an ancient Law, dying at the same time, to the former was substituted Eadred, and to the other, Hunfert. Again the See of Hagulstadt being vacant by the death of a Prelat of eminent vertue, Alcmund, Tilbert, or Tilher, or as some call him Gilbert, was ordained in his place: And Kenulf Bishop of Lindesfarn dying, his Successour was Higbald. Lastly in our ancient Catalogue of the Succession of Bishops we find that ano|ther Tilher was consecrated Bishop of Wor|cester, in the place of Weremund who dyed this year.
2. Not long after Albert or Aldebert sir|named Coena,A. D. 780. Arch-bishop of York, as Hove|den writes, departed this life to our Lord: but a little before he dyed Eanbald was ordained in his room. Some affirm that this Eanbald was a Disciple of S. Alcuin. But they are mistaken: for it was not this, but an other of the same name who sixteen years after this was his im|mediate Successour in the said Arch-bishoprick that was Alcuins Disciple.
3. Moreover Kineard Bishop of Winchester at this time ended his life, to whom suc|ceeded Aethelard Abbot of Meldun, or Malms|bury, who was afterward assumed to the See of Canterbury. And in the place of Bertun Bi|shop of Lichfeild was substituted Higebert.
4. Wee shall not much transgresse the bounds of this History if wee commemorate the death of Sturmis the first Abbot of Fulda: who by the Centuriators of Magdeburg is af|firmed to have been an English-Saxon, but more truly a German of the Province of No|ricum,Aegila vit. S. Sturm. ap. 16. Decmb. as wee read in his Life written by Aegila the fourth Abbot of the same Monastery of Fulda.He was in his childhood offred to S. Boniface, who recommended him to the care of his devout Preist Wigbert, Abbot of the Monastery of Fritzlar: by whose inspection he was in his tender years brought up in piety and learning: in so much as that being yet but a child, he committed to his memory the whole Psalter, and a great part of the Gospells and other Lessons of Holy Scripture.
5. In due time he was ordained Preist, and with great zeale preached the Gospell among the Pagans, Almighty God confirming his Doctrine by frequent Miracles, as casting out

of Devills, restoring many to health by im|position of his hands with prayer. Many seduced Christians he recovered to the Ortho|dox Faith: and many discords and dissentions he composed, teaching all his hearers to practise meeknes, humility, longanimity and Charity.
6. After three years thus piously em|ployed, he was by inspration moved to un|dertake a life of solitude, austerity and con|templation. Which having discovered to Saint Boniface, he was by him appointed to find out in the Province called Bchonia a con|venient retired place for a Monastery, to which quiet state S. Boniface himself had an intention in his old age to betake himself, though he could never effect his desire. After a long search, at last his Disciple Sturmis found out the most proper and in all re|spects most convenient Seat of Fulda, where as hath been declared, S. Boniface by the mu|nifience of the Noble Princes Caroloman and Pipin built that famous Monastery.
7. When it was built, he committed the care and government of it to S. Sturmu: to whom he gave instructions how he should direct such as were committed to his care: adding likewise Precepts concerning obe|dience and Humility to be practised by the Monks, conformable to the Rule of S. Bene|dict, which he established among them. Among other Instructions he told them that he could not find in any Writings of the an|cient Institutours of Caenobiticall Profess on that Wine or Strong drink were becoming the Dis|ciplin of a Monastery: he therefore forbad the same to them. But some years after, in the raign of King Pipin, this custom by the De|cree of a Synod was altered in co~sideration of the weaknes  infirmities of many among them: though some persisted in the ancient austerity to their deaths.
8. But for a more perfect Instruction in Mo|nasticall Disciplin, S. Sturmis four years after he had been constituted Abbot, with the consent of S. Boniface, went to Rome, where for a years space he perfectly informed him|self in the Regular practises and Traditions of the Monasteries there and severall other parts of Italy: And having made a collection of the best and most perfect, returned home|wards: and first informing Saint Boniface of of all, by his advice he established the practi|ses of them in his Monastery of Fulda. Hence it came to passe that many seeing the inno|cence and piety of those Religious men, were induced to heap possessions on the said Mo|nastery.
9. After S. Boniface's Martyrdom, the Holy Abbot Sturmis, to whom S. Boniface had given order that his body should be buried at Fulda, went into Friseland, attended with a great multitude, to fetch the Sacred Body, which after earnest contention with S. Lullus Arch-bishop of Mentz, at last he obtained, and with a most solemn Procession brought to his Monastery. By occasion of which the devotion of many to that holy place encrea|sing, the Monastery became much enlarged and enriched.
10. Not long after the Devill enviously looking on the prosperity of the said Mo|nastery, suggested to the minds of three malevolent Monks to accuse their Holy Ab|bot to King Pipin, obiecting to him that he was an enemy to the King. The Holy man did not expresse much earnestnes to refute this accusation, saying only: I have a witnes in heaven of the falsenes of this imputed crime: Whereupon by the Kings command he was banished from thence with a few other Monks, and retired to a Monastery called Vanedih, where he remained two years, with all kindnes entertained by the Abbot. As for the Monastery of Fulda the care or it was committed to Lullus, who had concei|ved a bitter passion against the Holy Abbot Sturmis, upon occasion of the contention about S. Boniface his body. Lullus thereupon appointed over them a certain Monk called Marc: whose government the Monks could by no means support: insomuch as when they were ready unanimously to forsake the Monastery, Lullus quietted them by per|mitting the choice of an Abbot to them|selves: This pleasing them, they elected one of their brethen, a true servant of God named Freszold, one who from his infancy had been brought up by S. Sturmis and was tenderly loved by him; who accepted of the Orrice of Abbot onely out of a desire and in|tention to ioyn with his brethren in endea|vouring to restore their good Spirituall Fa|ther Sturmis: For which purpose they de|manded the Prayers of all the neighbou|ring Monasteries.
11. By vertue of which Prayers, God mo|ved the heart of King Pipin to call to mind the servant of God S. Sturmis, and to give order that he should come to his presence. Being then brought to the Palace, and se|verall days expecting when he should be called to the Kings presence, It hapned one morning early that the King intending that day to hunt, went according to his custom to prayers into his Chappell, where the Holy man after the Mattin office still remained: Who seing the King, presently took a light which he caried before the King, till he came to the Altar, where after he had prayed, he said to the Holy Abbot, God ha's once more brought us together: What was that which your Monks accused you of, and which moved my di|spleasure against you? I have quite forgotten it. The Holy man answerd, Though I have oft offended God, yet I am free of all offence against your Maiesty. The King replied, However the matter stands, If you have imagined or done any thing to my preiudice, God forgive you as I likewise . In saying which words he drew out of his garment a thread of silk which he threw on the ground, saying, Let this be a

token that I have cast away all displeasure against you. And presently after knowing how much his return was desired, he sent him back ho|nourably, confirming the Priviledge given by the Pope, by which that Monastery was exempted from the Iurisdiction of Lullus Arch-bishop of Mentz. The report of his return being divulged, he was so|lemnly mett by all the Religious Monks in those quarters, who with singing of Psalms and great ioy attended him to his Monastery.
12 The Blessed Abbot then employed his whole time in correcting all disorders in his Monastery, in adorning the Church, and repai|ring the decayd buildings about it. And par|ticularly to the end all occasions of going abroad might, according the S. Benedicts Rule, be taken away, he took care that all necessa|ry Manufactures should be exercised within the Convent, and for a generall commodity he caused trenches to be made by which he conveyd water within the Monastery, to the inestimable benefitt of his Religious. He also made a sumptuous Shrine for the Sacred Body of S. Boniface, enriched with gold and silver, which remains to this day. And so great fa|vour and familiarity he had with King Pipin that he obtained of him a Mannor called Omunstat belonging to the Crown, with all hat depended on it.
13 The like favour he enioyed with King Charles after his Father King Pipins death, who oft sent for him, and bestowd another Mannr on the said Monastery, called Hamelenburg: In consideration of which, Prayers are said to this day by the Monks for him. After this the said Most Christian King began to think seriously how to induce the barbarous Nation of the Saxons to embrace the Faith of Christ: Which design he recom|mended to the prayers of all Gods servants. Then gathering a great Army, and taking with him many Ecclesiasticall persons, he partly by terrour, and partly by their preaching and exhortations withdrew a great part of that Nation hitherto captived by the Devill, from Idolatry, and caused them to submitt themselves to the easy yoke of Christ. After which he divided the countrey into Pa|rishes, appointing Preists to preach  baptize among them.
14. Notwithstanding after the King was departed with his army, most of the Saxons renouncing Christianity returned to their old Idolatries: and not content with that, they raised forces, killing all Christians among them, and wasting the whole coun|trey as far as the River Rhene. When they came neer to Fulda, the Holy Abbot knowing that they had sent a band of soldiers to burn the Monastery and to kill all they found in it, gave notice to his brethren of the danger: Whereupon they all taking the holy Martyrs body with them, went towards Hamelenburg. But the Holy Abbot went to a place call'd Weisereth, endeavouring to gather soldiers to represse the cruelty of the barba|rous Saxons.A. D. 781. Which was also effected. And when the Saxons were compelled to retire home, the Monks returned with the Holy Mar|tyrs body to Fulda.
15. After this King Charles brought a second time his Army against the Saxons: and com|manded the Holy Abbot Sturmis with his Monks to remain in a strong town called He|resbury. And after the warr, which was pro|sperously ended by the King, he se~t him being sick to his Monastery, atte~ded by his own hysi|cion called Winter: who mistaking his disease, applied Physick to him which instead of qua|lifying, much encreased it. Whereupon the man of God perceiving that death approached, commanded all his Monks to be assembled, whom he earnestly exhorted to persevere in the same Regular observance which he had in|stituted among them: And then recommen|ding himself to their prayers, he begged par|don of every one who thought himself any way iniurd by him, and professed that he cor|dially forgave all his persecutours, particu|larly the Arch-bishop Lullus, who had always been his adversary. Then he took leave of them all: and presently after, his sicknes co|ming to extremity, we who assisted him be|sought him with tears that he would be mindfull of us, and pray for us in heaven. He suddenly turning himself toward us, sayd. Make your selves worthy that my Prayers may doe you good, and I will not faile to doe what you de|sire. After this his pious Soule was delivered out of the prison of the Body, and being plen|tifully enriched with all divine vertues and graces departed to our Lord, to live forever in his heavenly kingdom. Amen.
16. Thus writes the Devout Abbot Aegila successour and Disciple of this blessed man:Marty. Ro 16. Decemb who was an eye witnes of many things here related. He was canonized by Innocent the second in a Councill of Lateran celebrated in the year eleaven hundred thirty nine. His Memory is celebrated on the sixteenth of De|cember.


XVII. CHAP.XVII. CH.

i.2. c The Gests and happy death of Saint willebald, an English Apostolick Bishop in Germany.

1. THE year following another Disciple Companion of S. Boniface in his Aposto|lick Office received the reward of his labours.A. D. 781. This was S. Willibald Son of King Richard and Bonna (who is said to have been sister to S. Bo|niface) and Brother to S. Winnebald and Saint Walburga. His Life remains written by a kinswoman of his, a Religious Virgin, who lived in his Sister Walburga's Monastery at Heidenham in Germany: The summ whereof is this:
2. When he was but three years old a cer|tain greivous infirmity seised on him by which all his members were so contracted  benummed,Vit. S. Willi|bald. ap. Sur. 7. Iulij. that he became as in a sort dead, so that his parents almost despaired of his re|covery. Where with being greivously affli|cted they took him and offred him to our Lord, to whose service they designed him in case he would please to restore him his health. Now it was a custom among the Sa|xons that instead of Oratories they would erect in the feilds or near their houses Crosses of stone or wood, to which they would repaire for performing their devotions. Before such a Crosse they layd the infant, vowing him to Gods service. Which they had no sooner done, but his health was immediatly restor'd to him.
3. Two years after therefore they, being mindfull of their Vow, delivered him to a ve|nerable person named Theodoret, who accor|ding to their order presented him to a de|vout Abbot named Egbald who governed a Monastery called Waltheim He with the advice and consent of his brethren, received him as a Member of their Religious Congregation: where he was bred up in all modesty piety and hu|mility, and withall according to his capacity was instructed in all Sacred learning.
4. When he was arrived at a mature age he by earnest prayers obtaind permission to ac|company his Father and Brother in a pilgri|mage of devotion which they undertook to Rome. In their return their Father S. Richard dyed at the Citty of Lucca, where also he was buried with great honour, as hath been else where declared. After whose death, an earnest desire took him to prolong his pilgrimage as far as the Holy land, there to visit and perform his devotions in all the places where the principall Mysteries of our Salvation were wrought. And accordingly, being accompa|nied by two devout persons only, he retur|ned back, and taking ship at Ceta, they sai|led to Cyprus: and from thence into Syria, where arriving at a Citty called Emesa, he with his co~panions, who were now seaven, was taken prisoner, and in danger to loose his life upon a suspicion that they were Spies. Being thus made captives, God disposed the heart of a certain old man who was a Saraen, to pitty them: insomuch as he oft visited them and ent them dayly sufficient nourish|ment in their prison. Not long after a Spanish merchant who had a Brother a servant of the Prince of that Cicy, in great favour with him, by his intercession obtaind the freedom of these Captives.
5. From thence therefore they went into the Holy Land, which they passed quite through, scarce omitting any place that was memora|ble, or recorded in Holy Scripture. A particu|lar account of all their proceedings, with he names of each place in order may be read in the History of the said Religious Virgin, who professes that she received the relation from S. Willibalds own mouth.
6. When they were come to Gaza, S. Willibald being present at Masse solemnly sung to the honour of S. Mathias the Apostle, lost his sight, and for the space of two months continued blind: whereupon he returned to Ierusalem,  entring into the Church where the Holy Crosse was found, his sight was again restored to him. After this, passing through severall cit|ties and places of devotion, they took ship again  return'd into Italy, arriving at Naples: From whence S. Willebald with one compa+nion travelled to the famous Monastery of S. Benedict, calld Mount Cassin, where they found very few Monks under the government of their Abbot called Petronax, a man of great mildnes  prudence. There S. Willibald made his abode the space of ten years, during which he was some times appointed Sacri|stan of the Church, afterwards a Dean, and lastly the Porter.
7. In this place having perfectly instructed himself in all duties belonging to Regular Observance, at last with permission of his Ab|bot he returned to Rome, where he was with great kindnes received by Pope Gregory the third, who took great delight in hearing him recount the marvellons variety of accidents which befell him in his long voyages. And a|while after, the said Pope told him that his kinsman S. Boniface had earnestly requested him to command him to quitt the Monastery of Mount Cassin, and to send him into Germa|ny to assist him there in preaching the Gospll. To which command S. Willibald humbly sub|mitted, and accordingly leaving behind him his companion in the Monastery, be began his voyage into Germany, and at last arrived at a place called Linthruth, where he found S. Bo|niface: who not long after sent him to a place calld Eystat: Which place had been given to S. Boniface by a devout person called Suitgar, who accompanied S. Willebald thiher. The Re|gion thereabout was in a manner wast, scarce any house to be seen, but a small Church de|dicated to our Lady Now after these two de|vout persons hd chosen a place convenient to be the Seat of a Monastery, they went to S. Boniface to give him notice thereof: who re|turned thither with them: and there ordaind S. Willibald a Preist. A year after this S. Boniface called him into Thuringia, whither being come he went to Heidenheim, where his Brother was Abbot of a Monastery, by whom he was with very great ioy received, after so many years of separation. To the same place short|ly after S. Boniface came with two other Bi|shops, S. Burchard and S. Wizo By whom S. Wil|libald was consecrated also Bishop: and sent back to Eystat, which Saint Boniface be|stow'd on him to be an Episcopall See, giving it the preeminence next to the Metropolis of Mentz
8. There he built a Monastery, instituting the Monks in the Observa~ces which he had learnt at Mount Cassin. And there leading an Angelicall

Life among men,A. D. 783. dividing his employment between a quiet repose of Contemplation in the Monastery, and charitable solicitudes in governing his Diocese, he at last full of me|rits and Graces this year rendred happily his soule into his mercifull Creatours hands and was honourably buried in his own Church. where his Memory is in great veneration, and his Sanctity testified by many Miracles, which are registred by Philip his Successour in the same Bishoprick.
Two hundred and eight years after his death he was solemnly Cano|nized by Pope Leo the Seaventh:Martyrolog. om. 7. Iul. And both in the Roman and English Martyrologe his Memory is celebrated on the seaventh of Iuly.


XVIII. C.XVIII. CHAP.

1. The death of S Werburga.
2. Succession of English Bishops.
3.4 c. A great miracle of a Soldier reco|vered by the Intercession of S. Bruno.

A. D. 782.1. ABOVT the same time is recorded the death of S. Werburga: she had former|ly been wife to Ceolred King of the Mercians, after whose death, which hapned in the year of Christ seaven hundred and sixteen, she complying with a divine inspiration entred a Monastery, where like the good Widdow, Saint Anna the Prophetesse, sh never departed from our Lords Temple, serving God night and day in abstinence and prayer the space of sixty five years, partly as a simple Religious woman under Obedience, and partly as Ab|besse of the same Monastery, with as much hu|mility governing others, as she had former|ly obeyd.
A. D. 783.2. Then the See of Worcester being vacant by the death of Tilher, it was supplied by the substitution of Adored in his place. Cel|mund likewise Bishop of Hereford dying, there was ordained in the same his Successour na|med Vtell, in the year of Grace seaven hun|dred eighty three.
3. Little else occurring the same year in Brittany, S. Ludger will inform us how won|derfully Almighty God glorified his servant Swibert in Germany, so recommending the Faith which he had taught.Vid. Append. ad Act. S. Svvib. ap. Sur. 1. Mar.That year (saith he) the most victorious King Charles having destroyed all the forts of the rebellious Sa|xons and Westphalians, came to a place called Drom, which having likewise subdued, he left it to be kept by his Son called Charles also, whilst himself went further into the midst of Saxony. In his absence the Westphalians came with strong forces purposing to drive the young Prince out of that countrey. There|upon a battell being sought, the Prince with his horse quickly defeated the Enemies.
4 Now among the Westphalians there was a certain soldier called Bruno, a devout Chri|stian, who had been compelled by the Noble man who governed that territory where he lived, to be present in the battell: His name when he was a Pagan had been Eldack: he was a man of great courage and wealth. This man having been present at the miserable death of the Sacrilegious Ogell, and knowing how the forementioned Noble man, Occo and Nthelin had for their sacriledge and cruelty been divinely punished, and again upon their repentance restored, thereupon became a Christian, and moreover in devotion to S. Swibert, he besides his other prayers, every day recited Our Lords Prayer, and the Angeli|call Salutation, earnestly begging that by his intercession he might obtain mercy in his last ower.
5. Now this Bruno fighting valiantly in the front of the army, was at last oppressed by the French horse, and among other wounds, was struck into the breast with a lance, so that falling to the ground he was troden under the horses feet. Thus weltring in his own blood, and being ready to expire, he in|wardly prayed S. Swbert to assist him in the present extremity: vowing that if he escaped that danger he would devore himself to his service the remainder of his lie. Assoon as he had made this prayer  vow, being in an Extasy, S Swibert in a glorious shape, adorn'd with his Pontificall vestment: appeared to him, and touching him with his Crosier, told him, that he had obtained of God that he should be freed from the present danger: therefore he should be mindfull of his Vow: Having said this, and making the sign of the Crosse upon him, he vanished out of sight
6. In the mean time certain of the French conquerours saw the brightnes in which S. Swibert had appeared  thereupon ran to the place, conjecturing that it was a sign that some person of eminent holines was either dead, or at least in an Agony there. Bruno seeing them, with a soft mournfull voyce begged their charitable ssistance. The Sol|diers seeing his horrible wounds wo~dred he was not dead. Then he informed them con|cerning the apparition of S. Swibert, and the Vow he had made: as likewise how by com|pulsion, and against his conscience he had fought in that warr. Hereupon they com|passionatly bound up his wounds, and caried him to a commodious lodging, where care might be taken for his recovery.
7 The fame of this being spread came to the eares of the King, who then was at a great di|stance in a place called Stoming He co~man|ded therefore that the soldier should be carefully brought to him:  having viewed all his wounds then not perfectly healed,  heard a particular relation of his Vision from his own mouth, he for the honour of S. Swi|bert gave him his freedom: Who assoon as he was recovered went to Werda with liberall oblatio~s,  there served our Lord the remain|der of his Life. And as for the glorious King Charles, calling likewise to mind how great a victory his Father King Pipin had obtaind by the intercession of S. Swibert he honoured

him ever after as his Speciall Patron,A. D. 784. and re|calling all the Monks of the Monastery of Werda who had during the war been disper|sed, he gave them many gifts and possessions: and magnificently adorned the Church of S. Swibert. Yea moreover many among the Saxons and Westphalians bore a peculiar ho|nour and veneration to the same glorious Saint.
8 This Narration commended to posterity by a Bishop of so great Holines, as S. Ludger hath been shewed to be, written likewise in the same age wherein this wonder hapned and such publick marks of the truth thereof appearing, seems to be warranted from all possibility of falsehood. And yet our late Lutheran Centuriators have the immodesty to write, Swibert was in great fame for working mi|racles but yet not any of them can be demonstra|ted. As if a thing publickly seen, confirmed by the writings, Charters, oblations and la|sting Monuments of Princes did want suffi|cient testimony. But men who willfully shutt their eyes, cannot see a mountain, when they dash their heads against it.


XIX. CH.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. c The Gests and happy death of Saint Gregory, Successour to S Boniface in the Bishoprick of Vtrcht.
5. Of S. Albericus an Englishman, Succes|sour to S Gregory.

A. D. 784.1. IN the year after our Lords Incarnation seaven hundred eighty four dyed S. Gre|gory Bishop O Vtrecht, a disciple of S. Boniface, worthy such a Master. Some Writers notwith|standing affirm that he was only elected but never confirmed Bishop, his modesty and hu|mility resisting: so we read in the Annota|tions to our Martyrologe.Martyr. Ang. 25. August. Or it he were Bishop there, he either resigned, or admitted as his Coadutour Alubert. His Life is written by S Ludger Bishop of Munster: Where it appears that he was by birth a German yet by reason o his relation to S. Boniface deserves to be commemorated in our History.
Vit. S. Gregor. ap Sur 25. August.2. One example or two of his piety we will here breifly relate. Two of his Brethren tra|velling unwarily through a forest, were mett, robbed  murdred by theeves; Where|upon a strickt sarch being made, the mur|derers were apprehended and brought to this Holy man, to be punished according to his pleasure and order. But he being a Dis|ciple of him who loved and dyed for his ene|mies, not only commanded they should be sett free, but likewise entertaind them with all humanity, affording them both mea and clothes: contenting himself with ad|monishing them to abstain for the future from such injustice and cruelty.
3. The same meeknes and patience he shewed in injuries done immediatly to himself. For he wanted not such as calum+niated and sought to deprave his best actions. These he was so far from hating, or revenging himself on them, that he ra|ther encreased his kindnes and tendernes to them. Yet God took his cause in hand: insomuch as not any one of them escaped panishment, but by some iudgment or other were copelled to acknowledge their malice and injustice
4. His last siknes was a Palsey, which yet neither deprived him of a power to walk, nor to continue his pious exhortations to his Disciples. This disease continued three years before his death, and it purified him as gold in the fire. Yea God was pleased to shew by a visible sign how pure his soule was: For when he was brought to that feeblenes that he could not be removed out of his bed, all the members or his body became like clean white wooll. Being ready to dye, he would needs be caried into the Church, where having received the Body of our Lord, he gave up his spirit to him,Martyr. Ang 25. Aug. looking to|wards the Altar. His Memory is celebrated on the twenty fifth of August.
5. As touching his Successour Albericus, he was by birth an Englishman: and is named in the Gallican Martyrologe with this elogy.Martyr Gal+lic. 25 Aug. On the one and twentieth of August is celebrated at Vtrecht the deposiion of S Albert, Bihop of the same Citty an Confessour. He was born in Brit|tany in the Diocese of York, from whence he came into Germany to preach the Gospell: and for his excellent endoments in piety and eminent lear|ning he was made Canon of the Church of Vtrecht. Afterward when S. Gregory through weaknes and old age was disabled to administer the same See, S. Alberic was appointed a dienser of the whole Diocese, to govern both the Clergy and peo|ple, and S. Gregory himself by inspiration of the Holy Ghost foretold that he should uccee im in the Bishoprick. Therefore after the Holy Bishop was freed from the chains of his flesh, S. Aeric was according to the desires of all exalted to his Epicopall throne. After which not contentin him|self with the solicitudes of his particular Diocese and Province, he extended his care to the adia|cent regions, and sent S. Ludger, who was after|ward Bishop of Munster, into the countrey of the Frisons, there to spread the Gospell ad root out Idolatrous superstitions At lnth after he had governed the Church of Vtrecht many years with admirable Sanctity, this blessed servant of God who was wholly celestiall forsook the earth, to which his heart never had been fixed and depar|ted to his heavenly countrey. He was honourabl buied near to his holy Predecessour, accompany  him  in his Tomb and reward, whom he has always fllowed in order and merit.



A. D. 785.
XX. CHAXX. CHAP.

1.2. Succession of Bishops in England.
3.4 c. The unhappy death of Kenulphus King of the West Saxons.
6. Brithric succeeds him.
7. Of Rictritha, a Holy Queen and Ab|besse.

1. AT the same time in Brittany the Epi|scopall See of London being vacant by the voluntary resignation of Kenwalch (as it is sayd) it was supplied by Eanbald, or Eadberch. And after the death of Edbert Bi|shop of Leicester, Vnwona was ordaind in his place.
A. D. 785.2. The year next following the two Bi|shops of the East-Angles dye again together, and to Eadred Bishop of Dumwich succeeded Alphun: to Hunfert Bishop of Helmham, Bibba. And within two years; both these agree to dye together, and to leave their Sees to new Bishops.
3. This was the last year of the Raign of Ke|nulf King of the West-Saxons: a Prince who had given many examples of vertue and piety, but yet ended his life unhappily. The length of his raign, and circumstances of his death are thus declared by William of Malmsbury:Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2. Kenulf, says he, was a Prince illustrious both for his vertues and warlick exploits. In one only battell which in the four and twentieth year of his raign he fought against Offa King of the Mercians, he was overcome. And after that he was afflicted with many calamities, and in conclusion came to a dishonourable and unhappy end. For after he had governed the kingdom of the West-Saxons the space of one and thirty years neither cowardly nor immodestly: at last whether it was out of a proud confidence that none durst resist him, or out of a provident care of the securi|ty of his Successour, he commanded Kineard the Brother of the Tyrant Sigebert, whom he saw to encrease dayly in power and wealth, to depart his kingdom. Kineard iudging it best to yeild to the tempest, went away with a shew of willingnes: But presently after by private meetings and unsinua|tions he assembled a body of men given to all manner of villany, with which he watched an opportunity against the King. And having been informed that he was for his recreation and lust|full pleasure retired with a small retinue into a certain countrey dwelling, he came suddenly upon him with some light armed soldiers, and encom|passed the house where the King was securely at|tending to his unlawfull luxury. Who perceiving the danger he was in, advised with his servants what he should doe. At first he barricadoed the dores, hoping either by fair speches to winn, or by threatnings to terrify the soldiers without: But finding neither way to succeed, in a furious rage he suddenly leaps forth upon Kineard,A. D. 786. and wanted very little of killing him. But being compassed by the multitude, and thinking it inglorious to fly, after he had well avenged himself by the death of many of the Traytours, he was slain: And those few servants with attended him, scorning to yeild, and earnest to avenge their Lord, were killd likewise.
4. Presently the fame of so execrable a Tragedy was spread abroad, and came to the knowledge of certain Noble men, not far distant, with the Kings Guards. Among whom Osric, who was most eminent both for age and prudence, encouraged the rest not to suffer the death of their Prince to passe unrevenged to their perpetuall infamy: Whereupon they all drew their swords and rushed upon the trayterous murderers. Kineard at first endeavoured to iustify his cause, to promise great matters, and to challenge kinred: But when all this proffited nothing, then he inflam'd the minds of his companions and fellow soldiers to resist bold|ly. A good while the combat was doubtfull, one side fighting for their lives, and the other for glo|ry. At last victory having a good space hovered uncertainly, turned her self to the iuster cause. So that wretched Traytour after a courageous but vain resistance, left his life, having enioyed the successe of his treachery a very short time. The Kings body was caried to Winchester, where it was buried in a Monastery, in those times very magni|ficent, but in this age almost desolate.
5. Other Historians mention the name of the village where King Kenulf was thus un|fortunatly slain:Wigorn. hic. Thus Florentius writes: It hapned (saith he) that Kenulf at that time went to a certain village which in the English tongue is called Meretum, for a certain wanton womans sake, c. This village is in the Province of Surrey and is now called Merton, of old, saith Camden,Camden in Surrey. famous for the fatall end of the West-Saxons.
6. There remaind in that Kingdom two Princes of the Royall family, which might pretend to the succession,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2. Brithric and Eg|bert. Brithric was preferred, perhaps for his mild and modest disposition: For he was a man more studious of peace then war: he was skilfull in reconciling freinds when dissenting: forraign Princes he civilly courted, and was in|dulgent to his own servants, yet so as not to pre|judice the vigour of his government.
7. As for Egbert, he was to attend sixteen years, before the scepter would fall to his lott. Which having once gott, he managed it gloriously: for he it was who dissolved all the petty governments, and reduced the whole kingdome into a Monarchy, as it has ever since continued: and moreover obliged all the other Pro|vinces to call themselves English, and the whole kingdom England, as shall be shewed hereafter.
8. In those dayes,A. D. 786. Hoved. hic as Hoveden writes, Rictrith, who long before had been a Queen, and was then an Abbesse, departed this life to our Lord. It does no where appear of what Pro|vince

this Lady was Queen,A. D. 787. nor of what Monastery Abbesse: But her piety deserves that her name and memory should not be abolished.


XXI. CH.XXI. CHAP.

1.2 c Pope Hadrian sends Legats into Brittany: Their Gests there.

1. IN the year of Grace seaven hundred eighty seaven,A. D. 787. great care was taken both by Princes, and Bishops in Brittany for the settling of Ecclesiasticall affairs: For the better composing of which Pope Adrian sent his Apostolick Legats, George, Bishop of Ostia, and Theophylact Bishop of Tudertum. Whether this proceeded from the said Popes voluntary care and solicitude, least the errours and disorders by which the Orientall Churches were defiled, should infect the Western likewise: Or that he was solicited thereto by the Bishops in Brittany, and some Princes too, to the end that provision might be made against the aspiring attempts of Offa King of the Mercians, who of late not only sought the oppression of some of the weaker Princes, but had also usurped the re|venews of the Church of Canterbury, and sought likewise to depresse its dignity, it can|not certainly be determined: But this seems most probable: as may be collected from the proceedings of the said Legats.
Ap. Spelm. Regeb. Cnt2. When they were come into Brittany, they were received both by the Kings, Clergy and people with great honour. They landed in Kent, as appears by the Letter of George Bi|shop of Ostia to the Pope in which he gives him an account of all their proceedings. The first person who entertained them was Iaenbrach (so he calls the present Arch|bishop of Canterbury who is by our Histo|rians named Iambert or Lambert.) After they had admonished the said Arch-bishop concerning such matters as they esteemed necessary, they proceeded in their iourney Northward, and came to the Court of Offa King of the Mercians: who for the great reve|rence which he bore to S. Peter and the Pope his Successour, received with wonderfull ioy and res|pect both the Legats and Epistles which the said Pope by them had written to him.
3. At the same time the King of the West-Saxons (Brithric) also came to advise with Offa concerning the common affairs of the Church, to whom they likewise presented the Popes Letter directed to him: in which Letters were mentioned certain disorders in Ecclesiasticall matters, about which, it seems, those Kings themselves were faulty: which disorders they promised to amend.
4. After some consultation with those Kings, the Legats divided themselves: For George Bishop of Ostia, who seems to have been the principall Legat, thought fitt to leave his companion Theophylact among the Mercians, and other more southern Pro|vinces, to reform disorders there: and for himself he went into the Northern parts, to Alfwold King of the Northumbers and Eambald Arch-bishop of York: In which iourney he took with him as an assistant Wighod an Abbot and Preist, a man of ap|proved fidelity, whom Charles the Great had sent with him into Brittany.
5. When he was come as far as York, he found that King Alfwold at that time re|mained at a place a great way distant from thence Northward. The Arch-bishop therefore thought fitt to send Messengers to him to give him notice of the Legats arrivall, and intention to assemble a Synod for rectifying abuses. The King received this information with much ioy, and im|mediatly appointed a day when the Synod should meet: commanding all Princes both Ecclesiasticall and Secular to give their atten|dance at it.
6. It is not in the Legats Epistle men|tioned where this Synod mett: but since our Ecclesiasticall Writers doe speak of two Synods this year and the next assembled in the Kingdom of the Northumbers: the one at a place called Fincenhale (not Wincenhale, as some corruptly write it, it is now called Finkeley.) The other at Acley: both which places are in the Province now called the Bishoprick of Durham: it is very probable that the Legat went so far Northward, to preside in both those Synods, as being most commodiously assembled in the midst of the Northumbriam Kingdom.
7. When the Synod was mett:One of the prime things which the Legat did, was to deliver Popes Adrians Epistles to be pu|blickly read: Which being done, both the Princes and Bishops unanimously professed that they would obediently observe the De|crees contained in them. What those De|crees were the Legats does not declare. But wee find that the year before this,Vid. Tom. 3. Conl. Pope Adrian had made a Collection of certain Heads of Ecclesiasticall Disciplin out or both the Greek and Latin Canons, the Roman Sy|nods, and Decrees of Ancient Popes, which he sent by his Legats to severall Churches to be received in their respective Synods, as the Common Law of the Church.
Such a Colle|ction wee read sent to Ingelramnus Bishop of of Metz in Germany: and very probably the same was also directed to the Bishops of Brittany, to the end that there might be an uniformity of Discipline through the whole Western Patriarchat.
8. Besides these Epistles sent from the Pope, the Legat advising with the Bishops and Princes found that great disorders and irregularities were spread through

those Churches:A. D. 774. which, said he, was no wonder, considering that, since the time of Saint Augustin no Bishop had been sent from Rome to make inspection into those Churches; and to reform abuses, To rectify which he with advice compiled a Capitular, or Writing containing the severall points to be re|formed: Which having caused to be read publickly: there followed a generall pro|fession of subiection and obedience to the orders and regulations prescribed by him, with humble thanks for his seasonable ad|monitions.


XXII. CH.XXII. CHAP.

i.2. c. The Capitular, containing twenty Ecclesiasticall Decrees: proposed by the Popes Legat in a Synod o the Northumbers, and Subscribed to by the Bishops, Abbots and Nbles.

1. THE Capitular here mentioned con|tained severall Ordonnances and Ad|monitions prescribed by the Legat, in order to the correcting of abuses which had crept into the Churches of Brittany. They were twenty in number, the sence of which we will here breifly sett down.
 2. The First admonished them to hold fast the Faith and Decrees established in the Councill of Nica and the five following Generall Councils: and that every year Bishops in their Synods should examine diligently their Preists whether they taught the peo|ple  conformably to those Decrees. 2. That Baptism should be administred according to the Canonicall Stats and at the due times appointed: and that God fathers and God|mothers according to their obligation in|struct their God-children, teaching them  the Creed and our Lords Prayer. 3. That Bi|shops every year visitt their Dioceses, and twice assemble Synods, to prevent abuses rising: Likewise that they appoint Congre|gations whither the people might resort to  hear Gods word preached. 4. That Bishops take great care that Canons live Canonically, and Religious men and women regularly, as well in their dyet as Cloathing: that so a distinction be made between Canons, Monks and Seculars in their habits: Wherin the two former were to conform themselves to the grave fashions observed in the Eastern parts, avoyding light-colourd and  costly rayment. 5. That when any Abbot or Abbesse dyes, care be had, with the counsell of the Bishop, that fitt Superiours be chosen in their places, out of their respective Con|vents: or in case none be found there, they  should be taken out of others. 6. That none be ordained Preists or Deacons but such as are of approved lives and can perform their Charges: and that they persevere in the Titles to which they are consecrated.
3. The .7. was, that all Publick Churches at Howers Canonicall with reverence observe their Course, or Ecclesiasticall Office. 8. That all ancient Priviledges conferred by the Apostolick See on any Churches and Mona|steries in Brittany be preserved inviolate: and in case any preiudice has been done to them by wicked men, that such iniury be taken away. 9. That Ecclesiasticall persons eat their meat in common, that it may be  observed whether they doe fast and abstain according to their obligation: and there|fore that none, except he be sick, presume to eat in Secret, because such is the pra|chise of Hypocrites and Saracens. 10. That Preists at the Altar for decencies sake under their Sacerdotall Vestments weare other clothing, as it was commanded in the Old Law. Also that Oblations should be bread, not Crusts. And that no Calices be made of Horn. Like|wise that Bishops meddle not in Secular Iu|dicatures. 11. Kings and Princes were admo|nished  to doe iustice, and to hearken to the admonitions of Bishops, who also are commanded confidently, without fear or flattery to tell them their duty. 12. That in  the election of Kings regard be had to such as are not born of adultery or incest: and that the Electours should be, not the com|mon people, but the Nobles and Bishops: And Kings being once constituted, that none should resist or detract then, much lesse conspire against their lives, under pain of an eternall Anathema.
4. The 13. was:That Great men and iud|ges  should iudge causes iustly, without ac|ception of persons. 14. That no uniust Tri|but should be imposed on the Church, not any greater then were according to the cu|stom of pious Emperours and Kings, or as the Roman Law appints: And that such Prince should especially abstain from this violence as doe communicate with the Roman Church. 15. That all Mariages incestuous with near  kinred or consecrated Virgins be utterly for|biden. 16. That bastards, or children of Re|ligious persons shall not be admitted to in|herit. 17. That Tithes be duly payed without  fraud, that God may blesse them. For it often happens, that he who pays not tithes, is reduced to tithes. Vsury is utterly prohibited. And iust, equall weights measures ordained. 18. That all vowes made either in prosperity  or adversity be performed. 19. That all su|perstitious  rites and relicks of Paganism be rooted out: And particularly that men ab|stain from dying and colouring their bodies, or painting figures on them (as the Hea|thenh Brittains of old did,) Likewise that none should cutt off their horses eares, slitt their nostrills, curtall their tales, or eat their flesh: for all these are according to the practises of Pagans.

20. All are admonished to Pennance:A. D. 787. and  to bring forth ruits beseeming Pennace: Not approaching to the Holy Eucharist but according to the iudgment of the Preist, after Satisfaction imposed according to the measure of their faults: And that if any one departed this wold without Confession and Pennance, none should pray for him.
5. In these Decrees there are some passages which require our consideration: For where|as in the fourth Canon, Bishops are required to take care that Monks in their cloathing conform themselves to the grave fashion of those in the Eastern parts. Some may pehaps from hence inferre, that the Lega by the Orientalls inten|ded the Grecians, and consequently that Mo|nachism came to us from the Eastern Church, and perhaps Religion also. It is not to be doubted but that by that phrase he meant the Orders of Religion observed in Kent, the most Eastern Province of the Kingdom and the most civilized part of the Island. Which is confirmed by the like expression in the nine|teenth Canon, where he forbids the eating of horse-flesh, a custome not practised in the Eastern parts: For surely he hid no need to have re|course to Greece or the Eastern Church for de|crying that barbarous custom.
6. Again, whereas in the sayd ninetenth Canon he enveighs against painting their Bodies: it seems that ancient rude fashion of the Old Brittains and Picts was not altogether disused: Yet not so as if the Northumbers practised it as in old times, over their whole naked bodies, but only on some parts which were discovered, as the face, armes, or thighs: which savoured of some relicke of Gentilisme.
7. Lastly, whereas in the Seaventh Canon mention is made of the Ecclesiaticall Course, o Office: we are to observe that though some Churches had their peculiar Office for Divine Service; Yet that in Brittany, and principally among the Northumbers, they conormd themselves to the Roman pratise, introduced by S. Benedict Biscop,Bed. Hist. l. 4. c. . as S. Beda declares.
8. These Decrees were by the Legat propo|sed in Councill, and withall devotion ubmit|ted to both by the Bishops, Abbots and all the Noble And thereupon confirmd by the Le|gat in the Popes name with making the sign of the Crosse: and in like manner signed by the Bishops and Nobles there present.
As tou|ching the Subscriptions there are found seve|rall names both of Bishops and Episcopall Sees which are no where else to be found: and therfore the false Writing of them is to be imputed to the unskillfullnes of Trnscribers.


XXIII CHAP.XXIII. C.

1.2. c. The same Capitular received in a Synod of the Mercians.
3.4. c Offa King of the Mercians to the preiudice of the See of Canterbury, raises Lichfeild to an Archiepiscopall See.
6.7. King Offa makes his Son Egfrid King with him: Of his Queen Quen|drida.

1. AFter this Synod in the Kingdom of the Northumber,Ibd. the Legat attended by the Kings Embassadours and certain Bishops, went back into the kingdome of the Mer|cians. With them also went Malvin and Pit|e Lectours, who caried with them the De|cree of this Synod. And being arrived there, they called another Synod at a place by our Historians called Cealchithe,Florent. Westmonast. Hunting. Antiquit. Brit. Camd. in rinob. pelman. ib. Cealtide, Calthu|the, and Calchuch. (Where this place is sea|ted none of them determine. Probably wee may understand Chelsey, which, saith am|den, in ancient Records is found written Chelchehith, which was ot a fear of the Mer|cian Kings.
2. In this Synod there were present King Offa and the Nobility of the countrey: Likewise lambert or Lambert Archbishop of Canterbury, with the other Bishops of that Province. There in the presence of the Councill the foresaid De|crees were read with a loud distinc voyce,  moreover explaind both in Latin and English, that all might understand. Whereupon all who were present unanimously gave thanks to the Legats, promising their obedience to the Popes admonitions, and that they would faithfully observe the said Decrees. And con|sequently both the King, Archbishop, Bishops Abots and Nobles confirmed them by their Subscriptions.
3. Besides this,Malmsb. de Rg. l. 1. c. 4 King Offa had a desire to pro+mote one of the Episcopall Sees of his own kingdom to a Metropoliticall Dignity, partly out of a consideration of the co~mmodity re|dounding therby to his own subiects: and partly out of displeasure conceived against the Archbishop of Canterbury, who being de|sirous to preserve the ancient Priviledges of his own See, opposed earnestly this design of King Offa, producing the frequent Edicts, both old and new, of the See Apostolick in confir|mation of the Supereminent Dignity of his Church. This resistance did so displease King Offa that he deprived him of all the lands seated in his kingdom which belonged to the See of Canterbury.
4 A certain Monk of S. Albans in a Wri|ting published under the name of Mathew

Paris touching th Life of King Offa,De vit. Offic. 2. dif. 21. affirms that the said Iambert Archbishop of Canter|bury was accused before the King of conspi|ring against him, and that by reason of the vicinity of his See to France, he had promi|sed to Charles the Great that in case he would invade Brittany he would give him free en|trance into his Archbishoprick, and all assi|stance likewise.
5. This Controversy being earnestly pro|secuted on both sides,Malmsb. ib. at last the King sent wise Messengers to Rome, and partly by rea|sons, partly by gifts so wrought in that Court that Pope Adrian condescended to his request, and exalted the Episcopall See of Lichfeild to an Archbishoprick, to which were subiect all the Bishops of the Mercian Kingdom, namely Denebert Bishop of Worce|ster, Werenbert Bishop of Leicester, Edulf Bi|shop of Sidnacester, Wolpheard Bishop of Hereford, as likewise the Bishops of the East-Angles, Alheard Bishop of Elmham, and Tidfrid Bishop of Dumwich. (Now the name of the Bishop of Lichfeild, who was made Archbishop was Adulf.) So that there remained to the Archbishop of Canterbury onely fower Bishops subiect, to wit, of Lon|don, Winchester, Rochester and Selesey (or as others write, Shirborn.) From whence ap|pears that though King Offa this year labou|red to effect this design, yet it was not effe|cted till some years after: because Aldulf was not at this time consecrated Bishop: the Bishop of that See now being Hygbert.
6. This same year King Offa thought fitt to assume his Son Egfrid to a participation of his kingly dignity, for which purpose he caused him to be solemnly crowned, pro|bably whilst the Synod was sitting. This is insinuated in an Epistle of Alcuin to him, in which he stiles him King,Alcuin Ep. 48. and gives, him good instructions for the discharge of that high Office, though he say withall, that his admonitions were not necessary, since he might sufficiently at home learn authority from his Father, and piety from his Mo|ther.
7. This Mother of Egfrid and wife of King Offa was called Quendrida, and as Mathew Paris affirms, was kinswoman to Charles the Great, and before she came into Brittany was named Drida. She was banished out of France for some unknown fault: and being arrived in Brittany so wrought upon the affections of King Offa, perhaps by a shew of Piety (for which Alcuin commends her) that he made her his Queen. But that her Piety was only in shew appeard by her im|pious murdring of the most pious Prince Ke|nelm: Of which hereafter.


XXIV. CHAP.XXIV. C.

i.2.3 Iambert Archbishop of Canterbury being wrongfully oppressed by King Offa, would quitt his See: but is disswaded by Alcuin. His death.

1. IAmbert Archbishop of Canterbury took very heavily this uniust deminution of his See. He omitted nothing, he spared neither cost nor labour to assert the dignity of his Church,Malmsb de Pontif. l. f. 199. and to represse the greedy covetousnes of his ad|versaries. Severall Appeals to Rome he inter|posed, and when he saw that King Offa's power and gifts prevayled, he determind to desert his See. Notwithstanding lest men should iudge that he took such a resolution out of passion and a sudden discontent, he consulted with his freinds about it.
2. There is among Alcuins Epistles extant one, directed to a nameles person, contai|ning an Answer to the same person (which doubtlesse was this Archbishop, who signi|fied to him the Moives inducing him to a purpose of forsaking his Episcopall charge:) Which Answer was sent by a Disciple of Alcuin called Candidus.Alcuin. Ep. 97.And therein Alcuin utterly disswaded him, telling him that he could not have a more iustifiable motive then his Predecessour S. Laurence had, which was the return of Idolatry, and the danger of death and torments in case he opposed him|self therto. Yet he, after he had been chastised by the Apostle S. Peter himself, repented of his purpose. It seems that when this Letter was written, Iambert was already retired into France, because Alcuin exalts the happines of the Church in which Iambert then lived, un|der the protection of so glorious and so or|thodoxe a King as Charles the Great was, whom he there and else where calls David.
3. Iambert hearkned to Alcuins advice, and returned to his See: where two years after he dyed on the twelfth of August, and was bu|ried after the ancient manner of his Prede|cessours in the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul: For thus we read in the Antiquities of Brit|tany:Antiquit. Brit. in Lam|berte. Iambert after he had the space of many years maintained the Dignity of his Prelacy with great constancy and no lesse labour: when he foresaw that his death approached, desiring to abolish the lae decrees of his Predecessours touching the bu|riall place of the Archbishops, and to reduce it to the ancient primitive custom, commanded that when he was dead, his body should be caried to be buried in the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul in the Monastery of S. Augustin. Which command was accordingly without any opposition performed: and he was honourably buried in the Chapter-house of S. Augustin. Concerning his Succes|sour we shall treat in due place.



XXV. CH.XXV. CHAP.

1. Brithric maries the daughter of King Offa.
2.3. The Danes begin to invade Brit|tany, c.
4 5. Lands given to the Monastery of S. Denys in France.

A. D. 788. Huntingd. f. 343.1. IN the year after the fore-mentioned Synods, Brithric King of the West-Saxons, saith Huntingdon, demanded and received for his Wife Eadburga daughter of Offa King of Mercians. By which alliance he was so much strengthned in his kingdom, that he became haughty and proud.
2. At the same time began the Prologue of all those inexpressible miseries which our Island in following times suffred from the rapines and cruelty of the Danes: of which we shall oftentimes have but too just occasion to treat and recount most horrible tragedies acted by those barba|rous in humane Pagans. For the ame Au|thour immediatly ater mention o that Ma|riage, thus proceeds:b. ib. In those dayes, saith he, there arrived three ships of Daes in Brit|tany, who came only to obb, and spoile Which the Governour of that Province where they landed knowing, he went with too much ne|gligence and security to meet them, inten|ding to apprehend them and lead them cap|tives to the Kings Court. This he did, not well informing himself, who and how many they were, nor for what cause they were come. There|fore unadvisedly falling in among them, he was slain. This was the first Englishman which the Danes slew: but afterward many thousands suffred the like fate: And these were the first Danish ships which aborded in England.
3 The same year two new Bishops were (according to custom) together consecrated in the Kingdom of the East-Angles, Td|fred to the Church of Dumwich, and Alherd to that of Helmham. And about the same time Wulfhard succeeded to Vtel in the See of Hereford. These were the first Bishops consecrated by the late ordained Metropoli|tan of Lichfeild.
Iac. Dublet in Antiquit. Monast. S. Dionys. 4. We read among the Antiquities of S. Denys in France compiled by a Monk of the same Monastery, a certain Charter, in which, the Authour of it, Berthwald a Duke in the Kingdom of the South-Saxons in Brittany relates, how having falln into a disease iudged by Physicians incurable, he had been informed that in France at the Monastery of Saint Dionysius, S. Rusticus and Saint Eleutherius, of which the Venerable Florad was Abbot, many miraculous cures were wrought by the intercession of the said Saints: Whereupon having demanded and obtained leave of King Charles, he went thither. And there after he had for the space of a very few dayes lyen sick, he was restored to perfect health through Gods mercy obtained by the intercession of those Blessed Saints. Therefore accor|ding to a Vow which he had made to God and the said Saints, some Relicks of whom he brought back into Brittany, he built a Church dedicated to their honour at a Man|sion house of his seated in a village called Kreseld upon the River Saford in a terri|tory called Cutfesta in which lyeth the Citty of Chichester: For the maintaining of the Monks belonging to the said Church, he by the consent of his Brother Eadbald gave the same Village with all its depen|dencies, and moreover the benefit of the two havens near adioyning, Hastings and Pevensel, with the Salpits, c. that they might pray for his soule. This Charter was accepted by a Monk called Deodatus in the name of the said Saints Dionysius, c.
5. This donation made by Duke Berthwald to the Monastery of S. Denys in France was confirmed by a Charter of King Offa dated the second year following:Ibid. In which Char|ter there is likewise a ratification of ano|ther Donation to the same Monastery by two Brethren, Agonowaa and Sigren, o certain lands seated in a haven caled Lundonwic: To which the said King likewise adds a gift of all the rents and customs due to himself out of the same Haven and land And this at the Petition of Maginarius Ab|bot of S. Denys who sent a Monk of his called Nadetharius to receive in his Ab|bots name this Charter from the Kings hands. And Subscribers thereto are King Offa, Hig|bert Arch-bishop of Lichfeild, Kinidred the Queen, Vnwona a Bishop and others.
6. In the next Century likewise upon oc|casion of a complaint made by the Abbot of S. Denys to Ethelwolf Monarch of the En|glish, of iniuries done by a certain Officer of the King called Togred, to the Tenants of that Monastery in Ridrefeld, in the Havens, Saltpits c. the said King renewed a con|firmation of the foresaid Donation and Char|ter. The like did also King Edgar upon such a complaint above a hundred years after that.



XXVI. C.XXVI. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests of S. Lullo, Arch-bi|shop of Mentz.
6. The sudden and happy death of S. Witta Bishop and Abbot.
7.8. c. The Blessed death of Saint Lullo.
10. S. wille hade first Bishop of Bremen.

1. IN the same year dyed S. Lul or Lullo, the Successour of S. Boniface in the Arch|bishoprik of Mentz.Serrar. vit. S. Lulli. His parents were Noble, for he was kinseman to Kineard Bi|shop of Winchester, and, as some write, to S. Boniface. He was educated in the Mona|stery of Malmsbury (Maldubia.) When he was Deacon he went over into Germany with other Apostolick Preists in the year of Christ seaven hundred twenty five, at the invita|tion of S. Boniface, by whom he was ordai|ned Preist, and employed in the great charge of preaching to the Pagans in Hassia and Thuringia. Afterward he was sent to Rome to procure the erection of the Church of Mentz into a Metropolitan See, as likewise Priviledges to the Monastery of Fulda: which he easily obtained.
2. When S. Boniface undertook his last iourney into the countrey of the Frisons where he was martyrd, he obtained permis|sion to consecrate S. Lullo his Successour in the See of Mentz, as hath been declared, and withall recommended him to the protection and favour of King Pipin and other Princes: and least they should forget this recommen|dation, he wrote to a certain Preist named Fulrad Chaplain to King Pipin,Ap. Bonif. Ep. 92. desiring him earnestly to take him into his care: in which Epistle he gave S. Lullo this Character, which shewd his esteem and particular affection to him, I desire you, saith he, and in the name of God doe earnestly beseech you that you will so order matters that my Son and Fellow-bishop Lul may be constituted in a power to compose the affairs of the People and Churches and be made a Teacher of Preists. And I confidently hope through Gods grace that the Preists will find in him a Master, the Monks a Regular Doctour, and the people a faithfull Preacher and Pastour.
3. S. Lullo worthily made good this com|mendation given of him by his Master: for assoon as he was gone he in person visited his Province, teaching, exhorting and corre|cting all abuses. But shortly hearing of the Martyrdom of his dear Father, he did not so wholly eild to greif for his losse, but that he employd his thoughts how to honour his Memory: And therefore calling his Clergy to|gether, he, attended by a great multitude of Ecclesiasticks and Nobles also, went to the place where the Holy Bishop had been mar|tyred, and with great solemnity, singing of Psalms, and lighted torches he brought the Sacred Body to Mentz, where he earnestly de|sired it might be buried in the Archiepisco|pall Church founded by him. But herein he was strongly opposed by S. Sturmis Abbot of Fulda, who bid him call to mind that the last words almost which he had spoken to S. Lullo himself, were a command that his body should repose in his Monastery of Fulda. Hereto S. Lullo was compelled to yeild, but yet the love  incomparable respect which He bore to the memory of his dear Master kindled in his heart such a passionate dis|pleasure against S. Sturmis, for depriving him of so beloved and so sacred a pledge, that he scarce ever ceased afterward to doe him any dispeasure, and even to persecute him with a violence not beseeming his Pro|fession. Notwithstanding the Holy Martyrs bowell, he placed in a Church at Mentz, where they are held in great veneration.
4. Moreover in a further expression of his love and regard to his blessed Masters me|mory, he exhorted S. Willebald his Nephew to write the Holy Martyrs Life, to the end that posterity might know, honour and imitate the heavenly vertues which shone so brightly in him.
5. Severall Monasteries he founded, as that of Heresfeild in Hassia, not far from Mentz, which he endowd with ample revenews,  adorned it with many Relicks, translating likewise thither from Fritzlar the Body of S. Wigbert, for which a magnificent shrine was made by the contribution of King Charles the Great. Another Monastery likewise he erected at a place called Bleidenstat about two miles from Mentz: Which afterward by his Successour Bertold was changed into a Colledge of Canons. Thither also he translated the Relicks of S. Ferruth from Kassel. In a word his whole life was employed in nothing but the advancement of piety and vertue: either in converting Pagans from Idolatry to the Christian Faith, or in promoting devout Chri|stians in the wayes of Perfection.
6. When his last sicknes seised on him, he sent for the Holy companion of his Apo|stolick Office S. Witta, who had been consecra|ted by S. Boniface Bishop of Birburg, and after that Town was destroyd, was made Successour of S. Wigbert in the Monastery of Fritzlar. Him being come, he desired to say Masse, after which he intended to direct him to his Mo|nastery of Heresfeild. The good Bishop after he had with great devotion prepared himself for celebrating that most dreadfull Sacrifice, not then perceiving in himself any bodily infirmity at all, went to the Holy Altar, where he had no sooner performed that Divine Liturgy, and communicated, but immediatly he expired. His Body Saint Lullo, presently caused to be caried into a boat,

conveying it himself to Heresfeld, where he buried it with great honour. This Holy Bi|shop is by some German Writers called Albui|nus, according to the Saxon signification of his name Witta or White.
7: Presently after S. Lullo himself followd him,Martyr. Ang. 16. Octob. partaking together the eternall rewards of his labours, on the sixteenth day of Octo|ber. His Body was there likewise in the same Monastery buried with all religious piety and solemnity. And about threescore years after being taken up, it was found with as fresh a colour, as due proportion and softnes of all the members, yea and covered with vest|ments as free from any decay, as if it had been then newly buried.
8. The said Monastery of Heresfeld having been ruined by the rebellious Lutherans,Mirae. Fast. Belg. 16. Oct. it is not known whither that Sacred body was re|moved: But his Head was caried to the Mo|nastery of S. Godard, the Abbot whereof Her|man in the year of Christ sixteen hundred and three gave it to the Iesuits of Mentz to be placed there in their Colledge.
9. Many Miracles are recorded as perfor|med by him both in his life and after his death: I will only mention one. Is the year of Grace eight hundred forty seaven when his Body was taken up, as the Monks there were removing a huge Stone which lay over it, it fell from their hands upon the foot of one of their Brethren, so crushing and breaking it, that it quite lost the shape of a foot. Whereupon the Religious Monks being much contristated, had recourse to God in Prayer, begging likewise the Saints in|tercession: And the night immediatly fol|lowing it was so perfectly restored, that the said Brother assisted at the next Mattins not retaining any mark of the least bruise at all.
10. A little before his death he by the ap|pointment of Pope Adrian ordained S. Wille|hade Bishop of Bremen. Which Citty was then newly erected into an Episcopall See by the same Pope, and richly endowed by the munificence of Charles the Great: Whose Charter, describing the limits of the Territo|ry whereof, and likewise of the lands con|ferred on it, is extant in Baronius. As tou|ching S Willehade, the first Bishop thereof, we shall deliver his Gests in the occurrents of the year of Christ seaven hundred ninety one, in which he dyed.





THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.

I. CHAP.I. CHAPTER.

1.2. c. Alfwold the pious King of the Northumbers, murdred: to whom Osred succeeds: and presently after, Ethelred.
7.8 Ethelred Bishop of Hagulstad: the ma|gnificence of that Church.

1. _NOTWITHSTANDING all the care which the Legats of Pope Adrian in the late Sy|nod, with the unanimous con|sent of the Bishops and Nobles had taken for the preventing seditions and rebellions in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, yet such an unquiet, tumultuous Spirit had taken so fixed a possession of the minds of that people, that scarce any King could be per|mitted to sit upon that throne but by the murder of his Predecessour, and the uniust usurper by his own destruction made way for his Successour. Which restlesse, turbulent disposition since it could not be cured by the Laws and authority of Gods Church, God took the revenge into his own hands, and sent the terrible Nation of the Danes first to lay wast that kingdom, and afterwards to be a most tearfull scourge to the whole Island.A. D. 789.
2. In the year of Grace seaven hundred eighty nine Alfwol the good pious King of the Northumbers after that he had with the great ioy of vertuous men governed that kingdom the space of eleaven years, was by a tempestuous sedition of wicked men deprived of it, and his life also. The Head of the faction against him was Sgga a Noble man of that Kingdom,Hoved. f. 404 who gathering a troop of desperatly wicked men murdred this most innocent King in a place called Silcester near the Picts wall. (This was an ancient Station of the Romans, where the Asturian Wing quartered, to oppose the irruptions of the barbarous Picts and Caledonians: and it was then called Cilurnam: but is now much more celebrated for the death of this pious King) In the place where he was slain a heavenly light was frequently seen,Huntingd. f. 343. saith Huntingdon.
3. His Body was caried to the Cathedrall Church of Hagustald, where it was with great honours and devotion buried:Hoved. ib. Harpsf. saec. 8. c. which Church had been built to Gods honour, and the memory of his Saints, Saint Cuthbert and S. Oswald King and Martyr. Of how great merit this innocent King was with God, the miracles performed at his

Tombe, and elswere doe declare abundantly.
4. Moreover the Divine iustice gave a yet greater testimony of his Sanctity by the terrible revenge with which God expiated this execrable murther, which though com|mitted by a few, was punished with a com|mon calamity.Hoved. ibid. For not only Sigga who defi|led his hands with his blood, the same year out of despair became his own executioner and mur|derer: But likewise dire Prodigies terrified the whole Nation: Horrible thunders and fiery dra|gons in the aire foretold a most greivous famine shortly ensuing; and an unexpressible slaughter of men. Thus writes Hoveden. And Mathew of Westminster addsWestmon. hic. as a prodigy of great wonder, that on mens cloathes were seen the sign of the Crosse: which he conceived to have been intended by God for a warning against the coming of the Danes, which shortly followed.
5. In the place of Alfwold there was sub|stituted Osred, son to King Alred who a little before raigned in the Kingdom of the Nor|thumbers. But this Osred enioyd but a short time the fruit of the treason committed against Alfwold: For within a years space the Northumbers according to their naturall inconstancy, grew weary of him: So that he was circumvented by the treachery of his Nobles,Hoved. A. D. 790. and deprived of his kingdom after which he had the Monasticall Tonsure in the Citty of York: and yet not finding security there, he was compelled to fly out of the Kingdom.
6. After the deposall of Osred, the Nor|thumbers recalled out of banishment Ethel|red the son of Ethelwold,Id. ib. who was a second time exalted to the throne.Among the Epi|stles of Alcuin there is extant one directed to this King Ethelred after his restitution,Alcuin. Epist 29. as likewise to Osbald and Osbert two of his Prin|cipall Nobles, in which he with great affe|ction admonishes them to sett before their eyes the great calamities lately befailn that Kingdom by the iniustice, rapines  unclean|nes of former Princes: which vices if they did not avoyd, they must expect the like iudgments. Particularly he exhorts them to apprehend the scourge which lately afflicted the Church of S. Cuthbert, a place enriched with the holy Relicks of many Saints, but now miserably wasted by Pagans
Before which Letter was sent, it seems King Ethel|red was slain, as appears by the destroying the Church of Lindesfarn.
7. The same year in which King Alfwold was slain, Tither (or as Hoveden stiles him, S. Gilbert) Bishop of Hagustald dying,Hoved. hic. Ethel|bert a little before consecrated Bishop of Wite|hern, or Candida casa, relinquishing that See, was translated to the Church of Hagu|stald.
leuin Ep. 328. To this Ethelbert newly Bishop of Ha|gustald, and to the Congregation of Monks there serving God in the Monastery dedicated to S. Andrew, there is ound an Epistle also of the same Alcuin, in which after congra|tulation for his assumption to that Bishoprick, he humbly recommends himself to his and all their Prayers: and exhorts them to be care|full in the pious education of young Reli|gious, that they may be worthy successours of the honour which they had obtained in other Chur|ches, and likewise that they might be intercessours for them when they were dead: For (saith he) the prayers of the living are proffitable to the dead, to obtain for some the pardon of their sins, and to others an encrease of their happines. In the same Epistle likewise he magnifies the beauty and sumptuousnesse of that Church and Monastery at Hagustald, built long before by S. Wilfrid:
Which according to the testi|mony of William of Malmsbury, was so ma|gnificent,Malmsbur. that in no countrey on this side of the Alpes could be found a Church which might deserve to be compared with it: In|somuch as those which came from Rome seeing it, imagined they saw the Roman am|bition in Brittany. And indeed it was from Rome that S. Wilfrid called the Architects and Masons which built it.


II. CHAP.II. CHAP.

1.2. c. Succession of Bishops in England: Ethelard an illustrious Arch-bishop of Canterbury
5. Two young Northumbrian Princes mur|dred.
6. Osred after his deposall, and Monasti|call Tonure slain
6. Ethelred maries the daughter of Offa.

1. EThelbert having relinquished the Epis|copall See of Candida casa,A. D. 790. Hoved. f. 404. it was sup|plied by Eadulph or Baldulj, who was ordained in a place called Hearvahalah, which may be in|terpreted, a place of Lords. About the same time likewise after the death of Higbert Bishop of Lichfeild, and lately called Arch-bishop, there succeeded in the same See Aldulf, who was the only Arch-bishop of that See which re|ceived a Pall from Rome: for not long after this See was reduced to its primitive state, simply Episcopall. Moreover Alubert Bishop of Selesey in the kingdom of the South-Sa|xons, dying, in his place was substituted Osa, by some called Bosa.
2. The Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury had been a good space vacant after the death of Iambert:A. D. 79i. and in the year of Christ seaven hundred ninety one was supplied by the translation of Ethelard thither from the See of Winchester,Vid. l. 24. c. i6. Malmsb. de Pontif. l. 1. f. 199. to which he had eleaven years before been ordained. He was a man to be compared, yea prefered above the most fa|mous Prelats of this Island, if we except the first Apostolick Doctours of it. For he restored unto the primitive splendour the dignity

and Priviledges of his Church, which had been depressed by King Offa: and in what esteem he was for his Sanctity will appear by the Epistle of Pope Leo to King Kenulphus, of which hereafter.
Alcuin. Ep. 283. A little after his assumption to this su|preme See, Alcuin wrote a letter of congra|tulation to him, in which he exhorted him to imitate the vertues of his glorious Pre|decessours, the Doctours and lights of Brittany, by whose prayers he should certainly be as|sisted, if he would reclame their intercession, with whose Sacred Bodies and Monuments he was compassed.
Which Epistle seems to have been an answer to one which this wor|thy Prelat wrote to him to demand his counsell and instructions, as one perfectly versed in all sacred and Ecclesiasticall lear|ning, touching the discharge of his New su|blime Office.
4. To the See of Winchester, from which this illustrious Bishop Ethelard had been ta|ken, was promoted Egbald, who is reckond the tenth Prelat of that Church.
Hoved. hic.5. At this time was performed an impious fact by King Ethelred lately restored to the Kingdom of the Northumbers. For whereas two children of the pious King Alfwold fearing the cruelty of King Ethelred, had fled for secu|rity to the Church of York, as to an inviolable Sanctuary, they were by deceitfull promises withdrawn from thence, and miserably slain by the said King in a place called Wonwaldremere: The names of those two Princes were Elf, and Elfwin.
6 The death of Osred presently after this following, did not deserve to be so much lamented, because though he had been vio|lently deposed from his throne, to which King Ethelred was restored, yet having been in some sort engaged in the security of a Re|ligious life, of which he had received the Tonsure, it was not so glorious for him to aspire to a Crown to which Ethelred had a right preferable to his.Id. ib. However he was about this time privatly recalled from his banishment in a place called Enfania, by certain Princes of the Northumbers discontented with King Ethel|red, who interposed their oathes to be loyall to him: But afterward his own soldiers deserting him, he was taken prisoner by King Ethelred, and upon his command slain in a place called Dingburch (or as others call it, Cunburg.) His body was caried to the mouth of the River Tine, and buried in the famous Monastery seated there.
6. King Ethelred not thinking himself as yet secure, to confirm his kingdom yet more strongly, sought the freindship and associa|tion of Offa King of the Mercians, the most powerfull of all the English Saxon Princes at this time. And to knitt more strictly the league between them, he demanded his daughter, named Elfleda, for his wife: which he likewise obtained, having cast off his former wife. But that which he contrived for his security, was the occasion of his ruine: for his Subiects abhorting such im|piety, deprived him of his kingdom, and afterwards of his life. And with him ended the Nortumbrian Kingdom, though the Name of King was given to some few others. Not|withstanding by the invasion and horrible depopulation made by the barbarous Danes, those Titular Kings of the English blood were scarce taken notice of by any.


III. CHAP.III. CHA.

1.2. c. The Gests and happy death of Saint Burchard, Bishop of Wirtzburg
10.11. c. Likewise of his Suceessour Saint Megingand.

1. THE same year, in which Ethelard was assumed to the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury, is marked with the death of two English Apostolick Bishops in Germany, S. Burchard and S. Willehade, the former Bi|shop of Wirtzburg, and the other of Bremen.
2. The Life of S. Burchard has been written by Egilward a Monk of his own Monastery near Wirtzburg,Vit. S. Bur|chard. ap. Sur. 14. Octb. as Trithemius testifies:Some af|firm, saith that Authour, that S. Burchard and S. Swithun (concerning whom we will treat in the next Century) were brethren, born of Noble parents in the Kingdom of the West-Saxons in Brittany: and that they were kins|men to S. Boniface. Certain it is that S. Bur|chard was one of those who were called out of Brittany in the year of Christ seaven hundred twenty five, to assist S. Boniface in his Apostolick Office in Germany.
3. Assoon as S. Burchard was arrived there, S. Boniface destined to him, in a propheticall manner, the flock of Christ which had been gathered by S. Kilian and his companions, and for which they had suffred Martyrdom. But to fitt him for so high an employment, he lived some years in the society of seve|rall devout and learned Preists under the Conduct of S. Boniface. After which S. Boni|face ioyning to his own, Letters also written by King Pipin to Pope Zacharias, requested that the Citty of Wirtzburg might be ere|cted to an Episcopall See. To which request the Pope easily condescended, after he had been informed that the said Church was en|dowd by S. Boniface himself with sufficient revenews to sustain the necessities of the poor, as well as of the Clergy. And upon the testimony given by S. Boniface, S. Burchard, his Disciple, was consecrated the first Bishop of that Episcopall See.
4. These things being happily effected at Rome, Saint Boniface conducting his now fellow Bishop to Wirtzburg, recommended him to his flock, by whom he was most ioyfully

received. At which time the bounds of the said Diocese were limitted. And S. Burchard being left in his New See, omitted no duty of a worthy Prelat, being assiduous in rea|ding, affable in conversation, powerfull in preaching, exemplary in life, liberall in almes-giving, tenderly loving and beloved by his flock,
5. In the second year after he was conse|crated Bishop, by the advice and with the assistance of S. Boniface, he made diligent search for the Sacred Bodies of S. Kilian and his companions the holy Apostolick Martyrs of Christ, which having found, he with great devotion took them out of the place into which they had been ignominiously cast by their murderers the Idolatrous Pagans. Assoon as the earth was opened, a celestiall fragran|cy was breathed from thence, and though their flesh was already resolved into dust, yet the vestments and books which had been cast with them into the pitt, were found en|tire, nothing at all defaced. They were in a most solemne Procession caried to the Church of Wirtzburg, where by a world of miracles they so encreased mens devotion, that by means thereof the Church became enriched with great possessions. S Burchard himself gave a village called Michelnstat, which Prince Caroloman had formerly bestowed on him. King Pipin afterwards gave a certain Castle called Karelburg with severall other ample possessions.
9. Near the said Castle there was a small Monastery which had been built by a Holy Virgin named Gertrudis. This Monastery being much retired did another devout Vir|gin called Immina begg of Saint Burchard: and in exchange gave him a place called The Mount of Saint Mary, or Old Wirtzburg, of far greater valew. To this place were the Sacred Bodies of Saint Kilian and his com|panions translated. There likewise did Saint Burchard build a magnificent Monastery, and placed there his Episcopall See. And thither did he oft retire, whensoever he could obtain any vacancy from the solicitudes of his charge and conversation of men: and there did he attend to God and celestiall things only.
7. Forty years did this Holy Bishop spend in the exercises of perfect Charity, either to God in Prayer and contemplation; or to men in advancing their soules in the same Divine Charity. And after such incessant labours in our Lords Vineyard, his corpo|rall strength diminishing, he called his Cler|gy together, to whom he declared his de|sire to see his Episcopall See provided of a per|son able to sustain the weighty employ|ments of it: for which purpose he proposed to them his Disciple and companion Megin|gand, well known to them for his emi|nent vertues and piety: who was imme|diately by common consent elected to be after his death his Successour, and during his life his assistant. A confirmation of this Election he easily obtained from his Metropolitan the Arch-bishop of Mentz, Charles the Great King of France consen|ting thereto.
8. Having discharged his mind of so great a care, he took with him only six of his Disciples, and by boat descended to a certain Castle called Hohenburg, where he employed the remainder of his dayes in great austerities, in watching, fasting and incessant Prayer. He had a desire to have continued his iourney to Michelnstat, where his purpose was to build another Mona|stery: But his infirmity encreasing upon him would not permitt him to accom|plish his desire. For within a few days after his coming to Hohenburg he gave up his soule into his Redeemers hands, having before secured his last passage by the Sacraments of Holy Church, which he received with admirable fervour and Spi|rituall ioy.
9. His Sacred body was by the affectionate care of his Disciple and Successour Men|gingand transported to his Cathedrall Church of Wirtzenburg, where it was reposed near to the Sacred Relicks of Saint Kilian, all the Nobility and in a manner all the inhabitants of the Countrey being assembled to ho|nour the funeralls of their beloved Pastour. Who as in his life time he had been an in|strument of great benedictions to them, so after his death likewise they experienced many effects of his Love, by frequent deli|verances and consolations obtained by his intercession. The day of his death is mar|ked o the fourth day before the Nones of February:
But his principall Feast is obser|served on the fourteenth of October,Martyr. Ang 14. Octob. the day of his Translation.
10. His Successour Saint Megingand, who was one of those which Saint Boniface had called out of Brittany, was come to a great age at the death of Saint Burchard: yet he administred that See the space of fifteen years, in all things conformable to the good example of his Blessed Prede|cessour. And t last being oppressed with age, by the consent of his Clergy he elected for his Successour a certain Disciple and Monk of his Monastery called Bernwelf, to whom he resigned the whole care of his Bishoprick, consigning into his hands all the possessions and goods left by Saint Burchard. And attended by a few disciples he retired to a certain place given to him by a devout person named Hatto.
11. But in this his choice he was not so happy as his Predecessour had been: for instead of kindnes and respect due to him, he found extreme ingratitude and persecution from his Successour. Inso|much as whereas in the Monastery of Saint Kilian he had left fifty Monks laudable in

their observance of Regular Disciplin,A. D. 790. all these did Bernwelf with iniuries drive out of the Monastery, and compelled them to have recourse to his Master Mengin|gand. And not content with that, he most greivously and incessantly vexed the good old man with frequent clamorous accustions of having detained certain Vest|ments and Books left by Saint Burchard. So great and insupportable unquietnes and troubles he caused to his Master who had made him Bishop, that he was compelled to forsake that place of his retirement called Korinlathe, and after|wards Nieustat which he gave up to the patronage of King Charles, and betook himself to another further distant Monastery by the same King bestowed upon him and his Monks. Where living in all free|dom from secular molestation under the protection of the illustrious King Charles, in all things being acceptable to God and men, he in a short time full of good works departed this life to receive his eter|nall reward.


IV. CHAP.IV. CHAP.

1.2. c. The Gests and blessed death of Saint Willehade, first Bishop of Bre|men.

Ap. Sur.  Novemb.1. AS for Saint Willehade he likewise came out of Brittany presently after Saint Boniface his Martyrdom, and arrived at a place called Dockum, where the said Holy Martyr received his Crown. There he remaind a good space, not deterred by the so late cruelty of the barbarous Pa|gans from boldly preaching the Gospell: and God so blessed his labours that many were converted and baptized by him. From thence passing over the River Lavinca he went to a place called Huchmark, where en|deavouring likewise to withdraw those bar|barous people from their Idolatry, they in a great rage cryed out, that such a profane se|ducer ought to be killed. And when they were ready to putt this in execution, cer|tain men among them more moderate, told them that they ought to make a tryall, according to the ancient custom of their countrey, by casting of Lotts whether his death would be acceptable to their Gods or no: And being hereto perswaded, through Gods Providence he escaped: so that they gave him free permission to goe out of their countrey.
2. Leaving them therefore he went to a place called Drente, where by his prea|ching many were converted and bapti|zed. But when his Disciples moved with zeale began to destroy the Heathen Temples,A. D. 791. the barbarous people became incensed, and had a resolution to kill them. Saint Willehade was sore bruised with clubbes, and one among them ran upon him with his sword purposing to cutt off his head. Lifting up therefore his sword, he with all his force smote him on the neck. Now the Holy man had at that time a case full of Relicks tyed about his neck. The sword then curt a sunder the string only, and did not at all enter into the flesh. The Pagans therefore astonished at this Miracle, let both him and his Disciples depart with|out any further harm done them.
3. Now the Victorious King of France Charles having heard report of this Holy man's sanctity and zeale, encouraged him much to be constant in preaching the Gospell. He went therefore into a Terri|tory called Wigmode, where he converted many, and built Churches: Yea the grea|test part of the Frisons inhabiting there|about promised they would embrace the Christian Faith. But not long after Witte|kind Duke of the Saxons rebelled against King Charles, and raising an army began a great persecution against the Christians. The holy man therefore after he had es|caped an imminent danger went to Rome: Where being much comforted and encou|raged by Pope Adrian, he returned back into Franconia.
4. Moreover at the command of the same King the man of God went again into Wigmode, where he openly and bold+ly preached the Faith, and repaired the Churches which the Pagans had demoli|shed. And God did so prosper his la|bours that the Frisons once more embra|ced the Faith which they had renounced: Yea Duke Wittekind himself, the Authour of all the mischeif, submitting himself to King Charles, was perswaded to receive Baptism.
5. The said King seeing so many Chri|stians converted, thought good that a New Episcopall See should be erected: for which purpose he made choice of a place called Bremen in the countrey of Wigmode: there he caused a Church to be built: and with the advice of Lullo, he sent to Pope A|drian to demand that this Holy man Wil|lehade should be consecrated Bishop of Bremen: which was accordingly perfor|med.Baron. ad A. D. 783. There is in the Annalls of Baronius extant the Charter of King Charles for the erection and endowment of this Episco|pall See, in which after thanks given to God for his many victories over the Sax|ons, he declares the limits of this new Diocese, what possessions and Tithes were annexed to it, as likewise to a Monastery adioyning, all which were committed to the care of the Holy servant of God,

Willehade. Which Charter was dated in the year of our Lords Incarnation seaven hundred eighty eight:
Ap. Sur 8. Novemb.6. In this function Saint Willehade be|haved himself with wonderfull piety, and encreased his diligence in the practise and progresse in all vertues. And fal|ling into an infirmity of body, he was commanded by Pope Adrian to eat fish: for formerly out of a rigorous absti|nence he forbore the use of them. Scarce any day passed in which he did not with great contrition of heart celebrate Masse, and besides that, he would some dayes recite the whole Psalter twice or thrice. Thus the blessed man did wonderfully adorn his Doctrine, and by his own example confirm that which with his tongue he preached to others.
7. At length after he had severall times with great zeale visited his Diocese, he came to a certain place called Blecken|see, now Plexem: Where so violent a fea|vour took him, that his Disciples despai|red of his recovery. And one of them being more familiarly conversant with him, could not forbear to testify his greif by teares and complaints, saying, Holy Father, doe not so soon forsake your tender flock, least when you are gone, the wolves seise upon it. The Blessed man, answered him, My son, doe not you desire to detain mee from the sight of my Saviour: These my sheep he gave mee, and to him I commend them of whose goodnes the whole earth is full. Thus piously affected, and always intent upon God was this Blessed servant of his to the hower of his death, which befell on the sixth day before the Ides of No|vember. To his funeralls all the people on all sides made hast, and with hymnes and praises to God caried the Sacred Body of their most dear Father and Teacher to the Church of Bremen, which himself had built, and dedicated to the Apostle Saint Peter. He sate in the same See onely two years, three months and twenty six dayes: having been a laborious Preacher since the death of S. Boniface the space of thirty five years.


V. CHAP.A. D. 792.
V. CHAP.

1.2. c. A falsely supposed Book against Images, said to be sent from Charles the Great to King Offa: Alcuin's iudg|ment touching Images.
7.8 c. It was upon misinformation that the Councill of Francfort censured the Eastern Church in that Point.

1. THE year of Grace seaven hundred ninety two is much celebrated by modern Protestant Writers,A. D. 791. because, as they suppose, it affords them a great advantage to question, yea condemne the Roman-Ca|tholick Faith touching Images, and the Ve|neration due to them. Sir Henry Spelman thus breifly gives an account of the busines:Spelm. de Concil. f 305 That year, saith he, Charles the Great King of the French sent into Brittany to Offa King of the Mercians a Book of the second Councill of Nica, in which a Decree is made that Ima|ges are to be adored. But the English reiect this.
2. To iustify this Device he first pro|duces a Letter pretended to be written by King Charles to Offa, thereto annexing a passage out of the Authour by whom the said Letter is recorded, to witt, the Compiler of the Life of this King Offa the second, lately published under the Name of Ma|thew Paris. As touching the Letter, there is nothing in it relating to the Contro|versy about Images:Ibd. But thereto the said Authour adioyns, That among others marks of extraordinary freindship between the two Kings, Charles, who as he was the most powerfull, so also the most meck and kind of the Eastern Kings, sent to Offa the greatest and most pious of the Western Kings, certain Epistles, and together with them Synodall Sta|tutes, as it were certain rudiments of Ca|tholick Faith, for informing the minds of the English Prelats, whom he beleived to be rude, unlearned and irregular. These things he sent to King Offa for perpetuating the freindship begun happily between them. And this pre|sent Offa received with ioy, as a blessing sent him from heaven.
3. This foundation being thus layd, though as yet not a word touching Images be found, yet Sir Henry Spelman to prove that at this time the English-Saxons, as to the Point of Images, were Protestants, that is, Iconomachi, will needs collect from hence that the Synodall Statuts here mentioned as sent to inform the unlearned disorderly Prelats in Brittany, was the same Book of which Hoveden thus writes: The same year Charles

King of the French sent a Synodall Book into Brittany,Hoved. hic. which had been directed to him from Constantinople. In which Book, alas! were found many things disagreeing, yea directly contrary to true Faith: and principally one Point confirmed by the unanimous consent of almost all the Ea|stern Doctours, and not so few as three hundred Bishops, That Images ought to be adored: which is an assertion which the Church of God doeth altogether abominate. And against this Point Albin (or Alcuin) wrote an Epistle admirably established upon the Divine authority of Scrip|tures: which together with the forementioned Book he himself caried to the King of the French, in the name of our Bishops and Princes.
Harpsf. saec. 8 f. 126.4. Harpsfeild taking Notice of the like passages, as he iudges, frudulently interpo|sed in the writings of some of our ancient Authours, esteems the whole Narration to be a foolish, unsavoury fable: not worth the trouble of confuting. And indeed, Sir. H. Spelman himself after he had produced these things,Spelm. ib. f. 308. foreseeing that it would be a difficult taxe to iustify these allegations, is content to represse himself, and onely in generall to affirm, that hitherto he could find no ground to iudge that as yet the English Church had admitted the adoration of Images. Thus writes he,Vid. sup l. 2. c. . and yet in the same Book he before had with great earnestnes endea|voured to iustify a pretended Synod of Lon|don assembled almost fourscore years before this time, in which a Decree is made by the English-Saxon Clergy and Nobility for admit|ting the adoration (that is, veneration) of Images, as we have already shewed.
5. And as touching the pretended Epistle in confutation of the said Doctrine written by Alcuin, and by him caried into France, besides that it neither appears in the volume or his Epistles published by himself, nor in any other Authour: Let the indifferent Reader iudge how unsavoury a fable the im|puting of this to Alcuin is, when he shall read what Alcuin himself writes concer|ning this Point.
Alcuin. de Devin. Offic. c. 18.6. In his Book of Divine Offices treating of the Ceremonies appointed by the Church to be observed on Good Friday, he writes thus: Towards evening in all Churches of Preists, Bi|shops and Monasteries a Crosse is prepared before the Altar, which is sustained on both sides by two Acolytes, and a cushion layd before it. Then comes the Bishop alone, and having adored the Crosse, kisses it: The same also is done by the Preists, Deacons and other Clarks, and lastly by the people. The Bishop sitts in his Seat, whilest all salute the Crosse. The two first Preists having saluted the Crrsse, enter into the Sacristie, c. Moreover the same Alcuin, not content with this, further teaches why and how this Ceremony is to be performed:Id. ib. When we adore the Crosse, saith he, let our whole body lye prostrate on the ground, and with our mind let us look upon him whom we adore, as hanging on the same Crosse, and we adore the vertue it self which it received from the son of God. In body we are prostrated before the Crosse: in mind before our Lord. We venerate the Crosse by which we are redeemed: and we pray to him who redee|med us. Yea further for exploring Alcuins mind touching this matter, these following words of his are remarkeable,Id. ib. Those who cannot have any part of the very wood of our Lords Crosse, doe without any prejudice to Faith adore that Crosse (or Image of it) which they have. Such a Protestant Iconoclast was Alcuin thus does he confute by the Divine authority of Scripture the veneration of Images asserted by the Council of Nica.
7. Notwithstanding what ever becomes of this Story touching King Charles his Syndall Book sent into Brittany (which is no other but his Capitulare, containing a great num|ber of Ecclesiasticall Ordonnances) or of Al|cuins supposed Epistle: This is undoubted that about this time a great scandall was given to the Western Churches upon occasion of the Doctrine touching Veneration of Sacred Images asserted a little before this time in the Seaventh Generall Councill assembled at Nicea. In which Councill three hundred and fifty Eastern Bishops restored the Sacred use and Veneration of Images, which had been with horrible cruelty impugned by severall preceding Emperours. In the Decrees con|cerning which, they taught the very same Doctrine and practise which King Charles and the French Church, as likewise King Offa and the English-Saxon Bishops, conformably to Pope Hadrian, both beleived and practised. Notwithstanding which, two years after this in a Councill assembled by command of King Charles at Frankfort the said Council of Nica was sharply and bitterly condem|ned.
8. It may seem strange that the Eastern and Western Churches should so well agree and so sharply disagree at the same time, and upon the same Point. But the wonde will cease when it shall evidently appear that it was upon a most malicious and false misinformation that King Charles and his Bishops entertaind a prejudice against the Eastern Church, being told that they main|tained a doctrine which they expressly dis|clamed.
9. To the end this may be demonstrated, we will produce from the Western Council or Frankfort what iudgment they made of the Councill of Nica (which upon misinforma|tion is there called the Councill of Constanti+nople:) There was brought into the Synod to be publickly debated a Question concerning a late Synod of the Greeks, which was held at Constan|tinople touching the adoration of Images: in which was found written this clause, That an Anathema should be denounced against all such as would not exhibite the same service or ado|ration to the Images of Saints, as they doe to the Divine Trinity. Such an adoration and

service our Holy Fathers have with contempt renounced to Images,A. D. 793. and unanimously con|demned it.
10. This was indeed a iust and neces|sary condemnation of so blasphemous a Doctrine: and no doubt both Alcuin and the English Bishops would not refuse to ioyn in the like condemnation. But the Doctrin so worthily condemned is so far from being approved or asserted in the Councill of the Greeks at Nica, that in the very Decision concerning the Venera|tion of Images, they doe expressly re|nounce it: as will appeare by their De|cree here following:Synod. 2. Ni+cena definit.11. We insisting on the Doctrin of the Holy Fathers, observing likewise the Tradition of the Catholick Church, Doe define that vene|rable and Sacred Images commodiously framed in colours, marble or any other matter ac|cording to the manner and form of the Ve|nerable and like-giving Crosse, are with all di|ligence and care to be dedicated in Churches, in Sacred Vessells and Vestments, in walls and tables, in private houses and publick wayes: and especially the Image of our Lord God and Saviour Iesus Christ, next of the Divine Virgin-Mother, of the glorious An|gells and Saints: To the end that by an in|spection of such images, all that look upon them may be brought to the remembrance and desire of the principall obiects represented by them, and exhibite reverence and respectfull adoration to them, yet by no means any true Divine Worship () which according to our Faith is only due to the Divine Nature: We therefore intend such a veneration as we shew when we reverently burn incense, or light candles to the Type of the venerable and life|giving Crosse, to the Holy Gospells and other oblations, as hath been and i the custom re|ceived from our predecessours.
12. Whence appears how innocent the Bishops of that Synod were of the impiety condemned by the Western Bishops at Franc|fort. So that we may conclude that this false information was given them from the Hereticks Iconoclasts condemned by the same Councill. And theefore the same Sir Henry Spelman writes truly and ingenuously saying,Spelman. ib. f. 707. I doe confesse that I doe not find that prodigious sentence concerning deifying of Images in the Exemplar of the Nicene Synod which is published by Binius.


VI. CHAP.VI. CHA.

i.2. c. The Body of Saint Alban the Proto-martyr of Brittany, miracu|lously discovered to King Offa: who causes it to be translated: and builds a magnificent Church and Monastery to his honour.

1. THE year following Offa King of the Mercians residing then at the Citty of Bath,A. D. 793. Westmonast. A. D. 794. Ap. Capgr. in vit. Saint Alban. was in sleep admonished by a Divine Oracle to take up out of the earth the Sacred Body of Saint Alban, and place it more ho|nourably in a shrine.He therefore sending for Humbert Arch-bishop of the Mercians declared unto him his vision. Then the said Arch-bishop attended by Ceoulf and Vnwona his two Suffragan Bishops with an innumera|ble multitude of both sexes mett the King at Verulam upon a day appointed. There did the said King behold a Light from hea|ven darting its beams over the place where the Holy Martyr had been buried: by which sign seen of them all they became assured of the truth of the former vision. Then were all the people commanded to purify themselves by fasting, almes and prayers, and the Bishops adorned with their Sacerdo|tall Vestments begged the assistance of the Blessed Martyr. For the place since the co|ming of S. Germanus and Lupus two French Bishops into Brittany to root out the Pelagian Heresy about three hundred forty four years before this, had been quite defaced by the Pagan Saxons, English and Iutes who conque|red the countrey, and destroyed all sacred places, and among the rest the Church which after the death of the Holy Martyr had been magnificently built to his honour by the Brittains, as Beda testifieth.
2. The said Bishops therefore after fa|sting and prayers,Bed. l. i. c 18. Westmon. ib. opening the ground, found the Blessed Martyrs body in a woodden Coffin, together with the Sacred Relicks of the Apostles and Martyrs which Saint Germa|nus had placed there. This Invention drew teares of ioy and devotion from the eyes of all the Clergy and people present: and the Bishops with great reverence and fear took out of the ground that precious Treasure which had been a long time hid, and with a solemne Procession, with Hymns and Canticles they transported it to a certain Church which had anciently been built to the honour of the said Holy Martyr without the gates of the Citty Verulam, where in a shrine cu|riously wrought of gold and silver and ador|ned with pretious stones they deposed it.
3. In the same place to this day divine

miracles are frequently wrought, for in the sight of many, hearing is restored to the deafe, walking to the lame, sight to the blind, and death both of mind and body to all who with confidence in the Divine mercy through the intercession of his Saint implore it. These things were acted in the five hundred and seaventh year after the suf|fring of the Holy Martyr, the three hundred forty fourth year after the coming of the En|glish into Brittany, the first Indiction and the first day of August.
4 King Offa not content with preparing a sumptuous shrine for the honour of this glorious Martyr, added also a most magnifi|cent Monastery, for obtaining of Priviledges, for which by advice of the Bishops recourse was had to the Pope. Concerning which Mo|nastery, Mathew of Westminster writes, that as S. Alban was the Prime among the Brittish Martyrs and Saints, so his Monastery excelled both in possessions and liberties all the other Monaste|ries of the Kingdom.
Monast. An|glic. p. 177. 5. To this day is preserved the Charter which King Offa made to this Monastery: in which he mentions the foresaid miraculous discovery of the holy Martyrs body: adding that since Honour given to God, and pious devo|tion to his Saints is the stability of an earthly kingdom, the prosperity of long life, and will un|doubtedly be rewarded with eternall happines, therefore he gave such lands and possessions there named to the said Monastery, freeing it likewise from all tributs and burdens: Ap|ponting withall over it as Abbot Willigoda a Preist to govern it according to the Rule of S. Benedict for ever: Lastly requiring that dayly prayers should continually be offred there for the soules of himself and his freinds.
Igulf. f. 854 6. At the same time the Abbot of Croyland called Patrick successour to the first Abbot thereof Kenulph, seeing the devotion  pie|ty of King Offa to Gods Saints, and his kind inclination to the Prayers of Religious men, obtained fro~ him a Charter likewise, by which he took into his Protection the said Monastery, confirming all the possessions and Priviled|ges formerly given to the same, freeing the Monks thereof from all secular burdens and impositions, as he had newly done his brethren the Monks of S. Alban: (such is his expression.)


VII. CH.VII. CHAP.

i.2. c. The Gests and Martyrdom of S. Ethelbert King of the East-angles.

1. COncerning this King Offa, the Chara|cter given him by William of Malms|bury is very proper,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2. saying, In one and the same man sometimes vices did palliate themselves with a shew of vertue, and sometimes vertues did succeed vices, that a man would be uncertain in what shape to represent such a changeable Proteus. For the same year in which he shewd himself so pious toward the Holy Martyr S. Alban, he shewd himself most impious in cruelly killing an innocent Prince and making him a Martyr.
2. This Prince was Ethelbert the Son of Ethelred and Leofrana by whom he was care|fully instituted in piety and all vertues.Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4. Io. Angl. Ap. Capgr. in Ethelbert. Westmonast. A D. 794. Polyd. Virg. l. 4.
Harpsf. saec. 8. c. 9.
Molan: in Addit. He had now governed the Kingdom of the East-angles forty four years with such iustice and moderation that he was tenderly loved by all his subiects. All which time he had never admitted any proposall of mariage: but now yeilding to the importunity of his Mother and Nobles who earnestly desired to see a Successour, he remitted to their iudg|ments to propose to him a fitt Consort.
3. When they were therefore to consult about the person, in the first place they ge|nerally turned their thoughts upon a Prin|cesse among the South-Saxons whose name was Seledrida, and her Fathers, Egeon, by whose death she was possessed of a very con|siderable Province, besides other great riches. Therefore they advised the King to make choice of her, whose Treasures and territory would be a great strength and accession to his Kingdom. But the King whose iudgment was directed by better Rules then humane policy and interests, reiected the proposall, because that Province which Egeon had left unto his daughter was procured by uniust and fraudulent means, and therefore he could not expect a benediction from God upon the possession of it.
4. Some few others therefore whose counsells were guided by Principles more sublime and not so worldly, proposed to the King a daughter of the most potent King Offa, whose name our Historians generally call Alfreda, only by Ingulfus she is named Etheldrita: a Virgin endowd withall Graces, against whom no exception could be made: Yea moreover such affinity contracted with her Father would be an absolute security to the Kingdom. To this therefore King E|thelbert consented, and thereupon Embas|sadours were dispatched to King Offa to de|mand of him this grace: which he willingly granted, so that conditions on both sides were readily agreed on.
5. When the time appointed for the ma|riage drew near, King Ethelbert thought fitt to goe to the Mercians, thereby to shew more affection and respect in conducting his espoused Lady home. But when he be|gan his iourney there hapned to him many terrible prodigies portnding a fatall suc|cesse. Among which this was one: When he mounted on horsback, attended by a great multitude of his loving Subiects who earnestly prayed for his happines, on a sudden, besides a great earth-quake, the Sun became wholly darkned, insomuch as one could not discern another, neither durst they

remove by reason of the trembling of the earth, All were astonished at this, and fal|ling prostrate on the ground, earnestly be|sought God to avert his wrath from them. But the King, more devoutly then the rest, humbly begged of God at least an internall Light by which he might discern whether that iourney and the occasion of it were ac|ceptable to him, and for the benefit of his own soule: in token of which he besought him to cease the trembling of the earth, no to restore the Suns Light. Assoon as he had ended his Prayer all these prodigies imme|diatly ended. Thereupon the King confident|ly prosecuted his iourney, though his Mother terrified by such ominous signs earnestly en|deavoured to disswade him.
6. Assoon as he was entred into Mercia at|tended by a small guard, God was pleased in a vision by night to signify to him his approa|ching death, and the immense glory which should follow it. For First it seemed to him that the roof of his Palace fell upon him, and that his Mother seeing it, let fall from her eyes teares of blood. Afterward he saw a wonderfully great and most beautifull Tree, which certain persons feircely endeavoured to hew down, and out of the wounds made in it flowed a torrent of Blood eastward. Then a pillar of Light from the South more bright then the Sun seemed to rise up: and himself in the shape of a Bird having the extremities of his wings shining like gold, had a great desire to embrace that glorious pillar: so that mounting to the top of it, he heard a most celestiall Harmony, to which he with in|finite pleasure attended, till his sleep ending, all vanished away.
7. The next morning he recounted this Dream to his freinds, at which their asto|nishment and fears were renewed with great encrease, considering such fearfull signs, as the falling down of a house, his Mothers bloody teares, a fair tree cutt down, and blood issuing out of it. Thereupon they attempted to perswade him to return, and not to tempt God after so manifest a warning given him of danger. But the King thinking it both dishonourable and unsafe to publish a suspicion of any treachery in so great a King as Offa, and withall considering that though in his Vision there were many omi|nous signs, yet the end seemed glorious and happy: Therefore resigning himself into Gods hands he chearfully pursued his journey.
8. King Offa at that time had his residence at a certain town now called Sutton-Wallis in Herefordshire, seated upon the River Lugge (Lugus:) There the King received him with demonstrations of kindnes and ioy, the like did the Queen, whose name was Quen|dreda. But whether this kindnes on the Kings part was sincere or no, it is left doubt|full. But certain it is, that the impious Queen presently after his arrivall most ex|ecrably contrived her Son in Law's murder, whereby without any danger or trouble she might procure to her family the accession of a new kingdom.A. D. 794. This horrible design, it is sayd, she discovered to her husband King Offa, who at first expressed a detestation of it: but at length was perswaded by the Impious Queen if not to ioyn in the exe|cution, at least to suffer her to doe it alone.
9. She had before this layd the execrable design, and provided a fitt executioner: His name was Winebert, and to him was assign'd the Office of conducting King Ethelbert, whensoever he was to treat about the ac|complishing the Mariage. One day there|fore after he had excused to him King Offa's meeting him, upon a pretence of indispo|sition, he lead the innocent King through certain obsure passages of the Palace, where with the help of his associats there atten|ding, he murdred him. And so was full|filld his vision of a beautifull tree cutt down, and a stream of blood issuing from it. Yea withall the other part of the vision likewise was accomplished, in which was represented a glorious Pillar of Light, and a Bird with golden wings mounting to the top of it, and there entertaind with cele|stial Musick: Which Bird was the soule of this pious King and Martyr received into heavenly ioyes.
10. Some of our Historians relate the fact after another manner:Westmonast. A. D. 794. That in the Kings Bed-chamber a chair sumptuously adorned was placed upon planches which at plea|sure might sink down, and draw the person after. And King Ethelbert having, after a day spent in feasting, been conducted into this his Bed-chamber, and sitting in the said Chair, fell down into a hollow place, where being over whelmed with bed-cloaths and pillows he was stifled. However the crime was performed, all consent that it was prin|cipally by the Queen Quendreda's contrivance that this pious King was murdred: though all doe not charge King Offa with the guilt of conspiring, or so much as knowing of it till it was executed.
11. The Blessed Kings body being taken out of the Cave was by the command of King Offa buried privatly at a place called Marden near the River Lugg: whither whilst it was caried, it was found so light, as if it had been already ennobled with the Dotes of a glorified Body. But it lay not long in that ignoble Sepulcher: for the night following was seen a Pillar of Light sparkling its beams to the place where the Sacred Body lay: And the third night after, S. Ethelbert appearing in a vision to a simple husband-man, com|manded him to transport his body to a Mo|nastery built on the banks of the River Wye: which he accordingly performed, and by the way a blind man was restored to sight by the merits of this Holy Martyr: for so is he

generally called in all ages since, by reason of the frequent Miracles wrought by his in|tercession: and this Title is expressly iustified by William of Malmsbury.
12. The place where he was buried, was by the Saxons called Fernley, but now He|reford, where a fair Church had formerly been built: To which King Offa in testimo|ny of his Repentance gave very rich Presents. There also he built a magnificent tombe for him: and in succeeding times the opinion of the holy Martyrs Sanctity did so encrease, that Milfrid one of the following Kings of Mercia much enlarged the same Church, de|dicating it anew to the honour of S. Ethel|bert. For thus writes Leland,Leland. From the time of King Offa the Citty of Hereford received great augmentation by occasion of the Monument of the glorious Martyr Ethelbert King of the East-Angles: and it is deservedly esteemed the prime Seat of that Province.
13. Out of the place where the Body of S. Ethelbert was first buried issued a foun|tain of most clear water, called S. Ethelberts well, over which now stands a Church, no doubt built to his honour. For what other motive could the builder have, since it is placed so near the River Lugg, which every floud being overflown by the muddy waters of the River, never diminishes any thing of its own purity. This wonderfull effect to this day the neighbours, even Protestants, take notice of, and impute it to the Sanctity of the Saint, yet think it an impiety to ho|nour the Saint so highly honoured by God. His Memory is celebrated in our English Martyrologe on the twentieth day of May.Martyr. Ang. 0. Maj.


VIII. CH.VIII. CHAP.

1.2. c. King Offa's devout Pilgrimage to Rome and pious actions there.
4. Great Priviledges granted to the English by the Pope.
5. His Queen Quendrida iustly punished for the murder of S. Ethelbert.

1. KIng Offa by the testimony which God gave to the Sanctity of King Ethelbert perceiving the enormity of his own crime: (for though it were true that his own hand had not been defiled with the Martyrs inno|cent blood, yet a great crime it was to per|mitt so horrible a crime to passe unpuni|shed:) He thereupon conceived great re|morse for it, and sought all wayes how to pacify Gods displeasure. Some Writers im|pute the founding of that magnificent Mo|nastery of S. Alban to his desire of making some manner of satisfaction for that Offence, which therefore they conceive to have pre|ceded that building. However certain it is that the remaining years of his life he em|ployed in memorable works of Charity and devotion.
2. Besides this, the year following he un|dertook a devout Pilgrimage to RomeA. D. 794. Westmon. hc. there to begg pardon of God at the shrines of the two Princes of the Apostles. There also he with great fervour visited most other places dedicated to the honour of Saints.
3. During his abode at Rome he confirmed through his whole kingdom,Id. ib. Math. Paris hic. containing one and twenty Provinces or Shires, that Con|tribution called S. Peters-pence, or Rome-Scott, which King Ina had before imposed on his Kingdom of the West-Saxons. And moreover he endued with large possessions the Schoole of the English formerly founded also by the same King Ina at Rome, for the sustentation of such his English subiects as should repair thither, either out of devotion only, or a desire also to perfectionate their minds with the Study of Sacred learning. This Schoole, saith Mathew Paris, by reason of the great confluxe of strangers thither to seek comfort and sustenance, was turned into an Hospitall, called the Hospitall of the Holy Spirit.
4. Lastly he supplicated Pope Hadrian not only to confirm by Apostolick authority the large possessions which he had lately and should hereafter bestow on his New-foun|ded Monastery of S. Alban, but likewise to conferre spirituall Priviledges  exemptions on it. To which request the Pope willingly condescended, for he adopted that Monastery to be a Speciall Daughter of the Roman Church, exempted from all Iurisdiction Episcopall and Archiepiscopall, as immediatly subiect to the See Apostolick. He granted likewise that the Territory belonging to that Monastery should be the only place in his Dominions free from the generall contribution of Peter-pence. Yea moreover that the Monks of S. Alban should be the Collectours of the same Contri|bution through the whole Province of Hert|ford: which having collected, they should reserve it to their own use for keeping ho|spitality. To these he added this generall Grace, that he enioyned King Offa for the re|mission of his sins at his returning home to call a Synod of his Bishops and Nobles, and whatsoever possessions or Priviledges he with their advice should bestow on the said Monastery he promised that he would himself confirm such his Charter by his own authority. And lastly in testimony of his great esteem of King Offa's piety, he gave this generall Priviledge to all the sub|iects of his Kingdom, That no publick Pe|nitent should be obliged, in execution of his Pennance enioyned, to goe out of the kingdom: that is. Whereas in severall cases of enor|mous crimes men were obliged to seek Ab|solution at Rome, he gave a generall Indul|gence that for all sins, men might be absol|ved at home.
5. Thus did King Offa omitt no expedient wherby to expiate his crime touching the murder of the blessed Martyr King Ethelbert. He returned not into his kingdom till the year following. In the mean time severall occurrents hapning in Brittany require a place here. As for his impious Queen Quen|dreda, shee enioyd but a very short time the fruits of her cruelty: for in the space of three months after she suffred a miserable death, but well beseeming her wicked life. And her Son Egfrid a vertuous and pious Prince, for whose advantage especially she executed that horrible murder, he was taken away by an untimely death after a few months raign: by which means the Mercian Crown was translated from the family of King Offa to the posterity of King Penda. And lastly her Daughter Alfreda designed to be the Spouse of the Holy Martyr, she had such a horrour of her parents crime, that out of a generall distast of the world she retired herself to a solitary devout life among the fenns of Croyland, where she spent many years in aspiring to the embraces of a yet more glorious Bridegroom. Concerning her wee shall treat further when we arrive to the year of her death.


IX. CHA.IX. CHAP.

1. The decay of Kentish Kings.
2.3. c. The Scandalous Rebellions and Treasons of the Northumbers: iustly pu|nished by God: Their miseries bewayled by Alcuin.

1. THE same year which King Offa spent at Rome in his Devotions and Chari|ties, Alric King of Kent, who was Tributary to King Offa, ended his life after a raign of thirty four years. He was the third and last of King Withreds children, who succee|ded him in that kingdom, not any of them leaving heyrs behind them. And afer them (saith William of Malmsbury) the Noble stock of the Kentish Kings withred away,Malmsb. de Reg. l. 2. c. 1. and their generous blood lost all its vigour and Spirits. Then any one who had impudence enough, who either by fraud could make himself rich and po|pular, or by faction terrible, aspired to Tyranny there, and unworthily adorned his head with the Regall Diadem. Such an one was Edilbert, sirnamed Pren, who after Alric invaded the Kentish throne, and after he had the space of two years tyrannised in that kingdom, he had the foolish boldnes to provoke the Mercians, by whom he was taken prisoner, and forced to submitt his hands to chains, and his body to captivity.
2. The same decay likewise at this time befell the kingdom of the Northumbers: for this being the fifth year after King Ethelred had been recalled from banishment to go|vern that Kingdom, he was also slain by his Subiects. And his death gave an end to the Kingdom of the Northumbers:Fasti. A. D. 794. and after thirty three years vacancy and want of a Lawfull King it was seised upon and possessed by Egbert King of the West-Saxons. Yet in the mean time there are named some few petty Kings there, du|ring the time of the Danish incursions. Thus we read in the Books of the Succession of Saxon Kings. The first who after the death of Ethelred usurped the place and title of King, was Oswald: and he after a short shew upon the stage for twenty eight dayes, was com|pelled by the Northumbrians to flye to the King of the Picts: so leaving place for Ar|dulf. But the memory of these and some other like Kings following hath been in a sort obliterated by the tempestuous rage of the Danes wasting those parts at this time, and putting all things in confusion.
3. A most iust punishment that was, sent by God to plague that rebellious Province, the inhabitants whereof had no regard to the Maiesty of their Princes but freely defiled their hands with their blood: by which they became odious both to God and man. Yea the infamous scandall of their rebellions passed into forrein countreyes likewise: as appears by a letter of Alcuin, who at this time lived in France, into which he was in|vited by King Charles the Great to assist by his learning the Church now combatted by New Heresies. That Letter was written by him to Offa King of the Mercians: the tenour whereof is as followeth:4.Ap. Malmsb. f. 26. Your Maiesty may please to know that King Charles does oftimes speak to mee of you with much affection and sincerity, and you have in him a most faithfull freind. And to expresse his kindnes, he has given order that presents should be sent to your Maiesty, and your Bishops, as likewise to King Ethelred and the Episcopall Churches in his Dominions. But alas! alas! These presents together with letters were no sooner deli|vered into the Messengers hands, but certain men out of Scotland which passed through your Coun|trey, brought us a most sad Message concerning the unhappy death of that King of the Northum|bers by the infidelity of his own subiects. Here|upon King Charles presently in great anger drew back his presents intended thither, calling them a perfidious, perverse and rebellious Nation, which so often murdered their own Kings, estee|ming them therefore worse then Pagans: And if I had not interceded for them, he would not only before this have hindred them from any good, but likewise have done them all the micheif which lay in his power.
5. Notwithstanding though Alcuin by his intercession with King Charles could avert the effects of his displeasure against the treacherous Northumbers, he could not sus|pend the indignation and severity of Gods iudgments upon them:Hoved. f. 40 For the same year a navall army from the Northern coasts, like sharp

stinging hornets,A. D. 795. invaded the kingdom of the Northumbers: and the barbarous soldiers like dire half-famished Wolves ran up and down the coun|trey, wasting, killing not only beasts, as oxen and sheep, but Preists, Deacons and Quires of Religious men and women They came to the Church of Lindisfarn, where they miserably spoyled all the countrey about: they trode under foot the most sa|cred things, they demolished Altars, and caryed away all the treasures and ornaments of the Church: severall of the Monks they killed, some they took for slaves, and most of them after shame|full usage they drove out naked, and exposed to starving by cold and hunger: some likewise they drownd in the Sea.
6. Alcuin having been informed of the de|solation of his countrey (for by many proofs in his Writings it appears that he was born in the Province of the Northumbers) wrote many bewayling sad letters to his freinds there to condole with the~ in their miseries: One he wrote to the Monks of the Mona|steries of Wiremouth and Girwy,Alcuini. Ep. in which he seriously exhorted them to sanctity of life,Id Ep. 50. and to tread in the steps of their Pre|decessour, Saint Beda c. Anoher to the same effect he sent to his Brethren in the Church of York, in which he called himself a Son of that Church.Ap. Malmsb. f. 275. And a third to Higbald Bishop of Lindesfarn and the whole Con|gregation there, whom he stiles the Cil|dren of Saint Cuthbert, and tells them that he iustfull feared the same misery would be|fall the whole Island, since Saint Cuthbert and so many Saints reposing there did not defend his own Church. He concluded, that assoon as King Charles should return with victory over his enemies, he would goe to him, and take care of redeeming the Northumbrian children which the Danish Pagans had sold into France, and of other their necessities recommended to him.
A. D. 795.7. Moreover in a Letter to Offa King of the Mercians he signified that he was prepa|red to cary himself the presents of King Charles sent to him, and thence to goe into his Native Province of the Northumbers. But on better consideration he thought it more convenient to abide still in France, and there to serve his countrey by doing all good offices: since he knew not what be|nefit he could bring to a place where none could remain in any security, where the Holy Altars are demolished by Pagans, Mo|nasteries polluted by adulteries, and the whole land stained with the blood of their Princes.
Ap. Baron hic Hoved. hic8. What those presents were will appear in an Epistle which King Charles sent to King Offa, as likewise in Hoveden who writes thus: The magnanimous King Charles with a potent army had lately subdued the Nation of the Hunns, their countrey he wasted, putt to flight their King and destroyed his army. From thence he brought home fifteen carts so loadned with gold, silver and precious vestments of silk, that four oxen could scarce draw each of them. All which spoyles the same King in thankfullnes to God for his victory, commanded to be distributed among the Churches and poore, not only in his own kingdom, but at Rome also, and in Britta|ny c.


X. CHAP.X. CHA.

1.2. Displeasure of Charles the Great against the English: which is afterward com|posed.
3 A Scottish Preist banished for eating flesh in Lent.
4.5. Pope Adrian dyes: and Leo the third succeeds
6.7.8. A Synod at Verulam: wherein the Priviledges of the Monastery of S. Al|ban are confirmed.
9 Successions of Bishops.

1. KING Offa was now returned from his pilgrimage to Rome.Malmsbur. Westmon. ad A. D. 775. Some years be|fore his going thither King Charles had ta|ken some displeasure against him, the oc|casion whereof seems to have proceeded from English Merchants, which defrauded the French of their customs; In somuch as a breach had like to have been made be|tween the two Kings: So forward it was, that King Charles forbad trading between the two Nations, neither was it safe for En|glish men to passe through France in devo|tion to Rome. But King Offa who by his in|vasions and usurpations had made almost all the Kings in Brittany his enemies, much ap|prehended the displeasure of so powerfull a King as Charles, and therefore by many Em|bassages and Presents endeavoured a reconci|liation with him, which at length with much solicitation he obtained. After which followd not only frequent entercourse or Letters between them, but many other ex|pressions of kindnes.Ap. Alcuin. Ep. 61.
2. There is extant a Letter of King Charles to Ethilhard Archbishop of Canterbury and Ceolulf a Bishop of the Mercians, in which he informed them that a certain man a Subiect of King Offa, who had incurred his displea|sure, had fled into France with his whole family, to seek protection and security there. Now this mans family being desirous to re|turn home after the Maisters death, whose name was Vmrinstan, desired King Charles his Letters of Recommendation, which he most willingly granted them, desiring these two Bishops to intercede in their behalf with King Offa: and in case they could not qualify his displeasure, he desired them to send them back to him.
3. Two Letters did King Charles this year write to King Offa in the one informing him that a certain Preist, by nation a Scott, had

made some abode in the Diocese of Colen, where he had been accused of eating flesh in Lent. But because the accusers Proofs were not absolutly convincing, therefore the Bi|shops in those parts would not pronounce sentence against him. Notwithstanding they thought not fitt he should stay any longer among them, by reason of the scandall given by such an Offence, and least others should by his example learn to neglect that holy Fast. So they thought best he should be sent into his own countrey, to be iudged by his own Bishops. To facilitate his iourney therefore King Charles desired King Offa to take care for his safe conveyance into Scotland from whence he first came, where he hoped that the Ecclesiasticall Canons were well observed.
4. In a second Letter he signified to him that free leave should be given to all En|glish pilgrims to passe through France to Rome,Ap. Baron. hic. but if any upon a pretence of de|votion shall bring prohibited merchandise into France, or defraud the Kings customes there, that should not be suffred. He fur|ther told him that he had sent sacred Vest|ments to severall Churches in Brittany, desi|ring that in consideration thereof there should be made Prayers for Pope Hadrian then newly dead: for though he did not doubt but his soule was in rest, yet he de|sired this to testify his cordial affection to his most dear freind.
Id. ib.The same day that Pope Hadrian dyed, there was chosen his Successour Pope Leo the third of that name. The suddennes of his election, and the unanimous consent of his Electours argued an eminent esteem of his sanctity and abilities. He was chosen both to doe and suffer many things. By him the Empire was restored to the Western parts.
6. A little before Pope Hdrian dyed, King Offa being safe returned from Rome, accor|ding to his order assembled a Synod at Ve|rulam, near which place he had built the famous Monastery of Saint Alban. What was acted in that Synod is breifly related by Sir H. Spelman out of an ancient Manuscript of the Life of S. Alban in this manner;Spelm. f. 314. King Offa having then assembled at Verulam a Coun|cil of his Bishops and Nobles, by their unani|mous consent and out of his great affection to Saint Alban, he conferred on that Monastery very large possessions, considering that great hospitali|ty was to be kept there: Because near thereto lyes the broad high way called Watlingstrete, by which men came from the Northern parts and returned. Therefore he esteemed it a pious thing that tra|vellours might find there a house to be entertaind freely. For this reason he addicted that place to the Monastery, which he dignified with many Priviledges and immunities. Moreover he ga|thered a Congregation of Monks out of severall houses where Regular Observance was kept with best care, especially from the Monastery of Becc in Neustria (or Normandy in France) and or|dained an Abbot over them named Willigode, a man who was indeed according to his Name,A. D. 799. of good Will: He was descended of the Royall family, being near of kin to King Offa.
7. The particular possessions given by the King at this time to the said Monastery are spe|cified in his Charter which remains to this day.Ap. M. Pa|ris in An|ctario. And besides the Priviledges before re|lated he added these, that what soever exactions or for feytures due to the King from any criminall person within the liberties of the same Monastery,Westmon. ad A. D. 794. should be payed thereto. That the Abbot or Monk who was Arch deacon, under him should exercise Episcopall Iurisdiction over all persons, both Preists and Laymen living within their possessions: and that they should pay subiection neither to Arch|bishop nor Legat, but to the Pope alone. In a word the said Church as it had all Royall rights from the King, so did it likewise enioy Episcopall orna|ments from the Pope.
8. This Charter the King sent to Rome to be confirmed by Pope Hadrian: and this seems to have been one of the last actions performed by the same worthy Pope. Who having sate in S. Peters chair twenty three years, ten months and seaventeen days, was notwith|standing esteemed by all good men to have quitted the government of the Church imma|turely.Baron. hic. Particularly King Charles for the respect which he bore him, distributed alms not only through the Churches in Provinces subiect to him, but also in forrain countreys for his soule, as we have declared in his Letter sent to King Offa.
9. The same year Higbert, or Humbert the first Archbishop of Lichfeild dying, there suc|ceeded him Aldulf, to whom a Pall was sent from Rome: notwithstanding before he dyed he was obliged to lay aside that Archiepisco|pall ornament, and to content himself with the simple Title of Bishop. Likewise to Ead|bald Bishop of London the same year suc|ceeded Heathobert, and to Egbald Bishop of Winchester, Dudda.


IX. CHAP.IX. CH.

1.2. c. The death of King Offa: and his Children.
4.5. c. Egfrid his pious Successour dyes shortly after him: being ready to restore the Rights to the See of Canterbury.
9. Eanbald Archbishop of York dyes: to whom another Eanbald succeeds.

1. THE year of Christ seaven hundred ninety six was the last of the raign  life of Offa the illustrious King of the Mercians,A. D. 796. after he had raigned thirty nine years. He left a noble memory of his courage in three victories obtained against the Kings of Brit|tany, the King of Kent, of the West-Saxons and Northumbers: And of his Piety in founding the famous Monastery of S. Alban, and cha|ritable contribution to the See Apostolick, besides many other Monuments of his Cha|rity and devotion.
A. D. 796.2. The memory of his name he left to severall places: For in Warwickshire having built a Church, a town thereto adioyning was called Off-Church: and in Suffolck another town was called Offton: Lastly he dyed in a village named Offley: From whence his Body was removed to the Town of Bedford, where it was buried in a Chappell without the Citty-walls with Royall solemnity. But in processe of time,Camden in Bedford. his Sepulcher was swept away by a vio|lent inundation of the River Vsk.
3. He left behind him by his Queen Quen|dreda severall children. His eldest son and Successour was Egfrid, who succeeded to his Fathers vertues, but not the years of his raign, for he governed the Kingdom not a full half year. In Capgrave we read of ano|ther Son of his called Fremond, slain after|ward by the Danes: but the story related of him does so disagree from Chronology, that it is manifest the Authour of it mingled to|gether the Occurrents of severall ages. He had two daughters the one, named Ethelbur|ga, who in her vices ressembled her impious Mother Queen Quendreda: for she not only left a stain upon her own countrey by poy|soning her husband King Brithric, but upon France also as wee shall declare. The other much unlike her sister,  truly the daughter of her fathers Piety  Alfleda, whom the Holy Martyr King Ethert had demanded for his wife, and who after his deth preferred the fenns of Croyland before her Fathers Palace.
4. His eldest son Egfrid had been assumed by his Father into a society in his Throne nine years before this: yet this is called the first and only year of his raign, for he did not out-live his Father more then five months. Yet in that short time he left many and la|sting Monuments of his piety, wholly em|ploying the few days of his raign in ador|ning and amplifying Monasteries and Chur|ches. He was a Prince, saith William of Malms|bury, who studiously avoyded the steps of his Fa|thers cruelty. He restored all the Priviledges of Churches which had been preiudiced by his Fa|ther. Moreover a possession which his Father had taken from the Monastery of Malmsbury he wil|lingly returned into the hands of Cuthbert then Abbot thereof, upon the exhortation of the wor|thy and courageous Archbishop of Canterbury.
5. Above all he most favoured the Monastery of S. Alban, to which he not only confirmd all the possessions and liberties given by his Father, but himself added new, in a place cal|led Pinnelesfeld, as appears by his Charter re|corded at the end of Mathew Paris, and sub|scribed by the Queen Cynedrida, his Bishops and Nobility. In a second Charter likewise to the same Monastery, in like manner subscribed, he added another possession called Thyrefeld. The place where this was written and con|firmed in a Synod, is named Celchyed.
6. Athelard Arch-bishop of Canterbury per|ceiving the pious disposition of this young King, suggested to him his obligations to re|pair the iniuries done by his Father to the Mother-Church of Brittany, Canterbury, which by all Princes since the beginning of Christia|nity had been esteemed the only Metropolitan Church of that part of Brittany, but lately had been diminished by the uniust exaltation of the See of Lichfeild. With which suggestion of the worthy Archbishop King Egfrid was mollified,Malmsb. f. 287 and had restored the honour of the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury, if death had not too hastily taken him away. But what Athelard could not ef|fect by reason of the too short raign of this King (since a busines of that importance re|quired many messages and returns fro~ Rome, serious agitation on both sides, and reasons to be given by the two contrary pretendants) His Successour in the Archbishoprick, Kenulf at last perfected after the death of King Egfrid.
7. This good King therefore being accom|plished, in a short time fullfilled a long age, and after five months payed his debt to na|ture: He was taken away, saith Alcuin, not for his own sins, but because his father for the esta|blishing his kingdom, had shed much blood. But how unsecure a foundation blood is for the establishing of kingdoms, was shewd in this example: for Offa was so far from confirming his Throne to his posterity, that five months after his death it was transferred to another family, a quite stranger to his.
8. The same year dyed also Eanbald Arch|bishop of York, and in his place was chosen and consecrated another Eanbald a Preist of the same Church, and Disciple of Alcuin. The place where his Predecessour dyed was called Edere: and his body attended by great multitudes was conveyed to the Church of York, where it was honourably buried.
9. This second Eanbald ioyned courageously with Ethelard Archbishop of Canterbury to nullify the invasion which Offa King of the Mercians had made on the Archbishop of Canterbury, which they also effected, as shall shortly be declared. And this endeavour of Eanbald was much commended by his Master Alcuin, as appears by part of his Letter cited by William of Malmsbury.


XII. CHAP.XII. CH.

1.2. c. Alcuin, famous for learning: teaches at York and is called into France.

1. WEE have oft made mention of Al|cuin as making his abode in France. It will not be impertinent to declare what occasion drew him into France, and obli|ged him to spend the remainder of his life there. Twice he had passed into France before: the first time upon some bu|sines, for which his Master Egbert Arch-bishop

of York sent him to King Charles: What that speciall busines was, it does no where appear. The second time when he was sent by Alfwold King of the Northum|bers to Rome to demand and bring the Ar|chiepiscopall Pall to Eanbald the first of that name Archbishop of York, in the year of Grace seaven hundred eighty one. In this iourney both going and returning he passed through Fra~ce. But neither of these times did he make any long abode there. However his second iourney was the occasion of his going a third time thither never to return. Because at his coming from Rome he met K. Carles the Great at Pavia, who being much delighted with his discourse and behaviour, earnestly entreated him that assoon as he had finishd the present affair for which he had underta|ken that voyage to Rome, he would return to him into France.
2. The answer which Alcuin gave him was, That without the order of his King and Arch-bishop he could not dispose or him|self. And in effect his stay in Brittany was esteemed so necessary, that twelve years more passed before he could comply with this re|quest of so great a King. But to speak more properly, it was not in compliance to this request that he then went, but he was obli|ged thereto by the emergent necessities of the Church, which was combatted by a New Heresy, for repressing of which none was ound more sufficiently enabled then Al|cuin, considering his eminently famous pie|ty and learning.
3. That which detained him so long in Brittany, was for the instructing the youth thereof in all manner of learning, both sa|cred and secular: For since S. Beda's time Brittany had never enioyed so universally a knowing Master. Some Writers pretend that he was a Disciple of S. Beda: But the long space of time which intervened between them takes away all probablity from such an assertion: and those Writers mistake is groun|ded upon a confounding of two persons nto one, for they suppose that this Alcuin or Albin is the same with that Albin who many years before was Abbot of S. Augu|gustins Monastery at Canterbury. The Master and Instructour of this Alcuin was Egbert the Noble and learned Archbishop of York, as not only the Authour of Alcuins life, but Alcuin himself declares.
4. The twelve years which Alcuin em|ployed in Brittany in teaching, produced a wonderfull happy effect, for out of his Schoole were produced almost all the able Bishops, Preists, Abbots and other Religious persons which adorned this Island in the present and following Age. Yea not a few came out of France and Germany to enrich themselves and their countreys with those treasures of knowledge which Alcuin communicated to them at his Schoole which he kept open at York in his own Native Province, where he was furnished with a most plentifull Li|brary instituted there by his Master, Egbert the Archbishop: whose Successour Eanbald the second of that Name was one of the most eminent among Alcuins Scholars.


XIII. CHAP.XIII. CH.

1.2. c. Of two holy and learned English Virgins, Gisla and Rictrudis (or Colum|ba) Disciples of Alcuin: Their Letter to him in France: and his Answer, c.

1. AMong Alcuins schollars in Brittany we must not omitt two illustrious Virins, Gisla and Rictruda: concerning whom our Learned Pits gives this short ac|count:Pits ad A. D. 770. Rictruda and Gisla (saith he) English Nunns of the Order of S. Benedict were for their extraction Noble, but much more for their ver|tues and learning. From their chilhood they were instructed in the purity of the Latin tongue and other good ltterature by their learned Master Alcuin. After whose departure out of Brittany it is reported that they made great progresse both in the studies of learning and exercises of vertues in their Monastery at Canterbury. They dili|gently imitated both S. Mary Magdalen in contem|plation, and S. Martha in actions of Charity. They with continuall watchfullnes attended to the perfectionating their own soules by Mortification and Spirituall Meditations: and next, to benefits their neighbours by externall works of Charity, especially comforting the afflicted. These two Virgns were renouned in Brittany during the time of Alric King of Kent. But this suspicion that they lived at Canterbury seems to be grounded on the forementiond mistke that Alcuin was Abbot in the same Citty. Whereas it is not to be doubted but that they were Northum|brian Virgins, living in their Monastery at York, where Alcuin taught.
2. There has lately been rescued from the dust of oblivion one Epistle written by these devout Virgins to Alcuin, which alone may be a proof sufficient both of their piety and learning.Ante Opera Alcuini.In which Epistle they signify to him their earnest desire to receive from him out of France sometimes letters of instruction and consolation: and that he would therein imitate S. Hierome, who living in his Monastery at Bethleem did not disdain to write Epistles to severall Noble Virgins at Rome, notwithstanding the great distance between, in which Epistles he did moreover explicate to them many obscure passages in the Propheticall Books of Scripture: Adding, that the distance between Brittany and Tours in France (where Alcuin lived) was in no comparison so great as between Betthleem and Rome. More particularly they humbly

requested of him an Explication of the Gospell of Saint Iohn, the Mysteries of which they ear|nestly desired to understand. And though they had already the Treatises of S. Augustin upon that Gospell, they were too difficult to be understood by them.
Alcuin Pre|fat. ad Evan+gel. S. Ioann.3. This request of theirs he charitably condescended to, as appeares by a prolixe Epistle of his placed before his Explication of S. Iohns Gospell, directed to them: In which he informs them in the time and occasion of S Iohns writing his Gospell for the confuta|tion of Marcion, Cherinthus, Ebion and other Hereticks, who denyed the Divinity of our Saviour. He further observes for their in|struction the difference in the stile between S. Iohn, and the other three Evangelists: For they are most copious in relating the exter|nall actions and speeches of our Saviour, which serve to direct Christian manners in this life: Whereas S. Iohn is very breif in re|lating the facts of our Lord, and cheifly insists on such speeches of his as regard the Vnity of the Trinity, the felicity of eternall Life, and such Mysteries as are more proper for a Con|templative Life. He addes that in explaining this Gospell he durst not rely on his own iudgment, but followed therein the Exposi|tions of Catholick Doctours, S. Ambrose, Saint Augustin, Saint Gregory, Saint Beda and others, out of whom with an humble heart and profound submission he had gathered variety of flowrs, and like a good Physicion out of many ingredients had composed a spirituall Medecine which might be health|full to their soules.
Id. ad 6. lib. praefat.4. There is extant moreover another short|er Epistle upon the same subject prefixed before the sixth Book of his Annotations on that Gospell, importing that he had sent them for their present use and devotion during the time of Lent, certain Extraits out of his explications on that Gospell proper for their present use, by meditating whereon they might be disposed with more spirituall ioy to celebrate the ensuing Paschal Solem|nity,
5. This Latter Epistle is inscribed to his Sister in Christ Gisla, and his devout daughter Co|lumba: And whereas therein he acquaints them that he directed to them the whole exposition of the said Gospell: thereby it is evident that the same person was intended by the two names of Rictrudis and Columba. Both these Holy Virgins are commemorated among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the ninth of Aprill.Martyr. Ang 9. April.


XIV. CHAP.XIV. CH.

1.2. c. Alcuin sent for by Charles the Great into France.
4.5. c. He disputes with, convinces and converts Felix a Spanish Bishop an Arch-heretick, who denyed the Divini|ty of our Saviour, c.

1. CHarles King of France was deservedly stiled Great, both for his victories in war, and his zeale to advance Learning and Catholick Truth. He not only willingly and liberally entertained all learned men who addressed themselves to him, but invited them with great rewards to accept his boun|ty.Brotom. Chron. col 8 7. On a certain time (saith Bromton) two Scot|tish (that is Irish) Monks, learned both in se|cular and Sacred knowledge, came out of Ireland with certain Brittish Merchants into France. These havng no wares to sell, were wont to cry aloud among the people who came to the faire,If any one be desirous of wisedom, let him come to us: for we have it to sell. This they did severall times:
Insomuch as many thought them out of their witts. But the report of this coming to the King, he sent for them: and demanded whether they had wisedom to sell: Their answer was,Yes, Sir, we have it, and in the name of God are ready to im|part it to those who shall desire it. He again asked them, what they demanded in recompence? They replyed, We demand three things: Commo|dious places to teach, Schollars of towardly disposi|tion, and such necessary nourishment and cloathes as humane life requires.
Hereat the King was much ieyed, and retaind them both with him. Afterward when he went to war he left one of them, named Clement, at Paris in a convenient lodging, and commended to his care certain Noble children, with order that he should be furnished with all commodities. The other he took with him into Italy, and bestowed on him the Monastery of Saint Augustin at Pavia, to the end he might there teach all that would apply themselves to him.
2. But there was none so highly esteemed by him as our famous Alcuin, whom about this time he earnestly invited into France, upon two speciall Motives:Quercet. Prae+fat. in Opera Alcuini. The former is thus expressed by Quercetan in his Preface to Alcuins Works: The most glorious King Charles (says he) who by experience was acquainted with the learning and Wisedome of Alcuin, both in France when he was sent thither to make a league of peace between the King of the Northumbers and King Charles: as likewise at Pavia, whilst he abode there: He therefore in an honourable manner called him out of the remote parts of Brittany to assist his affectionat desire to promote the studies of true Wisedome, and restore to light the Liberall Sciences, which at that time were in

a manner extinguished in France. And the same is testified by Alcuin himself in an Epistle which he wrote to the same King Charles.
Alcuin. Ep. 23.2. But the other more important Motive of Alcuins coming into France was the same which his Master Egbert lately Arch-bishop of York had prophetically told him a little before his death: That he should goe into France where he should produce much fruit beneficiall to Gods Church, by opposing a new pestilent Heresy endeavouring to main|tain that Christ was only the adoptive son of God.
3. This Prediction was fullfilld when King Charles called Alcuin out of Brittany. For then Elipandus Bishop of Toledo and Felix Bi|shop of Vrgel (Vrgelitanus) endeavoured to poyson the Church with their blasphe|mies iniurious to the Divinity of our Sa|viour. This Alcuin testifies himself in a Book written against the former of these two Arch-hereticks.Alcuin. in praefat. ad l. 1. cont. Elipand. I never entertained a servant to minister to mee, saith he, but I much rather affectionatly desire to doe service to all the ser|vants of Christ: And for this purpose by Divine ordination, as I beleive, I came out of Brittany to the most illustrious King of this Nation, Charles. For that it was Gods will I should doe so, was foretold mee by a most holy man in my coun|trey, who was endued with the Spirit of Prophecy: Yea the same my most Venerable Master enioynd mee by his last command, that wheresoever I heard of the rising of any new Sects contrary to Apostolick Doctrines, I should addict my self entirely to the defence of the Catholick Faith.
4. Presently after he was come into France, the first thing he did was to write an Epistle to Felix exhorting him to return to the Vni|ty of the Church, In answer whereto Felix returned not a Letter,Alcuin. Ep. 8. ad K. Carol. but large Book, in which (saith Alcuin) I found greater blasphemies then in any of his former Writings, for he affirmed plainly, That Christ Iesus was not the true son of God, nor true God, but titular.
5. To combat this Heresy, Alcuin desired of the King that others might be adioynd to him: And accordingly upon the first soun|ding of the trumpett to battell there appeard severall Champions of the Orthodox Faith, among whom the principall were Paulinus Patriark of Aquileia, Ethereus a Bishop of Os|ma in Spain (Vxmensis) and a certain Abbot called Beatus.Quercet. in Praefat. d Alcuin. Paulinus the most learned of these wrote three Books to confute this Feli|cian Heresy, which he presented to King Charles, humbly desiring they might be sent and delivered into the hands of the most re|verend man, most skilfull in divine knowledge, Albin (or Alcuin:Alcuin. Ep. 81) which was accordingly done. And Alcuin writing back to Paulinus highly commended both the sweetnes and elegancy of his stile, and vigour of his reaso|ning, encouraging him withall to be con|stant in defence of Gods house.
6. But none fought more prosperously in Gods cause then Alcuin himself:A. D. 797. For he ut|terly strangled the Felician Heresy in the be|ginning, and converted the Arch-heretick himself to the Catholick Faith. This is not ta|ken notice of by any of our Historians, as ha|ving passed in a forrain countrey.Quercet. ib.But Quer|cetan from Felix his own Confession relates, How the said Heretick being presented before King Charles at Aquisgran by Laidrad Archbishop of Lyons, obtained leave to sett down in writing the Sentences of former Saints to prove that Christ was only an adop|tive Son of God, to be presented to such Bi|shops and Abbots as the King should cause to be assembled. Which was accordingly gran|ted him. And in answer to those, Alcuin produced many Sentences of Holy Fathers, S. Cyrill, S. Gregory, S. Leo and other Authours formerly unknown to Felix: and to these was added the authority of a late Synod at Rome which condemned, not by violence, but strength of reason the errours contai|ned in Felix his Reply to Alcuins Epistle. So great an authority of truth, and so unani|mous a consent of the Church did so con|vince the iudgment of Felix, that as he writes in his own Confession, I professed in the presence of many Bishops and Monks that I did heartily repent of my former errour: and that I would from thenceforth never beleive nor teach the adoption of the flesh in the son of God, Or that he had only the name and title of God given him in his Humanity: But according to the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers. That the same our Lord Iesus Christ was the proper and true son of God in his two Natures, That he was the only begotten son of the Father, without preiudice to the respective Propriety of each Nature.
7. This Conversion of Felix did so enrage his former companion Elipandus, that he wrote a Book against Alcuin in a most bitter furious stile, calling him a Filthy, rotten false Prophet, a son of Hell, a New Arius, an Arch-heretick, foule, pitchy Albinus: and moreover he charged Alcuinus that by tor|ments he had made Felix a Martyr, so for|cing him to renounce his former Opinions. To whom Alcuin thus answer,Alcuin. cont. Elipant. l. 1. Neither did I, nor Ruffinus make Felix a Martyr: But through Gods mercy I made Felix, formerly a partner in your errour, to become a good Catho|lick: I persecuted indeed, not his person, but that impious Doubt of him, who temp|ting our Lord, said, If thou beest the son of God, command that these stones be made bread.
8. After this Victory Alcuin returned to his Monastery at Tours: For as a Monk of Sangall testifies,Sangall. de Gest. Car. M. l. 1. King Charles gave to Alcuin the Abbey of Saint Martin near Tours: to the end that when he was absent abroad with his Army, he might rest there, and instruct such as should repair to him. And such plentifull fruits did his teaching produce, that the mo|dern French-men may deserve to be compared with the ancient Romans or Athenians. Thus

as Almighty God in the beginning of this age sent out of our Island seated in the ex|tremities of the world such Apostolick men as Saint Swibert, Saint Boniface, c. to settle the Christian Faith in Germany: So he thought good at the end of it to send the learned Alcuin to restore the same Or|thodoxe Faith in France and Spain. But of Saint Alcuin, for so hereafter he deserves to be called, more shall be said in this and the following Book. We must now attend to the affaires of Brittany,


XV. CHA.XV. CHAP.

1.2. Kenulf King of the Mercians.
3.4. c. He solicites and obtains from Pope Leo a restitution of the Primacy of the See of Canterbury, c.

A. D. 797.1. EGFRID the son of Offa King of the Mercians after a short raign of scarce five entire months, dying, he named for Successour Kenulf, having regard rather to his vertues and merits, then title or pro|ximity of blood. Yet he was descended from a Brother of King Penda called Chenalch father to Kentwin, who begot Cuthbert the Father of this Kenulf.
2. The excellency of this Prince is well described by William of Malmsbury,Malmsb. f. 33. who affords him this Character, Kenulf was a ma|gnanimous person, whose vertues over-went his fame. He never did any thing that en|vy could carpe. At home he was Religious, in war Victorious: He was a Prince whose praises will never be silenced as long as there lives in England a person ingenuous and sin|cere. He is to be exalted for the sublimity of his State, and Humility of his mind: Which vertue did then shine most bright, when he restored the iniured dignity of the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury. For this good King did little valew the worldly haughtines of his own Province, when it could not be established without transgres|sing the ancient Ordonnance of Ecclesiasticall Canons.
3. In this first year of his raign there|fore Athelard Arch bishop of Canterbury encouraged by the iustice and piety of this King represented to him the iniurious op|pression which by King Offa had been brought upon the Prime See of Brittany, desiring him that the order instituted by Holy Progenitours might not be depraved by the ambition of particular persons. In which request Embald Arch-bishop of York likewise ioynd. Whereupon the King being satisfied in the iustice of his demand, to the end the matter might be more ma|turely pondred, commanded a Synod to be assembled at Clovesh (or Cliff:) where by the votes of the Bishops and Nobility Mes|sengers with Letters were sent to Rome to Pope Leo, desiring him to employ his spi|rituall authority also to rectify the dis|orders introduced lately into the Churches of Brittany.
4. But this Embassage had not the good successe expected: and the fault seems to have been in the Messenger, which was an Abbot called Wada, who, as we read in a second Letter to the same Pope from the same King Bishops and Nobles, behaved him|self in thate Legation slouthfully negligently and imprudently. Perhaps it might be by the suggestions of the Archbishop of Lich|feild, who was principally interessed in the busines, that he willingly made the message unsuccessefull.
5. This Second Letter, sent by Byrne a Preist, and by Fildas and Ceolberth ser|vants to the King,Baron. ad A. D. 796. is recorded by Baronius and is indeed a Letter well beseeming the piety of this good King:In which after the expression of his ioy that so worthy a person had succeeded to the Venerable Hope Hadrian, he with great submission begged his Fatherly Benediction, and that he would accept him for his Son, promi|sing all duty and Obedience to him: In the next place he represented to him, how his Predecessour King Offa out of an enmity which he bore to the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury Iambert and to the Kingdom of Kent, had divided that Archiepiscopall Pro|vince into two Provinces, so making a Schism in the Churches of Brittany, con|trary to the expresse Ordonnance of the most Blessed Father Pope Gregory the Great, who had decreed that to the See of Can|terbury twelve Episcopall Sees should be subiect. Now though he would not con|demne either King Offa for procuring this change, or Pope Hadrian for condescen|ding to it, since he did not know all the Motives which might induce them thereto: Yet since it seemed to him and the Synod most iust that that Mother Church, in which reposed the Sacred Body of Saint Augustin who brought Christianity into the Kingdom, should enioy the honour of Metropo|litan, he desired his Holines to advise with wise men about this matter, and to search the Archives of the See Apostolick, where the ancient Ordonnances touching the esta|blishment of the Churches of Brittany were preserved, and to give his iudgment and Sentence in the cause accordingly. He besought him withall seriously to peruse a Letter sent by the same Messengers from Aethelard Arch-bishop of Canterbury tou|ching severall other causes and necessi|ties of the Churches of Brittay, and to make known to them his will concer|ning them. With this Letter the King sent likewise certain presents, to wit, a

hundred and twenty (Mancusas) markes.A. D. 796.
6. Now though in this Letter the Names of the Messengers by whom it was sent be expressed: Yet certain it is that Aethelard Arch-bishop of Conterbury, whose cause was discussed, either him|self went with them, or at least imme|diatly followed them. Saint Alcuin in|deed endeavoured to disswade him from that iourney, but the good Arch-bishop esteeming it his duty to omitt nothing that might be advantageous for so iust a causeAp. Malmsb. da Pont. l. 1. Ethelard. Saint Alcuin in a short Letter sent from his Monastery at Tours, wished him a prosperous iurney.And moreover know|ing that the said Arch-bishop was desi|rous to salute King Charles by the way, he wrote another to the same King, whom he calls King David,Alcuin. Ep. ad K. Carol. and himself Flac|cus Matricularius, in which he earnestly recommended to his favourable reception the same Arch-bishop: as likewise other persons of quality which it seems atten|ded him, to witt, Ceilmund who had been a servant to Offa late King of the Mer|cians, and Torchmund a faithfull Officer to Edilred formerly King of the Northum|bers, a man of approved zeale for the Faith, and of stout courage, who had valiantly avenged the death of his Master.
Westmon. hc.7. Now what successe this iourney had is thus breifly declared by Mathew of Westminster: Kenulf King of the Mercians in his own Name, and in the Names of all the English Bishops sent Messengers and Let|ers to Leo Successour to Pope Adrian: the Arch-bishop of Canterbury himself underta|king the Charge of generall Embassadour: and obtaind of him what he requested.Ep. Leon. P. ad K. Kenulf.But this appears more expressly and fully by the Letter of Answer written by Pope Leo himself: in which, after many high com|mendations both of the Kings piety, and the Arch-bishops excellent vertues, he si|gnified that after diligent search into the Sacred Roman Archives he found that his Predecessour Saint Gregory had to the Ar|chiepiscopall See of Canterbury, and to Saint Augustin Arch-bishop thereof subiected twelve Bishopricks, granting to him only the power of Consecrating the said Bishops: Therefore by Apostolick authority he decreed a restitution of the same Ordinations Con|secrations to Athelard and his Successours: A confirmation of which Priviledge he had gi|ven to the said Arch-bishop, which he re|quired should be observed under the penal|ty prescribed by the Sacred Canons.


XVI. CHAP.A. D. 797.
XVI. CH.

1.2. c. Pope Leo the third in|humanely tormented by two Assas|sins, who pluckd out his eyes and tongue, c.
3 4. His sight and speech miraculously re|stored.
5.6. c. Charles the Great testifies this in Letters to S. Alcuin.

1. THERE is one Clause in the foresaid Letter of Pope Leo to Kenulf, which argues that the said Kings Letter was written two years after this time, as implying a knowledge of a great calamity which be|fell this good Pope: though some of our ancient Historians refer it to this year. The said clause is conceived in these words: In one of your Epistles,Id. ib. said the Pope, we doe find a proestation of your Maiesty, that such is your respect to our Apostolick function, that if you had been present with mee at Rome, you would willingly and affectionatly have layd down your own life for us.
2. Now the calamity hapning to the Pope was this:Anastas Bi|bloth. Baron. ad A. D. 79. Hantingd. f. 344. Though for his vertues and piety he was by the unanimous consent of the Roman Clergy and people chosen Pope the same day in which his Predecessour dyed: yet some there were which bore excessive malice and envy towards him, the princi|pall of which were two Nephews of the former Pope, named Paschal and Campulus. It does not appear upon what provoca|tion these two wicked persons should conceive displeasure against the Pope: but their rancour and fury was so implacable that on a certain day when the Pope was publickly celebrating the great Litany, they delivered him to certain troops of sol|diers layd in ambush near the Monastery of Saint Steven, who barbarously seising on him cast him on the ground, and there inhumanly plucked out his eyes, cutt out his tongue, and so left him blind and dumb upon the pavement. Yea moreover those two inhuman wretches not content with this, drew him from that place into the Church it self before the Altar of Saint Steven, where they again tore out whatsoever remaind of his eyes and tongue, and tearing all his flesh with whipps, they left him there wal|lowing in his own blood. But afterwards fearing least some good men should take him from thence, they sent some of their party, who caried him to the Monastery of Saint Gerasime, where they shutt him up in close prison.
3. But God who patiently suffred the ma|lice of these barbarous men thus far, in a moment destroyed all their wicked designs: For Pope Leo, presently after he was conveyed to the said Monastery, perfectly recovered both his sight and speech. Which mira|culous mercy being made known to his freinds, and particularly to Albin his Chamberlain, they came by night, and by force took him out of the Cloyster, and transported him to the Church of Saint Peter, where generally all the Romans gave praise to God for this wonderfull deliverance of his Servant. But the Con|spiratours not being able to execute their malice any further against the Pope, went to vomite their rage upon the house of Albin, which they lacked and utterly demolished.
4. The fame of this prodigious Miracle was in a short time spread through all Christendom. And Winegise Duke of Spo|leto, accompanied by the Embassadours of King Charles, came to Rome, and from thence conveyed the Pope to Spoleto. From whence afterward he went into France to King Charles, by whom he was with all honour and kindnes received: and during all his voyage the high wayes were filled with devout people, which with great ioy and devotion congratulated with him for the goodnes which God had so won|derfully shewed to him, and to the whole Church in his regard.
5 King Charles assoon as he was informed of this barbarous cruelty executed on this good Pope, wrote a Letter to Saint Alcuin, demanding his advice what became him to doe in such a coniuncture.Alcuin. ep. 11. To whom Saint Alcuin answerd, that it was his duty as being supreme Governour of Gods people, an avenger of crimes, a comforter of the afflicted and an exalter of such as are good, to punish severely those examples of extreme impiety com|mitted at Rome, where formerly piety did most flourish, but where of late wicked men through the blindnes of their hearts pluck out the eyes of their own head, c. And accordingly King Charles shortly after conducted Pope Leo to Rome, where the crimes falsly impu|ted to him by his enemies were cleared: but what became of the two forementioned Assassins, we doe not read.
6. Another Epistle likewise King Charles wrote to the same Saint Alcuin, in which he declared to him the miraculous recovery of the same Pope,Id. Ep. to whom God by his Divine operation had restored his sight and speech: To which Saint Alcuin answerd that it was the duty and obligation of all good Chri|stians to reioyce in such Clemency of the Di|vine Protection, and to praise the name of our God, who never forsakes such as putt their trust sincerely in him. And whereas the said King had invited him to quitt for some time the smoaky lodgings of his Monastery at Tours to accompany him in his voyage to the golden palaces at Rome:A. D. 798. Saint Alcuin excused himself, saying, that the sight of swords and armour would doe more harm to his eyes then the smoaky chambers at Tours: and that he should more serve his Maiesty by dayly praying for him in his Monastery, then attending him in his edious iourney, too burdensom to his weak infirm body.



1.2. Succession of Bishops.
3.4 c. Edilbert Pren King of Kent sub|dued by Kenulf the Mercian King.
6. The Monastery of Winchelcomb.

1, A Thelard returning from Rome seems to have brought with him the Archiepiscopall Pall for Eanbald Arch-bi|shop of York,Hoved f. 406 who this year received it and thereby was instated in the pleni|tude of his Pontificall power. The first exercise whereof was expressed in the Or|dination and consecration of Eadred to the See of Hagustald, who succeeded to Ethel|bert. In which ordination he was assisted by Higbald Bishop of Lindesfarn: and the solemnity was performed at a place cal|led Wodford. Dudda likewise the Bishop of Winchester dying, in his place was sub|stituted Kinebert.
2. The year following Eathored Bishop of Worcester in the Kingdom of the Mer|cians,A. D. 798. dying, in his room succeeded Denebert. And about the same time the Church of Shirborn also being deprived of its Pastour, Denefrid, received Wibert for his Successour.
3. At the same time Edilbert sirnamed Pren after he had raigned two years in Kent,Malmsb. f. 11. taking the boldnes to provoke the Mercians much exceeding him in power, was taken prisoner by them, and was for some time held captive in chains. But afterwards being sett free by his enemies, his own Subiects refused to admitt him: so that it is uncertain how and where he ended his life.
4. But Hoveden recounts this calamity of King Edilbert Pren more tragically: At this time,Hoved. hic. saith he, Kenulf King of the Mer|cians with all his forces united invaded the Province of Kent, which he wasted most ter|ribly, almost to the destruction of the inha|bitants. During which invasion Edilbert King of Kent was taken prisoner, whose eyes the Mercian King commanded to be plucked out, and his hands cutt off, for his former pride and treachery. Then he adioyned that King|dom

to his own, putting the crown thereof upon his head, and the Scepter in his hands.
5. Such inhumanity as this seems much disagreeing from the mercifull nature of this good King. Therefore the Narration of Mathew of Westminster is far more cre|dible: In the year of Grace seaven hundred ninety eight (says he) Kinulf King of the Mer|cians in a hostile manner wasted the Province of Kent, and took prisoner Edilbert, sirnamed Pren, who was much inferiour to him in power, whom he caried in a triumphant manner bound in chains to his own kingdom. But not long after when he caused a Church, lately founded by him at Winchelcomb, to be dedicated, on the day of the Consecration he took the chains from off the captive King before the Altar, and dismissed him free. There was then present Cuthred, whom in the place of Edilbert he had made Governour of Kent. The Church sounded with acclamations, and the streets with the Kings praises, and be|cause in a meeting of thirteen Bishops and ten Dukes assembled for that Solemnity he refu|sed to none the marks of his liberality: so that all went home much richer then they came: For besides Presents of inestimable va|lew in rich garments, choice horses and other furniture which he gave to his Nobles: to eve|ry particular man then present he gave a pound of silver, to every Preist a Mark of gold, to every Monk a peice of money: So that not one person there present fayled to partake of his bounty. And he enriched the Monastery with so large possessions, that in this age it seems incredible.
Monast. Ang. p. 189.6. In the Annals of this Monastery of Winchelcomb is recorded the Charter of this King, confirmed in a Synod at which were present two other Kings his Tributaries, Cuthred King of Kent, and Sired King of the East-Saxons: in which he signifies that his intention was that his body should be buried in the same Church. But this Char|ter was of a later date, because it is sub|scribed by Wulfred Arch-bishop of Canter|bury who succeeded six years after this to Athelard. In the same Annals likewise is declared that at the first building of this Monastery three hundred Monks were pla|ced in it. What particular Maunors the King gave to them is unknown,Registr. Wn|chel. by rea|son all the ancient Records were burnt in the time of King Steven.


XVIII. CHAP.XVIII. C.

1.2. A Synod at Bacanceld, against Vsurpers of Church revenews: and for restitution of the Rights of the See of Canterbury.
3. Another Synod of the Archbishop|rick York.

1. A Little after Athelard was returned from Rome,Spelm. de Concil. f. 317. a Synod was assembled by the Kings command, in which himself and Athelard presided. The place where the Sy|nod was held was called Bacanceld: In which the Ach-bishop in the name of Pope Leo, by the consent of the whole Synod published this Prohibition, adiuring all men by the most dreadfull iudgment of God from that day forward, not to infringe the liberties, nor usurp the revenews of Gods Churches and Monasteries: denouncing against all trans|gressours excommunication in this world, and damnation in the next.
2. At the same time likewise the di|gnity, of late empaired, was restored to the Metropolitan Church of Canterbury. And Aldulf formerly stiling himself Arch-bi|shop of Lichfeild, submitted himself to the Popes command, and to the iurisdiction of Athelard: in this Synod subscribing himself by the simple Title of Bishop. Yet all matters were not so cleared in that Controversy, but that upon new emergent difficulties Athelard was obliged once more to have recourse to the See Apo|stolick.
3. In the Kingdom of the Northumbers likewise a Synod was called at Finchal (now Finkley) in which Eanbald Arch-bishop of York presided,Hoved. f. 406 Ib. Stubbu de. Act. Pont. brac. and at which were pre|sent many persons of high rank, both Ec|clesiasticall and Secular. In this Synod many Ordonnances were made, proffitable to the Church of God and the whole nation, tou|ching the Observation of the Paschall solem|nity, the regulating of Iudicatories both Ecclesiasticall and Secular, the introducing of good order among Clarks and Religious persons, and many other like Ordonnances, by which the generall state of that Pro|vince was excellently composed. Eanbald likewise the Arch-bishop commanded that the Faith of Gods Church explained by the five Generall Councils should be publickly re|cited: whereto all unanimously consented. (The same as we have before declared, had been practised in the Synod of Hatfeild under Theodore Arch-bishop of Canterbury.)



A. D. 779.
XIX. Ch.XIX. CHAP.

1.2. c. Pope Leo conducted to Rome by King Charles the Great.

1. THE year following King Charles with great pomp conducted Pope Leo back to Rome.DA.. 779. Anast. Biblio. in Lem. 3. Among other expres|sions of ioy at his reception testified by Anastasius, this was one, That all the Schooles of Strangers in that Citty, to witt, of the Franks, Frisons, Saxons and Lombards ioyning together in one body with Crosses and flaggs, singing likewise spirituall Canticles, re|ceived the Pope, leading him to the Church of Saint Peter, where he solemnly celebrated Masse. Now by the Schoole of the Saxons he certainly means that of the English, in|stituted by King Ina and amplified in re|venews by King Offa. For the Name of Brittany began now to grow out of use. Shortly we shall have it by Regall autho|rity changed into England: In the mean time it was most usually called Saxony beyond the Sea, to distinguish it from the Old Saxony in the Continent. Hence in the last Letter written by Pope Leo to Ke|nulf King of the Mercians, he stiles him King of the Province of Saxony.
2. It is probable that Athelard Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Kinebert Bishop of Winchester accompanied their countrey|men in this Procession: For at this time those two Bishops were at Rome, as Floren|tius testifies.Flore. hc. The occasion of Athelards second iourney thither was to clear some difficulties arising from the change made lately in the Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction in Brittany. Which difficulties were so many and of such consideration, that all oppo|sition could not be quieted, nor all im|pediments removed till four years more were passed.
3. And as for Kinebert, the Motive of his going to Rome was either devotion, or to offer in the name of Brithric King of the West-Saxons the yearly contribution, called Romescot, which was collected our of his Dominions.


XX. CHAP.A. D. 780.
XX. CHA.

1.2. c. Charles the Great solemnly crowned Emperour of Rome by Pope Leo the third.
6. Saint Alcuin's congratulation to him.

1. THE last year of this Century was ren|dred illustrious by the New erection of the Western Empire.A. D. 800. The Emperours of Con|stantinopl, besides that for severall ages they had been the Protectours of Heresy, they were become unable to defend the Western Regions from the assaults which the Saracn made in severall parts, especially the Islands: and Rome particularly was exposed to many oppressions from the Lombards and other petty Princes tyrannising in Italy, yea from the Nobility of the Citty it self and of the Territory adioyning, who oft compelled the Popes to flye into France and Germany: So that it was necessary to seek out a com|mon Protectour abroad. Now not any Chri|stian Prince could enter into competition with the Kings of France either for power or inclination to defend the Apostolick See, or to secure Italy it self from the Saracens abroad, and Tyrants within the bowells of it. The obligations which Rome, and especially the See Apostolick had already to the Predecessours of King Charles, not only for quelling the Tyrants who oppressed it, but for raising it from poverty and weaknes to wealth and power, to be envyed even by Princes, were so fresh and so excessive, that to seek a Protectour from any other Kingdom had been folly. And among the Kings and Princes governing in France, none hitherto approached to King Charles the Great, either for power, or for affe|ction to the Church, a proof whereof he at this time gave to the present Pope, in his care to secure him from his malicious enemies by retiring into France, his tender, affectionate and respectfull entertainment of him there, and his restoring him with far greater splendour then ever to his See, with power to execute iustice, and if he pleased, any revenge upon his barbarous enemies.
2. These things considered, both grati|tude and interest strongly moved Pope Leo to resent the inestimable benefitts which he had so lately received from King Charles. And since his abilities could stretch no fur|ther then to exalt so great a King by Words and Titles, and no Title was either more easy for him to bestow, or more becoming King Charles to receive, then that of Empe|rour of the West, or of Rome: For these

reasons the sayd Pope at this time made choice of that way of expressing his grati|tude.A. D. 800.
3. Now that this new Honour might be conferred as it were in a Legall manner and due Form, according to the ancient custom, he caused the Nobility and cheif among the Clergy at Rome and neighbouring places to assemble together, as constituting a re|semblance of the ancient Roman Senat: And by their unanimous Votes and suffrages was this illustrious King nominated and chosen Emperour of Rome: Which election was presently signified to the Common people of Rome and other Regions of Italy assembled in infinite multitudes from all parts, by whom it was with loud acclamations ratified and confirmed. Which being done, Pope Leo, as Prince of the Senat did in all their names, with the greatest solemnity and glory ima|ginable, ioyning in the ceremony both Civill and Spirituall authority, sett the Im|periall Crown upon his head on the day of the great Solemnity of our Lords Nativity.
4. The fame of this being spread abroad, as it caused both envy and terrour to the Eastern Emperour and Empire, so it was re|ceived with great applause and congratu|lation in the Western Provinces and King|doms, from whence many testimonies of ioy, and many rich presents were sent from all parts to the New Emperour.
5. Among others none was more emi|nent either in the way to testify his ioy, or the pretiousnes of his present then our Countrey man Saint Alcuin.Alcuin. Ep. 20. His Epistle is to this day extant, full of cordiall expressions of affection and congratulation. So like|wise does his Present remain in the Church, as a common benefit and treasure. Concer|ning it Cardinall Baronius thus writes:Baron. ad A. D. 7786. Among the many obligations in which po|sterity is engaged to celebrate the memory of this glorious Emperour, the most eminent is that fa|mous elaborate Work compiled by Alcuin, or Al|bin, who with incredible pains published a corre|cted Copy of Holy Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament. For by occasion of the multiplici|ty of exscribed Copies, it was become so wholly con|taminated with errours and corruptions, that it had in a manner lost its esteem among Catholicks. King Charles was much troubled at this,  there|upon resolved to employ his care that the Scri|pture might be restored to its primitive integrity. But that taske required both such wonderfull la|bour and iudgment, that all those to whom he re|commended it excused themselves out of a con|sciousnes of their inability, At last he obliged Alcuin to undertake it. Who thereupon em|ploying his utmost diligence, and having re|course to the most ancient and most true foun|tains, he at last compiled a perfect corrected Copy of the whole Scripture, which he presented to the Emperour Charles. And of this the same Emperour takes notice in one Section of his Capi|lar, in these words, Our pleasure is, and such command wee have given by our Messengers, that true Copies of Canonicall Books of Scripture be provided and read in all Churches.


XXI. CHAP.XXI. CH.

1.2. c. That S. Alcuin was Charlemagns Master.
4.5. By his suggestion the Feast of the Holy Trinity was instituted

1. ABout the same time Saint Alcuin having likewise finished his Books concerning the Blessed Trinity,Alcuin in Praefat. ad. l. 1. de Trinit. which he undertook in opposition to the foremen|tioned Heretick Elipandus, dedicated them to the same Emperour, as appears by the preliminary Epistle to him. And the parti|cular reason given by him why he inscri|bed them to him was, Because, said he, it became mee to perform the Office implyed in the Title which is commonly given mee, though beyond my desert, of being your Maister and in|structour: as likewise to convince those who doe not much approve your Maiesties intention of understanding the nice subtilties of Logick which the Holy Father Saint Augustin in his Books of the Holy Trinity shewd to be necessary in the explication of this Mystery, the profound Questions whereof, he says, can no other waybe manifested but by the subtilties of the Catego|ries.
2. Cardinall Baronius is the only conside|rable Writer who denyes S. Alcuin to have been the Emperours Master and Teacher:Baron. ad A. D. 718. groun|ding his assertion on this, That Alcuin him|self sometimes consulted the Emperour in points of difficulty, as in one for example, Why the three Sundays before Lent should have the Titles given them of Quinquagesima, Sexa|gesima and Septuagesima? And thence he con|cludes, that when the Emperour calls him Master, he intended thereby only a Title of honour, and not as if he had really been his Disciple.
3. Notwithstanding though it be most true that the said Emperour was more then ordinarily learned in sacred knowledge, yet that S. Alcuin at least in inferiour litte|rature was his Master,Eginard. in vit. Caroli. is testified by Writers of the same age, and the immediatly following. Thus Eginardus, who is called by Baronius the inspectour and recorder of the Gests of Charles the Great, writes thus in the said Emperours life, In learning Grammar Charles had for his Master Peter of Pisa a Deacon and old man: In other Disciplins his Teacher was Albin, sir|named Alcuin, a Deacon likewise and most lear|ned man in all kinds of knowledge, who was of a Saxon offspring and came to him out of Brittany. Vnder him the Emperour employed much time and diligence in learning Rhetorick, Logick and

especially Astronomy. The like is affirmed by the Monk of S. Gall, who having called Saint Alcuin an English man exercised in all the lati|tude of Scriptures above all in his time,Sangall. de Gest. Caroli M. l. 1. addes, That Charles retained him with him continually to the end of his life, except when he went forth with his Armies: insomuch as he would have himself stiled his Disciple, and Alcuin his Ma|ster.Radulf. l. de Ca-Obser+vant. And Radulfus Dean of Tungres writes thus, In divers countreys through all the Paschall time onely three Psalms are recited at Matins: and for this custom it is alledged that Alcuin, Master to Charles and his Son Ludovicus, at the entreaty of Boniface Arch-bishop of Mentz, in|stituted this order, with the approbation of a Sy|nod at Mentz. To these may be added the te|stimonies of many other Authours cited by Quercetan. And for as much as concerns Ba|ronius his allegation to the contrary from Saint Alcuins proposing a Question to King Charles touching Quinquagesima, c. an answer may be given from Alcuin himself writing to the same King, where he says, That to propose a Question wisely,Alcuin. Ep. 6.  Carol. is to teach. But this is more then sufficient touching this Point, upon occasion of S. Alcuins Books of the Blessed Trinity.
4. These Books did S. Alcuin write to the Emperour Charles to inflame his zeale to the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity. And moreover to the end that the Beleif Reverence thereto might be communicated to all Christians, he at this time also moved the same Emperour to deale with Pope Leo that the Holy Trinity might be honoured with a peculiar Feast, for which a proper Office and Masse should be instituted: Which was also effected, and the said Office and Masse were complied by S. Al|cuin himself. This is testified by Frederick Nausea Bishop of Vienna, who putts this among the praises of Charles and S. Alcuin, saying:Fr. Nasea Conc. 12.5. For a long time there was no speciall Feast instituted to the Honour of the Blessed Trinity, the Catholick Church contenting her self with that dayly Form of Praise where with we use at the end of every Psalm, Hymn and Canticle to glorify the same, saying, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, c. Which order was instituted by Pope Damasus at the pro|posall made by S. Hierom. But at length in the year of our Lord eight hundred at the request of the Victorious, holy Emperour Charles the Great, in|cited thereto by his Master and Preceptour Al|cuin, a man of eminent learning and piety, an Or|dnnance was made by the command of Pope Leo That the Blessed Trinity should be honoured by a peculiar Feast on the next sunday after Pentecost, being the Octave thereof.


XXII. CHAP.XXI.I CH.

1.2. c. A Synode at Clovesho: and the Acts of it.

1. WE will conclude this Book and Cen|tury with a short view of the state of Gods Church in Brittany at this time.Splm. f. 318.Sir Henry Spelman has published another Synod held this year at Clovesho: In which, after a publick attestation of the Vniformity of their Faith with the same which Saint Gre|gory the Great caused to the taught here at the first Conversion of the Nation: with a Pro|fession that what they beleived they would also in their lives practise, a Decree was made for the restitution of all lands and goods which had been usurped by Lay-per|sons, and violently taken from Churches and Monasteries.
2 More specially Athelard Arch-bishop of Canterbury presiding in the same, repre|sented to the Synod, how Ethelbald King of the Mercians had given formerly to the Church of our Saviour in Canterbury a certain Monastery called Cotham with all the Lands and possessions belonging thereto: and that such his Donation might be of perpetuall force he sent by Cuthbert then Archbishop a Turf of the said land, together with all Writings peraining to the same Monastery, which he required him to lay upon the Altar of our Saviours Church. But after the death of the said Arch-bishop, two men who had been educated by him, named Vehead and Osbert, by the Devills instiga|tion stole away those Writings, and caried them to Ceolulf King of the West-Saxons: who thereupon took to his own use the said Monastery and land, notwithstanding any thing that the Arch-bishop could alledge. His Successours likewise in the Arch-bishop|rick, Bregwan and Iambert, in severall Synods made complaints of this injury done to the Church of our Saviour, both to the King of the West-Saxons and to Offa King of the Mercians who had subdued many Citties, and particularly that Territory in which the said Monastery of Cotham was seated, which he annexed to his own Dominion. But now at last Kenulf King of the Mercians repenting of his injustice, had restored all the said Writings, adding with|all a great summe of money, humbly requesting that he might be absolved from the Excommunications denounced against Sacrilegious usurpers of Church|lands.
3. Matters standing thus, the said Arch-bishop Athelard, together with his principall Officer Cuba, brought the foresaid Writings into the Synod, which

were publickly read and approved.A. D. 780. Then he acquainted the Synod that by a mutuall agreement between himself and a certain Abbesse named Cynedritha, she should pos|sesse the said Monastery of Cotham with all lands belonging to it, giving in exchange land of one hundred and ten Mansions, and Sixty Hides (Cassatarum) in a place named Fleot, and thirty in another called Tenaham, and twenty in a third named Creges Ennu|lina, all which lands King Offa had formerly given to her and her heyrs, and after their decease to the Church of Beodford. This agree|ment touching an exchange, with a mutuall surrendry of all Writings on both sides, the Arch-bishop desired might be approved and confirmed by the Synod, that no difference might hereafter happen between his Succes|sours and the heyrs of King Offa. He more|over gave to the same Abbesse another Mo|nastery seated in a place called Pectonege, which the devout King Egfrid had bestowd on him to be possessed by a right of in|heritance.


XXIII. C.XXIII. CHAP.

1.2 c. The Martyrdom of S. Alcmund a Northumbrian Prince.
4.5. c. Brithric King of the West-Saxons murdred by his Queen Eadburga: For which it was ordained that the wives of succeeding Kings should never have the Title of Queens.

Westmon. hc.1. THE Kingdom of the Northumbers at this time was again most greivously plagued by the Danish Pirats: for a most hor|rible army of them landing in the Northern parts cruelly spoyled the Churches of Hercenes and Tyn|mouth.
2. The same year also Alcmund son of Alred who had been there King, was apprehended by the guards of the present Vsurping King Eardulf, and by his command was slain, together with all those who had been his companions in banishment.
3. This Prince Alcmund was son of that King Alred who in the year of Christ seaven hundred seaventy four was by a rebellion of his Subiects driven out of his kingdom and fled to the Picts. This Prince willingly followed his Father into banishment, the incommodities whereof he bore with a Chri|stian equanimity. By such afflictions God di|sposed this pious Prince for a far richer crown For though by the relation of Ma|thew of Westminster he is said to have been slain by the cruelty of King Eardulf: yet in our Martyrologe he is commemorated in the quality of a Martyr,Martyr. Ang. 19. Mart. made a sacrifice to God by the inhumanity of the Danes. Certain it is that he dyed a violent and uniust death, and by posterity has been aways venerated as a Saint: which God approved by many Miracles. In the Citty of Darby a magnificent Church was built to his honour, called to this day the Church of S. Alcmund. Another likewise was erected in Shrewsbury, as our Martyrologe testifies,Id. ib. where his Name is ce|lebrated among Saints on the nineteenth of March. And in former times a great con|course thither was made, especially from the Northern parts, to pay their devotions to God in honouring his Saint their iniured countreyman.
4. This Century concluded with the death of Brithric King of the West-Saxons by the treacherous cruelty of his Wife. The manner thereof is thus described by Mathew of West|minster. King Brithric, saith he, had taken to wife Eadburga daughter to Offa King of the Mer|cians.Westmon. hc. This woman being exalted to so great ho|nours, did not content her self, but was restlesse in her ambition to enioy alone all wealth and power. Therefore with a tyrannous malice she was wnt to accuse before the King and persecute all the Nobles of the Kingdom and all others who favoured iustice. By which means she became the Obiect of the Vniversal hatred both of the Princes and inferiour subiects: Because that wicked wo|man by her flatteries had so insinuated her self into the Kings affection and esteem, that who|sever she accused, were presently either banished or slain: Or if she could not obtain this, her custom was privatly to destroy them by poison.
5. Now there was at that time a certain young man of a Noble family and deeply in the Kings favour: against whom the Queen not having any thing of which she could with any pretence of iu+stice accuse him, she provided poyson with which she killed him. And a part of this poyson the King unawares taesting, immediatly dyed. Her purpose then was not that the poison should be given to the King, but only to the young man his favourite: but by mishap they both drank of it, and both presently dyed.
6. The King being thus unhappily slain, the Queen knowing how universally she was hated, in great fear fled away privatly, carying with her inestimable treasure. And passing the Sea, she went to the Emperour-Charles, to whom she pre|sented many rich gifts.On a certain time,  she was among other Ladies standing in his pre|sence, being though a most wicked, yet a woman of wonderfull beauty, the Emperour said thus to her, Take your choice, Madame, whether you will have mee, or my Son who stands where at the window, for your husband. She without any de|liberation, and being incited by her lust, answerd thus, If the choice be left to mee, I would much rather chuse your son then you, because he is younger. Then the Emperour perceiving that the satisfying her lust suggested this answer to her tongue, returned her this quick and elegant reply, If you had chosen mee, I would have given you my Son: But since you have chosen him, you shall have neither him nor mee.
A. D. 800.7. Notwithstanding upon her importunity, and also in regard of her beauty the Emperour bestowd on her a Noble Monastery of Religious wo|men into which she retired, and there hypocriti|cally laying aside her secular habit, she took the habit of a Religious woman. having in her heart no sence of the duty to which that Profession obli|ged her, and for some few years exercised the Of|fice of Abbesse there.
8. Her memory was in such execration in Brittany, that by an unanimous agreement of the Nobility and Commons in the King|dom of the West-Saxons a Decree was made, that from that time the wives of those Western Kings should never enioy the Title of Queens, nor partake of any prerogative of Regall dignity.
9. To Brithric there succeeded in that kingdom Egbert, the first founder of the Saxon or English Monarchy, and the first who commanded the Island to be called by a new Name, England: Concerning whom more in the following Book. This I will conclude with the Chronologicall account of this time given by Ethelwerd a Noble Historian of the Royall blood of the Saxons, who lived in the following Age: In the year when Eg|byrht began his raign there passed from the Crea|tion of the world six thousand years wanting five:Ethelvverd. hist. l. 3. c. 2. from our Lords Incarnation, eight hundred: from the coming of the Saxons Hengest and Horsa into Brittany, three hundred and fifty years: and from the first entrance of S. Augustin sent by S. Gregory to convert this Nation, two hundred and four years.






