




NOVEMBER:
OR,
Signal Dayes
Observed in that Month
In Relation to the CROWN
and ROYAL FAMILY.
Written by the most Ingenious and Learned
Mr. WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT
then Student of Christ-Church in Oxon,
and Proctor of the Vniversity.
In the SAVOY,
Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold
at the Sign of the Anchor in the Lower Walk of
the New Exchange. 1671.






NOVEMBER,
OR,
SIGNAL DAYES
Observ'd in that MONTH in
relation to the CROWN and
ROYAL FAMILY.

1.
THou Sun that shew'st the Day, look down
and see
A Month more shining by Events than
thee;
Departed SAINTS and SOULS
sign'd it before,First Day All-Saints; Second Day All-Souls.
But now the Living sign it more:
Persons and Actions met, all meant for Joy;
But some build up, and some destroy:
Bate Us that Ushering Curse (so Dearly known)
And then the Month is all our own:
So at the First, Darkness was thrown about
Th' Unshapen Earth, and Light was then struck out.



2.
Draw the first Curtain,Third Day Began the Long Parlia|ment 1640. and Maho|met began his Reign Anno 622. and Cautionary Towns resto|red to the States 1616. and the Scene is then
A Triple State of Guil'd and Trusted men;
Men, in whose hands 'twas once to have given Us more
Then our bold Fathers ask'd before:
Who had they us'd their Prince's Grace, had got
What no Arms could and Theirs will not:
What more than Witchcraft did our Blessing curse,
And made the Cure make Evils worse.
'Tis the Third Day, throw in the Blackest Stone,
Mark it for Curs'd, and let it stand Alone.


3.
But,Fourth Day The Birth of the Princess Royal MARY (P of Aurange.) 1632. and of her Son the now Prince of Aurange 1650. hold! speak gentler things; this Fourth was seen
The softest Image of our Beauteous Queen:
Bring me a Lamb, not us'd to elder Food,
That hath as yet more Milk than Blood;
That to the Honour of this early Bride
(Like Thetis come to Peleus side)
Some tender thing may fall: though none can be
So tender or so white as She:
While we at home our little Turf debate,
She spreads our Glory to another State.



4.
Next,Fifth Day, The Gun-powder-Plot 1605. View a Treason of the work Intent,
Had not our own done more than Strangers meant
Religion is the Thing both sides pretend,
But either to a different End;
They Covenant out of Zeal to rear their own,
These out of Zeal to pull all down:
Bless Us from these, as them; but yet compare
Those in the Vault, these in the Chair:
Though the just lot of unsuccessful Sin
Fix theirs without, you'l find worse Heads within.


5.
But,Twelfth and Thirteenth Day, Brain|ford Fight 1642. hark! what Thunder's that, and who those men.
Flying towards Heaven, but soon fall down again?
Whose those black Corps cast on the Guilty Shore?
'Tis Sin that swims to its own Dore:
'Tis the Third Scourge of Rebels, which allow'd
Our Army, like the Prophets Cloud,
Did from a handful rise, until at last
By it their Sky was over-cast:
But (as Snakes hiss after they've lost their Sting)
The Traytors call'd this Treachery in the King.



6.
Away!Sixteenth Day Queen HENRI|ETTE MARIA born. and view the Graces and the Powers
Hov'ring aloof and dropping mingled Flowers
Upon a Cradle where an Infant lay
More Grace, more Goddess than are they:
Thrice did they destine Her to pass the Seas;
Love made her thrice to pass with Ease,
To raise a strength of Princes first, and then
To raise another strength of men:
Most fruitful Queen, we boast both Gifts, and thus
The Day was meant to You, the Joy to Us.


7.
Next to this Mother stands a Virgin Queen,Seventeenth Day Queen ELIZA|BETH began her Reign 1558.
Courting and Courted, wheresoever seen:
The People's Love first from her Troubles grew,
Her Reign then made that Love her Due:
That comely Order which did then adorn
Both Fabricks, now by Faction's torn,
That Form by her allow'd of Common-Prayer
Is stil'd vain beating of the Air:
How do they Honour, how Forsake her Crown,
Her Times are still cry'd up, but practis'd down.



8.
Reach last the whitest Stone the World yet knew,Nineteenth Day The Birth of K. CHARLES the First 1600.
White as his Soul to whom the Day is due;
Son of the Peaceful Iames, how is he blest
With all his Blessings but his Rest!
Though undeserved Times cloud all his Pow'rs,
All Troubles seize on other Hours;
Let this Day flow to Him, as void of care
As Feasts to Godds and Poets are;
The Wish is Just, O Heavens, and as our strife
Hath added to his Care, adde to his Life.


9.
And now since His large Heart with Hers is met,
Whose Day the Stars on purpose neer have set;
November shall to me for ever shine
Red in its Ink, redder in Wine:
And since the Third Day (which hath now made shift
T' absolve the Treasons of the Fifth)
Cannot be well remember'd or forgot
By Loyal Hearts, as if 'twere not:
The last Extream against the first We'll bring,
That gave us many Tyrants, this a King.
FINIS.





