




An EXACT DESCRIPTION OF IRELAND: Chorographically Surveying all its Provinces Counties After a more Accurate, Plain, Easie, and Particular Manner than any before done in this kind. Shewing the Exact STATE of that Kingdom, and all the Principal Things that are Necessary to be known. And 5 Maps relating thereto. With an INDEX of all the Provinces, Counties, Baronies, Cities, Towns, Forts, Castles, Rivers, Lakes, Havens, Bays, Moun|tains, Promontories, c. In such a manner as may serve for a Geographical DICTIO|NARY for IRELAND. Very Useful for the Right Understanding the pesent Affairs of that Kingdom. Done according to the latest Surveys, and agree|ing with all the New MAPS. By LAURENCE EACHARD of Christ-College in Cambridge.
London: Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple near Tmple-Bar in Fleetstreet. 1691.




THE Preface.
IRELAND is at present a Place of very Considerable Action, and of so nigh Concern to this Nation, that I thought a short Descrip|tion of it could not be very un|acceptable in so Curious an Age, thogh offer'd by One who has so lately troubld the Publick with something of this Nature. Since it is usual for Authors to give some Account of their Works

in their Preface, I shall do so of this; and that as briefly as I can.
In making of it, I have ob|served as good a Method as I could, and have been also as par|ticular, not leaving out any thing that ought to be known, or was necessary to make it Com|pleat; not only observing those Things that were purely Choro|graphical and Modern, but al|so such as were Historical and Ancient.
In the Provinces and Coun|ties, I have also been very Me|thodical, agreeing with each o|ther (even to the equal Num|ber of Paragraphs) so exact|ly, that what is in one, may be found in all; and have gi|ven them all the true Dimen|sions according to the latest Sur|vey.

The Towns I have Describd as largely as I could from any Athor I could procure, (tho' perhaps not so largely as some may expect) mntioning mre than I can find in any other Book, always beginning with the most Northern Town in the County, (as nigh as I could) and going on in such Order, (shewing their Distan|ces all the way in English Mles, the 60th part of a Degree) as may be most easily found in the Maps. I have shewn the Di|stance of the chief Town in each County from Dublin, the chief of the Kingdom.
The Index I am sure must be of good use to all such as de|sire to understand the History and Affairs of this Country:

And for the speeder finding of those Places there mentioned, I have set the Longitude and Latitude of all the Towns and Castles, (according to P. Lea's and H. Moll's Map.) That this Index might be of greater and more general Use, I have na|med many more Places than are in the Book; tho' perhaps there be not enough to satisfie every One's Curiosity, yet I have left out none that deserved any thing of Observation.
I must desire the Reader to take Notice, That I have men|tioned very little of these late Wars, (those no ways belonging to my Design) but have (as I have hinted elsewhere) taken care as much as I could, to re|pesent all things as they were (or ought to have been) before

these Troubles began: But how|soever, I have taken particular Notice of all such Places as have been any thing Notable in these Times; and have often given some small Hints for Distincti|on sake.
Perhaps it may also be ex|pected, that I should give a List of the Governors, and se|veral Officers, with an Ac|count of the Number, Conditi|on, c. of the Souldiers, with other Things concerning the Present State of this King|dom. But these Things, by reason of the many Alterations every Day, are extreamly diffi|cult to do, and are quite from my Design; therefore I shall leave 'em to such as have more Convenience and better Intelli|gence than my self; reckoning

(notwithstanding their Omissi|on) that this Book fully answers the Title-Page.
By reason of the little time I have had to write this Book, possibly I may have committed some small Faults, (perhaps in the exact Number of the Pa|rishes, Boroughs, Castles, c. which were very difficult to get) if there be any such, I hope the Impartial Reader will not take Notice of them to my Disad|vantage. If there be found any fault in the Description of the Wild Irish, it must be at|tributed to my Authors, who were not altogether so Modern as I could have wished. The Business of these Times, and the present want of such a De|scription, has made me some|what more hasty than I would

have been: But however, I have endeavoured to do every thing as well and exact as the time would permit.


THe Five Maps herein contained, are one General Map of the whole Kingdom, divided into Provinces; the other Four are the Provinces divided into Counties.



BOOKS lately Printed for, and sold by Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple in Fleetstreet, viz.
The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the Causes an Means by which it was Accomplished. Toge|ther with a particular Account of the Extra|ordinary Occurrences which happened there|upon. As likewise the Settlement of both the Kingdoms under their most Serene Majesties King William and Quen Mary. Octavo. Price 5 s.
Wisdom's Dictates: Or, Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the Health of the Body, and the Peace of the Mind: Fit to be re|garded and practised by all that would enjoy the Blessings of the present and future World. To which is added, A Bill of Fare of seventy five Noble Dishes of Food, far exceeding those made of Fish or Flesh. By Tho. Tryon, Stu|dent in Physick. Price 1 s.
Arithmetical Rules, digested and contracted for the Help and Benefit of Memory; very ne|cessary and useful, as well for Gentlemen and Tradesmen, as for Youth and Apprentices, in Mercantile Affairs. With Examples Illu|strated upon the Rules. By Arthur Leadbetter, Schoolmaster in the Whiting-street in Bury St. Edmonds in Suffolk. Price 1 s.
Bragadocia, a Comedy. Price 1 S.



A TABLE Of the Provinces and Counties of Ireland.

ANtrimPage 43
Armagh52
Catherlagh88
Cavan50
Connaught58
Cork101
Down54
Dublin80
Dunnagal46
East-Meath77
Fermanagh49
Gallway67
Kerry100
Kildare83
Kilkenny86
Kngs-County84
Leinster70

LetrimPage 62
Limrick99
Londonderry46
Longford74
Louth55
Mayo64
Monoghan51
Munster91
Queens-County85
Roscommon66
Slego63
Tipperary99
Thomond69
Tyrone41
Ulster38
Waterford97
West-Meath77
Wexford89
Wicklow81








A Generall Mapp of the Kingdom of IRELAND. By Francis Lamb.
map of Ireland







A Chorographical Description OF IRELAND, c.

Of IRELAND in General. CHAP. I.

f its Name, Bounds, Situation, Clime, Form, Dimensions, Distances, Air, Soil, Products, Commodities, Rivers, Lakes, Bays, Mountains, Capes, c.

IRELAND is called by the La|tins, Name. Hibernia; by Orpheus, Ari|stotle, Strabo, Stephanus and Clau|dian, Ierna; by Pomponius Me| Iuvenal and Solinus, Iuverna; by Pto|omy, Iuernia, and sometimes Britannia

Minor; by Martian of Heraclia, Ioyep|nia; by Diodorus Siculus, Irim; by Eustahus, Oyernia or Overnia, and Ver|nia; by some called Bernia; Plutarch called it by the Name of Ogygia. The Irish Bards or Poets have mentioned the Names of Tivolas, Totdanan, and Banno, as the most ancient Names. In later times it went by the Name of Scotia, and Scotia Minr, to distin|guish it from the other Scotland. It is now called by the Inhabitants Eryn, and sometimes Gwydhill; by the Welch, Yverdon and Ywerdhou; by the Ger|mans, Irlandi; by the Italians, Irlan|da; and by the French, Irlande.
It is environed on all sides with the Ocean; bounded on the East with a Bouds. violent and unruly Sea, called the Irish Sea, or St. George's Channel, which se|parates it from England and Wales, and on the North-East from Scotland; on the West with that vast Ocean called th Western or Atlantick Ocean, which parts it from the main Continent of America; on the North with the Nor|thern Ocean, called the Ducalidonian Ocean; and on the South and South-West with that which is called the Vergirian Ocean.

If we consider it in respect of Hea|venly Situa|tion. Bodies, it is situated between the 5th Degree and 58th Minute, and the 10th Degree and 45th Minute of Lon|gitude that is from London; but rec|koning from Tenneriffe, it lies between the 8th and the 12th Degree, and 55 Minutes of Longitude, equal with the greatest part of Gallicia and Asturia in Spain: And between the 51st De|gree and 15th Minute, and the 55th Degree and 15th Minute of Northern Latitude, equal with Wales, and the greatest part of England.
By this account we may see that it lies wholly under the Ninth and Clim. Tenth Climes, with a little of the Eighth; so that the longest Day on the most Southern parts is 16 Hours, and about 25 Minutes, and the longest Day on the most Northern parts is 17 Hours, and about 12 Minutes, that is almost an Hour longer. It lies in one of the temperate Zones toward the Northern parts of it, about five De|grees from the middle; so that for its Situation it cannot be very intem|perate either in Summer or Winter.
As for the Form and Shape of this Form. Island, it is oblong (nigh as long again

as broad) somewhat (though but little indeed) resembling an Egg, to which form many have likened it to. Speed compares it rather to the shape of the Fore-Leg of a Bear, which is as diffi|cult to imagine as the other; and if we consider all the variety of Windings and Turnings, scarce any thing can be imagined to have a more irregular Form.
It is for bigness an Island of the third Rank, reckoned to be about Dimen|tions. half as big as England: In length, from Fairhead, the Northern Point of Antrim in Ulster, to Missen-Head, the South Point of Cork in Munster, about 285 Miles: In breadth, in the widest place, that is, from the East-parts of Down in Ulster, to the West-parts of Mayo in Connaught, 160 Miles: From the East of Wexford in Leinster, to the West of Kerry in Munster, 152 Miles: But in the middle, from the East of Dublin, to the West of Galloway, 146 Miles. The whole Circuit (reckon|ing all the Windings and Turnings) is above 1400 Miles.
It lies distant from Scotland, North-East Distan|ces. and South-West, (from Cape Red-boy in Antrim, to the South-parts of

Cantire) 15 Miles: From England, East and West, (from the East-parts of Down, to St. Bees-Head in Cumber|land) 84 Miles: From Wales East and West, (from the East-parts of Wex|ford to St. Davids) 45 Miles: From France, North-West and South-East, 220 Miles: From Spain, North and South, 440 Miles: And from New-France the nighest part of America, (from which it lies exactly West) a|bout 1440 Miles.
The Air is most mild and tempe|rate in respect of Hot and Cold; so Air. that it is cooler in Summer and warm|er in Winter than in England, but no|thing so clear and subtile as here, there|fore not so good in Summer for ripen|ing of Corn and Fruits: In the Win|ter it is more subject to Wind, Clouds and Rain, than Frost and Snow. It is so excessive moist, that many there are sore troubled with Loosenesses and Rheumes, more especially Stran|gers, who seldom escape those Distem|pers; for the staying of which they have a Liquor called Usque-bah, or an Aqua: Vitae, which is esteemed of as stronger and better than ours.

As for its Soil, it is of it self abun|dantly Soil. fruitful, but naturally rather fitter for Grass and Pasturage. In some places the rankness of the Soil is so great, the Grass so long, and withal so sweet, that the Cattel in those pla|ces would soon graze to a surfeit, if they were not sometimes hindred. This Country, in many places, is in|cumbred with vast Bogs, and unwhol|some Marshes, being full of great Lakes and Sands, and is also over-grown with many large Woods: But of late Years these Inconveniencies have been very much corrected by drying and draining up many of the Marshes, and by cutting down several of the Woods.
It produces a vast number of good|ly Flocks of Sheep, which they share Products. twice a year. Here are likewise ex|cellent good Horses, (which we call Hobies) which have not the same pace with others, but a soft and round Am|ble, setting one Leg before another very finely. As for Cattle, here are infinite numbers, being indeed the prin|cipal Wealth of the Inhabitants; (it is said, they will give no Milk if their Calves be not by them, or their Skins

stuffed with Straw or Hay.) For Bees, they have such Numbers, that they are found not only in Hives, but also in the Bodies of Trees, and holes of the Earth. It is very much troubled with Wolves, but has no Snake, or Vene|mous Creature whatsoever, neither will any live here. It has variety of all sorts of wild and tame Fowls; and vast quantities of Fish, especially Sal|mons and Herrings. All living Crea|tures, besides Men, Women and Grey|hounds, are smaller than ours in Eng|land.
The Principal Riches and Commo|dities Commo|dities. of this Kingdom are Cattel, Hides, Tallow, Suet, great Store of Butter and Cheese, Wood, Salt, Honey, Wax, Furs, Hemp, Linnen Cloth, Pipe Staves, great quantities of Wool, of which they make Cloth and Freezes, with those course Rugs, or shag Man|tles, which are vented into Foreign Countries: Variety of Fish and Fowl, and also several Metals, as Lead, Tin and Iron; in a word, there is nothing wanting either for Pleasure and Profit, every thing being extraordinary cheap and plentiful; and of late times the Industry of the Inhabitants have not

been so much wanting, and by reason of the great Converse with the English are more Civilized then formerly both Trade and Learning flourishing i such a measure, that were it not fo these unhappy Broils, it well might have been counted as Beautiful an Sweet a Country as any under Heave.
The Principal Rivers of this Coun|try Rivers. are; 1. Shannon, or Shennon, which ariseth in the County of Letrim in Connaught: It divides for the most part of the way, Connaught from Leinster and Munster, and makes many Lakes, (particularly Lough-Ree, and Lough-Derg) passing by the Towns of Letrim, Iames Town, Lanesburrough, Athlone, Clonefert, Killalow and Limrick, after a Course of 200 Miles, (of which 60 Navigable) falls into the Western Ocean with a Mouth above seven Miles wide. Others are, 2. Swift Awiduff, or Blackwater. 3. Baleful-Shure. 4. Woody-Barrow. 5. Rolling-Liffe. 6. Pleasant-Boyne. 7. Spreeding Lee, c, These shall be all more particularly Treated of in the Provincss. The Havens are many and Commodious, those of chief Note are, 1. Waterford, at the Mouth of the River Shure.

2. Cork, at the Mouth of the River Lee. 3. Youghill, at the Mouth of the River Awiduff, or Blackwater.
The principal Lakes of this King|dom Lakes. are; 1. Lough-Erne, in the County of Fermanack in Ulster, nigh 30 Miles long, and 10 broad, borde|ring about with shady Woods, and full of inhabited Islands, some con|taining 2 or 300 Acres of Land, ha|ving vast store of Trouts, Pikes, and Salmons. 2. Lough-Neagh, or Sidney, between the Counties of Antrim and Tyrone, 20 Miles long, and 12 broad, beset and shadowed along with thick Woods, and unpassable Bogs, yet ex|treamly Pleasant. 3. Lough-Ree, made by the River Shannon, between the Counties of Roscommon, Longford, and West-Meath, 15 Miles long, and five broad. Louth-Derg, another made by the Shannon, between Tipperary, Tho|mond and Gallway, 18 Miles long; and four broad. 5. Lough-Corrib in the County of Gallway, having in it several Isles abounding with Pine Trees. 6. Lough-Conn in the County of Mayo. 7. Lough-Cara, c. 8. Lough-Cilly in the County of Slego. 9. Lough-Allyn in the County of Letrim. 10. Lgh-Dercuereagh.

11. Lough-Hannel in West-Meath, with several others.
The most considerable Bays of this Bays. Country may be reckoned, 1. The Bay of Gallway, a very large and safe Harbour, capable of a vast Fleet of Ships, and defended on the West, with the South Isles of Arran: It lies be|tween the Counties of Gallway and Tho|mond. 2. Dingle-Bay, a large and spacious Harbour in the County of Kerry in Mnster. 3. Bantry-Bay in the County of Corke in Munster, full of small Islands. 4. Dunnagal-Bay, between the Counties of Dunnagal, Slego and Letrim, at the entrance of Lough-Earne. 5. Bay of London-derry, a kind of a Lake between the Cou ties of Dunnagal and Londonderry; call|ed also by the Name of Lough-Foyle. 6. Carickfergus-Bay, between the Counties of Atrim and Dwn. 7. Car|lingford-Bay, between the Counties of Down and Louth. 8. Bay of Dublin in the County of Dublin. 9. Wex|ford-Bay in the County of Wexford. 10. Kinsale-Bay in the County of Corke, with many other of less Note.
Mountains of chiefest Note are  . reckoned, 1. Knck-Patrick, or St. Pa|trick's

Hill, in the West parts of the County of Limrick, mounted up a mighty height, and yielding a pleasent prospect into the Sea, beholding a far off, the River Shannon, falling with a vast Mouth in the Ocean. 2. Sliew-Bloemy in Queen's County, with their rising tops mounted up a wonderful height from whence arise the Rivers Shure, Nuer and Barrow. 3. The Mountains of Evagh and Moourne, a ridge of Hills not far off the Sea in the County of Down. 4. Sliew-Gallen, certain Hills in the County of Tyrone, dividing it into two parts. 5. Curlew-Hills in the County of Rscommon in Connaught. 6. The Gualty Mountains in the County of Tipperary, nigh the Counties of Limrick and Cork.
The most considerable Capes or Promontories are, 1. Fair-head in the Capes. County of Antrim, the mok Northern Point in this Kingdom, about 17 Miles off Scotland. 2. St. Iohn's Point in the County of Down, about 8 Miles South of Down. 3. Old-head in the County of Cork, about seven Miles South of Kingsale. 4. Missenhead in Cork. the most Southern Point in this Country. 5. Leane, a very long Point in the

County of Thomond, at the Mouth of the River Shannon. 6. St. Iohns Cape, in the County of Dunnagal, about 13 Miles West of Dunnagal. 7. North Cape in the Northern parts of the same County. 8. Dog-head, in the Western parts of the County of Gall|way. I could here mention several of the Bogs, as Allin, Red-Boy, c. but these will be of no great use.
In the Province of Ulster and Coun|ty of Dunnagal, upon an Island in a lit|tle St. Pa|tricks Purga|tory. Lake, called Derg, there is an old little Monastery, in which is a very narrow Vault within the Ground, so small that a Man can scarce stand up right in it, not containing above 6 or 7 Persons at once: This they call St. Patrick's Purgatory, very much talked of by the Ignorant for walking Spirits, and dreadful Apparitions; which they say was occasioned by St. Patrick's earnest Prayers to God, that the Torments which the wicked are to suffer after this life might be presented to the Eye, that he might the more easily Root out the Sins of his Coun|try Men. They Foolishly imagine, that this Cave was digged first by Ulisses, when he went to Parlee with

those in Hell. This place was very much resorted to by Pilgrims, till the later end of King Iames the First Reign, this hole was laid open, and the Friers caused to depart.
There are seven places in Ireland, Remarks. which are more properly called by the Name of Cities, viz. Dublin, VVater|ford, Gallway, Limrick, Cork, London|derry, and Kilkenny, to which we may add, Athlone, Kingsale and Drogheda; four Archbishopricks, viz. Armagh, Dublin, Cashell, and Tuam; 19 Bi|shopricks, and one University, viz. Dublin. Here are also about 39 Mar|ket Towns; 119 Places that return Parliament Men, which commonly go by the Name of Burroughs; 93 Towns of Commerce and Trade; 222 Castles of old Erection, besides several new Fortresses built in the later times; and 1586 Parishes. The chief City of the whole Kingdom, is, Dublin, the Vice-Roys Seat.



CHAP. II.

Of the Inhabitants and famous Men, particularly of the Wild Irish, shew|ing their Language, Names, Diet, Attire, Manner of Living, Customs, Religion, Superstitions, Whimseys, Marriages, Burials and Wars.

THE Inhabitants descend origi|nally from the Britains, according Inhabi|tants. to the best Authors: since then inter|mixed with Danes, Swedes, and Nor|mans; but at present they are both English and Irish. As for the English; I shall need to say nothing of, nor the more civilized sort of Irish, who are very conformable to the Customs and Laws of our Nation. But the Kernes, Rapperies, c. (those meer Irish, who as yet have not been throughly con|quered or civilized) are those that I do intend particularly to treat of; therefore I would not have our Irish Schollars take it amiss, or think ill of that Character which no ways belongs to them; but before I go any further I shall here (as the most fit place)

mention some of the most eminent Persons this Nation has produced.
The most Famous Men of this Coun|try Famous Men. may be reckoned 1. St. Patrick, a Person of eminent Piety, who converted this Nation to Christianity between the fourth and fifth Centurys. 2. Pal|ladius, another Person who helped to convert this Kingdom about the same time. 3. Columbus a Religious Monk some few ages after, who would by: no preferments be induced to leave his Country. 4. Richard Fitz-Rase, a Learned Bishop of Armagh, who flo|rished Anno 1350. a declared Enemy to the Errors and Corruptions of the Romish Church. In later times were 5. Iames Usher, Arch-Bishop of Ar|magh, so eminent for his Piety and Learning. 6. Ieremiah Taylor, the Eloquent Bishop of Down and Connor; with several others in our times.
Now to give a Character of the na|tural Wild Irish; they are of a middle The Wild Irish. Stature, strong of body, of an hotter and moister nature than many other Nations of wonderful soft Skins, and by reason of the tenderness of their Muscles, they excell in nimbleness and flexibility of all parts of the body;

they are reckoned of a quick Wit, (tho' besotted to many follies) prodi|gal and careless of their Lives, endu|ring Travel, Cold, and Hunger; given to fleshly lusts, light of belief, kind and courteous to strangers, con|stant in Love, impatient of abuse and injury, in enmity implacable, and in all affections most vehement and pas|sionate. They are very much deligh|ted with Musick, but especially with the Harp and Bagpipe, at the first many of them are very Skilful.
The Language, that they commonly speak is Originally British, or at least Lan|guage. a Dialect of it, but now very much degenerated from it, by reason of the Intermixture with Norwegians, Danes, Easterlings or Oos-mans and English Saxons; so that at present it has but very little affinity with our Modern Welch, which is the same with the old British. But the names of Wa|ters, Isles, Mountains and places are said to be meerly British. This Tongue is also spoken in the Western parts of Scotland, and the Isles of Hebraides, as Camden says. The En|glish Tongue is very frequently used among 'em, and in some places (par|ticularly

in the County of Wexford) they make use of a mungrel sort of speech between English and Irish.
They are vulgarly called by the Names. names of Teague and Dear-Ioy. The greatest men have often the Letter [O] put before their names, as O Neal, O-Rock, O-Donel, c. some of the bet|ter sort also carry the name of Mac, (which signifies Son) as Mac-Decan, Mac-Cannon, Mac-Carty, c. When they are babtized, they commonly add some profane name taken from some event, or else some colour as White, Black, Red; else from a disease or Scab, or peeldness; or from some one Vice or other as Thief, Proud, c. They never give the name the Parent or any of the kindred then Living, for they are persuaded that their death is hastned thereby; but when the Fa|ther is dead the Son commonly assu|meth his name, lest it should be lost.
As for their Diet, they feed very much upon Herbs especially Water-Cresses; Diet. upon Mushromes, Sham|roots and Roots: They delight also in Butter tempered with Oatmeal; also in Milk, Whey, Beef-Broth, and Flesh oft-times without any Bread at

all. As for their Corn, they lay it up for their Horses, for whom they are very careful, when they are Hunger|bitten in time of dearth, they dis|dain not to Eat raw flesh, after they have pressed out the blood thereof: and for to concoct it, they will drink down very large quantities of Usquebah or Aqua-Vitae, draught after draught. They also let their Kine blood, which when is grown to a Jelly, and strew|ed over with Butter, they eat with a very good appetite.
As for their Attire, they commonly wear little Jackets of Woollen, and Attire. those very short; Breeches most plain and close to their Thighs; over these they commonly wear a Mantle or shag Rugg deeply fringed, and well set out with many colours, with|in which they often lap themselves, and sleep on the very ground. They go for the most part bare headed, un|less it be when they put on an head|piece. They wear their Hair long, and count it the greatest ornament. The Women also make a great esteem of their Hair, especially if it be gol|den colour and long withal, for they lay it out in a full length plated in a

bravery: They rather load then adorn their heads with great quantities of fine Linnen, rolled up in Wreaths.
Their way of Living is after a Way of Living. very odd sort, having no great im|ployments; for they are given to idleness above measure, and count it the greatest riches to take no pains, and the most pleasure to enjoy their Liberty. Their Cows, and Cattle are the chiefest Wealth they have, and in greatest esteem. They count it no shame or infamy to commit Robber|ries, which they very frequently use with great cruelty; when they go to rob they make prayers to God that they may meet with a booty; and they suppose it was sent them from God as a Gift. They also suppose that Violence and Murder are no ways displeasing to God, for if it were a sin, he would not present them with that opportunity; and they count it a sin not to make use of a fair opportunity: further they say that this sort of Life was left to them, and that they only walk in their Fathers steps, that it would be a dis|grace to their Nobility to forbear such Facts and get their living by Labour.













When they go out in a Morning to do any business, they mark him they Customs. met first; if they be prosperous they endeavour to meet him oft, if not they are as careful to avoid them. Before they sow their Corn, the good Wife or Mistress of the house, sendeth Salt to the said Field. In the Towns, when any Magistrate entreth first upon his Office, the Wives and Daughters along the Streets, and ou of the Windows bestrew them and their followers with Wheat and Salt. At every third word it is ordinary with them to rap out an Oath, as by the Trinity, by Christ, by St. Patrick, by St. Brigid, by their Baptism, by their Godfathers hand and such like. When they take never so solemn Oaths they will be forsworn upon every oc|casion, but if they sware by any great Man and be forsworn, they forfeit a great Sum of Money or Cattle to that same person whose name they used.
In matters of Religion they are Roman Catholicks, in some things Religion. very devout, mortifying and keeping under their Bodies, very much, watch|ing and praying, fasting every Wed|nesday and Saturday: some of 'em

fast on St. Catharine's Day, and also on Christmas Day, though they be never so sick. In Matters of Divine Service they are very slovenly, the Vestments re so foul and nasty, that they would make one cast up his Stomach: The Altar portable, and by some abuse or other polluted; the Mass-Book all orn, the Chalice of Lead without a Cover to it, and the small Vessels for Wine made of Horn. The Priests hemselves are very poor, and mind nothing but gathering of Goods, and getting of Children. They make a great shew of the Canon-Law, but have never a jot of Learning. They commonly have their Children suc|ceed them in their Churches, for whose Illegitimation they are dispen|sed withal.
When they first see the Moon after Supersti|tions. the Change, commonly they bow the Knee, and say the Lord's Prayer, and then speak to the Moon with a loud Voice, Leave us as whole and as sound as thou hast found us. They use to look through the Shoulder-Blade-Bone of a Sheep, when the Flesh is clean ta|ken from it; if they see any dark or duskish spot in it, when they look

through, they say that some Course shall shortly be carried out of the House. They pray for Wolves, and wish them well, and then they are not afraid to be hurt by them. They count it unlawful to rub down, o curry their Horses, or to gather Grass for their Meat on Saturdays. When a Horse is dead, they hang up his Fee and Legs in the House; yea, the very Hoofs are esteemed as a hallowed and sacred Relick. They count her a wicked Woman or a Witch that com|eth to fetch Fire from 'em on May-Day; neither will they give any Fire then, but unto a Sick Body, and that also with a Curse.
They are of Opinion, that if their Whim|sies. Butter be Stolen, 'twill soon after be restored again; if they take away any of the Thatch that hang over the Door, and cast it into the Fire. They be|lieve, that the Kite will not take away their Chickens, if they hang up the the Egg-shels, out of which they were Hatched in some place of the Rough of the House. If any praise an Horse, or any other of their Beasts, before they have said, God Save him, or have Spit upon them; if any harm befal

that Beast within three days after, they eek out him that praised him, and then mumble the Lords Prayer in his right Ear. They fully beleive, that to set a Green Bough of a Tree before their House on May-day, will cause them to have abundance of Milk all Summer long. They have besides these, many other Follies, which for hortness sake, I shall now forbear to mention.
Those that dwell in Towns seldom Marri|ages. make any Contract of Marriage with them in the Country; they pass their Promise, not for the present, but for the future time; or else give assent without Deliberation, so that for a ve|ry little falling out, they part asunder, the Husband to another Woman, and the Wife to another Husband: Oft it is not known whether the Contract was true or false, till the last Gasp: Hence grow Robberies, Depredations, Murthers, and deadly Hatred. They are very much given to Incest, and no|thing is so common as Divorces under pretence of Conscience. It is grown a common Custom after the Husbands's Death, for the Wife to have a third part of the Goods, the rest is divided

by even Portions among the Children; but when they come to Possession, he that is mightiest commonly go away with the best share; sometimes an Unkle, or Nephew, if he be a great Man,, will seize upon the Inheritance, and shut the Children out of all.
When any one lies a Dying, Women hired on purpose stand in Cross-ways, Burials. calling upon him with great out-Crys, and abundance of rediculous Expostu|lations, why he should depart from so many Advantages. After he is Dead, they keep a Mourning with lowd Howlings, and clapping of Hands to|gether. When the Corps go forth they follow it with such a Peal of out-Crys, that a Man would think the quick, as well as the Dead, were past all Recovery. Neither do they Mourn less for those that are Slain in Battel, or by Robbing, though they affirm such to have an easier Death; yet they will Rail on their Enemies with Spite|ful Words, and continue for a long time a deadly Hatred against all of that Kindred. They suppose that the Souls of the Deceased go into the Company of certain Men, famous in those Places, of whom they still retain

strange Fables and Songs, as of Giants of great Renown, which they say they oft-times see by Illusion.
Their Warefare consists of Horse|men, Wars. of Soldiers set in the Rereguard, whom they call Galloglasses, who fight with sharp Hatchets; and of light|armed Footmen called Kernes, whose service is with Darts and Skeanes. To give a shout to every Man going out of a Gate, and counted fortunate. They commonly use the Bagpipe in stead of a Trumpet: They carry a|out them Amulets: They recite cer|tain Prayers, and in joyning Battel, they cry as loud as they can Pharroh, with this perswasion, that he who cryeth not so loud as the rest, shall suddenly be taken from the Ground, and carried along the Air, into certain desart Valleys, where he eateth Grass, appeth Water, hath some use of Rea|son, but not of Speech: But at last y the help of Hounds and Hunters, hall be brought home again.



CHAP. III.

Of its Antiquity and old Inhabitants A short History, shewing the sever Conquests and Rebellions; Government Laws, Strength, Arms, Archbishoprick and Bishopricks, and the Old and Ne Division.

IReland is of very great Antiquity,  we may believe the Irish Writers, wh Antiqui|ty. say it was inhabited by one Caesari Noah's Neice, before the Flood: Abou 300 Years after the Flood, Bartholan a Scythian came hither, and fough many famous Battels with Giants. Ma|ny Years after, Nemetheus, a Scythia also, arrived here, and was soon ca out by the Giants. After this, Del with some Grecians, seized on this Isle and soon after Gaothel and Scota hi Wife (Daughter to Pharaoh King o Egypt) landed here, and called this I|sland Scotia, after his Wives Name This was about the time of the Israe|lites departure out of Egypt. Som few Ages after, Hiberus and Hermion, Sons of Milesius King of Spain, by the

permission of Gurguntius King of the Britains, planted Colonies here, after t had been dispeopled by Pestilence. These are meer Fables of the Irish's own making, without any Grounds.
The antient Inhabitants were the Old I|habi|tants. ish, being Originally Britains accor|ding to the best Authors, distinguish|ed then into several lesser People and Names, as shall be afterwards spoken of. These were a rude and barba|ous People, of whose Actions we know but little of; this Country not being so happy as ever to be Conquer|ed by the Romans, those great Masters of Learning and Civility. Towards the wain of the Roman Empire, we find them called by the Name of Scots, (the reason thereof is uncertain) and this Country Scotland, they sub|dued the Hebraides, or Western Isles, and the Neighbouring Picts and Cali|donians, and gave the Name of Scot|land to the Northern parts of the Bri|ish Continent: Besides this, we hear but little of them except that of Pala|dius and St. Patrick's Converting them to the Christian Faith. Not long af|ter they left the Name of Scots, and returned to their first and more wo|ed

Name of Irish, then being under the Government of several small Princes.
The first Conquest, or rather Inva|sion, First Conquest. of this Country, (setting aside Egfrid King of Northumberland's de|stroying several places with Fire and Sword, Anno 694.) was by some of the Saxon Monarchs of England, (par|ticularly by King Edgar) who made themselves Masters of Dublin, and se|veral other considerable Places; but being in a short time so incumbred with Danes at home, that they were well satisfied to leave all that they had gained here, being scarce able to de|fend their own from that Nation: So that these soon recovered their former Liberty, that is, under the Govern|ment of their own Princes.
The next Conquest was made by Second Conquest. the Northern Nations, as Danes, Swedes and Normans, going by the general Name of Norwegians, who first scow|red along the Coasts by way of Py|racy; but afterwards, (finding the weakness of this Isle, (by reason of its several Divisions) they made an abso|lute Conquest of it under one Turge|ius, whom they elected for their

King. They were not Masters of it long before the King of Meath (the only Irish Prince in favour with Tur|getius) found out a Stratagem, by the help of his Daughter Omlagliben, (whom this Tyrant loved) and slew him, and with him all the Norwegians that were his Attendence; and by this means they soon routed the rest, so that the Petty Princes once more en|joyed their former Dominions.
The last Conquest was by King Third Conquest. Henry the Secend of England, Anno 1172. who was called in for the As|sistance of the King of Leinster, who was driven out of his Kingdom by the King of Meath: He restored him, and made a Conquest of these Petty Prin|ces, who submitted themselves to him, and gave him all their Power which was confirmed to him by Pope Ha|drian; and ever since this Country has (for the most part, though with divers Alterations) remained subject to Eng|land. The Kings of England had on|ly the Title of Lords of Ireland, (tho' Kings in Effect and Power) till Anno 1542. Henry the Eighth, in an Irish Parliament, was declared King of Ire|land, as a Name more Sacred and Re|pleat

with Majesty, which was con|firmed to Mary his Daughter by Pope Paul IV. Anno 1555.
The Irish have always looked upon Rebelli|ns. our Conquests as such wrong and in|justice done to 'em, (though indeed no|thing could be more to their Advan|tage) that they would never let slip any Opportunity of Rebellions. The first Rebellion was in the Reign of 1. Edward the First,  when that Prince was engaged against the Scots, one Dovenald O Neal rose up and styled himself King of Ulster, and in Right of Inheritance the undoubted Heir of all Ireland, but he was soon quell'd again. The second Rebellion was in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, 2. Anno 1537. by the Earl of Kildare, who also added the Pretence of Reli|gion: This was soon suppressed, the Earl taken and beheaded with his five Uncles.
The third Rebellion was by O Neal, Third Rbellion. in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1563. (notwithstanding he was par|doned for the beginning of one before) He burnt the Cathedral of Armagh, and besieged Dundalk, but without any success. After two Years Sir Henry

Sidney, Lord Lieutenant, went against im; in fight broke his Forces, so that leeing to the Scots, (whom he had ikewise injured) he was assassinated n cold Blood, and soon after attainted n Parliament, and the Title O Neal quite abolished.
The fourth Rebellion in this Coun|ry Fourth Rebellion. was not above 14 Years after, in Anno 1579. about the middle of Queen Elizabeth. It was begun by the Earl of Desmond, who (not being of suffi|cient power himself) called in the Spaniards, who began to possess them|selves of several Places: But how so|ever this was of no such ill consequence as some others were, for about a Year after, the Spaniards were all dri|ven out, (Sir Oem being a considerable Agent against them) and the Earl him|self was taken and executed Anno 1583.
The fifth Rebellion was in the same Reign, Anno 1595. made by Sir Oem, Fifth Rebellion. (who before had done great Service against the Earl of Desmond.) This was more dangerous than any before, he being a good Soldier. Anno 1598. he defeated the English nigh Black-Water, In 1599. brought the Earl of Essex to

condescend to a Treaty with him. In 1601. he brought the Spaniards over to his Assistance, who took and Gari|soned Kinsale. This War lasted eight Years, till Anno 1603. Kinsale was re|taken, and the Spaniards totally dri|ven out; whereupon Sir Oem submit|ted, and was brought over by the Lord Lieutenant to King Iames the First.
The sixth Rebellion was the most Sixth Rebellion. terrible of all, made by a general In|surrection of all the Irish, Anno 1641, in the beginning of our Troubles in England, who assassinated an incredible number of the English, after such a barbarous sort as no Age nor Nation could ever parallel. Our Nation could lend them no Assistance till Anno 1649. and 50. Oliver Cromwel, with Ireton and others, gave them a most bloody Chastisement, erecting many a dread|ful Trophie of the Divine Vengeance against all such perfidious Traitors; so that if Mercy had not been shewn in time, they might with a little more Expence of Time and Treasure, ut|terly extirpated the Irish Name and Nation.

As for these present Troubles, I shall say nothing of, having been treat|ed of by so many good Pens already; and in my Description of the Provin|ces, Counties, Towns, Castles, c. I shall say but little of these Wars; and knowing by reason of them there have been many Alterations, (which I shall take but little Notice of,) I shall give a Description of every place as they were before the Wars begun. Yet perhaps I may be a little more parti|cular in those Towns which have been most famous in these Wars.
The Government of this Country is Govern|ment. by a Vice-Roy, (though he has not that Name) first called Keepers or Wardens of Ireland, afterwards Justi|ces of Ireland, and now Lord Lieute|nant and Deputy of Ireland. Their Authority is Large, Ample and Royal; having Power to make War, to con|clude Peace, to bestow all Magistracies and Offices, except a very few; to pardon all Crimes, unless they be some of High Treason; to dub Knights, c. And truly there is not in all Chri|stendom any other Vice Roy that tomes nigher the Majesty of a King

for his Jurisdiction, Authority, Train, Furniture, and Provision. There are assistant to him in Council the Lord Chancellor of the Realm, the Trea|surer of the Kingdom, and others of the Earls, Bishops, Barons and Judges, which are of the Privy Council.
When any one entreth upon the Honourable Place of Government, first the Letters Patents are publickly read; after that he takes a solemn Oath in a set Form of Words before the Chancellor; then the Sword is de|livered to him, which is to be born before him; and then he is placed in a Chair of State, having standing by him the Chancellor of the Realm; those of the Privy Council, the Peers and Nobles of the Kingdom, with a King of Arms, a Sergeant of Arms, and other Officers of State.
Besides the Lord Lieutenant him|self, in more remote Provinces, are Inferiour Gover|nours. several Inferiour Governours to admi|nister Justice, as a Principal Commis|sioner in Connaught; and a President in the Province of Munster, who have to assist them certain Gentlemen and Lawyers who are directed by the Lord Lieutenant. As for the several





Degrees of States, this Country has the very same as in England, as Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires, c.
Here are also the same Courts as in Courts  Laws. England; as the Parliament, (which at the King of England's Pleasure is call|ed by the Deputy, and by him dissol|ved) the Star Chamber, the Chancery, the Kings-Bench, the Common-Pleas, and the Exchequer; likewise four Terms in a Year. Here are also Ju|ces of Assizes, of Nisi Prius, and of Oyer and Terminer, and Justices Peace in every County. Also the King hath his Serjeant at Law, his Sollicitor, c. As for the Common Laws, Ireland is Governed by the same with Eng|land.
The Strength of this Nation con|sists Strength. partly in the Situation, being be|girt about with difficult and dangerous Seas; and partly in the several Forti|fations and Castles built by the Eng|lish since they became Masters of it. Their Forces have never been reckon|ed very numerous till of late, and then they have either been so ill Disciplined, or of such Cowardly Dispositions, (es|pecially in their own Country) that an Enemy of no very great Power (were

it not for their strong Places) might easily tame 'em.
The Arms of this Kingdom, are Azure, an Harp Or, stringed Argent, Arms. which Arms, King Iames the First (to shew himself absolute King of Ire|land) caused to be Marshalled with the Royal Arms of Great Britain, and have ever since been set upon our Coyns. I should speak of the Re|venues, Coyns, Weights, Measures, and such like of this Kingdom; as for the first, I can have no perfect account of, so that I dare not say any thing of it; as for the rest, they are mostly the same as in England.
The Ecclesiastical Government is Archbi|shopricks, c. under four Archbishopricks, viz. Ar|magh, Dublin, Cashell and Tuam, under these were at once a great number of Bishopricks, and those but poor ones, (as they are generally now) but since the Reformation, have been reckoned oly 19, and of some of those I am a little uncertain. Six are under Ar|magh; (the Metropolitan) viz. London|derry, Connor, Dromore, Clogher, Kil|more and Dundalk; three under Dub|lin, viz. Kilkenny, Kildare and Fearnes; five under Cashell, viz. Waterford,

Limrick, Cork, Ardfeart and Emly; and fi under Tuam, viz. Gallway, lone, Killala, Clonefert and Killa|low.
This Island was anciently divided The old Division. into many several Peoples and Pro|vinces, as the Robognii, Darnii, Volon|tii, Vennionii, and Erdinii in the North parts now Ulster; the Auteri, Ganganii, and Nagnata in Connaught; the Mena|pii, Cauci, Blanii, and Brigantes in Leinster; and the Luceni, Velabri, Ulterni, Vodii, and Coriondi in Mun|ster. Afterwards it came to be divided into five Parts, which were so many Kingdoms, viz. Ulster, Connaught, Meath, Leinster and Munster.
Since then the Kingdom of Meath have been joyned to that of Leinster, New Di|vision. the rest remaining as before, so that is divided at present into four distinct Provinces, viz. 1. Ulster, 2. Connaught, 3. Leinster, and 4. Munster. The first of these lie on the North, the second on the West, the third on the East, and the fourth on the South. These Provin|ces are divided into 32 Counties, and those subdivided into 253 Baronies or Hundreds, and those have in them 1586 Parishes. These shall be every one treated of in their Order.



CHAP. IV.

Of Ulster, shewing its Name, Bounds, Dimensions, Rivs, Products, Re|marks, c. and describing all its Counties, Towns and Castles.

THE Province of Ulster, is called by the Latins, Ultoni, and some|times Name. Ulidia; by the Irish, Cui Guilly, or Province of Guilly; by the Welch, Ultw; and by the English Ulster.
It is Bounded on the East with St. George's Channel; on the West with Bounds. the main Atlantick, or Wstern Ocean; on the North, with the Ducalidonian, or Northern Ocean; on the South with the Province of Leinster; and on the South-West, with the Province of Connaught: So it is encompassed on 3 sides with Sea, being almost of a round Form.
It is in length, from the most West Dimensi|ns. Point in the County of Dunnagal, to the East parts of the County of Down, about 116 Miles: In breadth, from Fair-head, the most North Point in Antrim, to the Borders of Longford in



ULSTER PROVINCE
map of Ulster



the Province of Leinster, nigh 100 Miles. The whole Circuit (counting all the Windings and Turnings) is a|bout 460 Miles.
The chief Rivers of this Province Rvers. are; 1. Bnne, rising in the County of Down, in Armagh; it receives the River Tanwagee, and then passes through the great Lake Neagh, then divides the County of Antrim from that of Londonderry, and falls into the Ducalidonian Ocean, a little below Colerain. 2. Lough-Foyle, which washes St. Iohn's Town and Londonderry, then falls into the Ducalidonian Ocean, ma|king a great Bay, or Lake of the same Name. 3. Swilly, in the County of Dunnaga, falling into the Ducalidonian Ocean, with a kind of a Lake. 4. Lagen-Water in Down, washing Dro|more, Lisburn, and Belfast, falls into the Bay of Carrickfergus. 5. Newry-Water, parting Down from Armag, and falls into Cangford-Bay. 6. Main in Antrim, c.
This Country abounds with large Products. Lakes, shaded with many and thick Woods; the Soil is fruitfull in Corn and Grass, but in some places a little Barren; howbeit, fresh and Green to

see in every place; well furnished with Horses, Sheep and Oxen; and it affords great plenty of Timber, and Fruit-Trees. The Waters are deep, and fit for Vessels, very well repleni|shed with Fish; and as for Salmons, here are more in some Rivers of this Country, than in any other River in Europe.
In this Province is one Archbisho|prick, viz. Armagh; Six Bishopricks, Remarks. (besides Raphoe, united to Londonderry) viz. Londonderry, Connor, Dromore, Clogher, Kilmore and Dundalk; Ten Market Towns, viz. Athordee, Ar|magh, Carrickfergus, Carlingford, Drog|heda, Dundalk, Dunnagal, Londonderry, Louth and Newry; 14 Towns of Com|merce and Trade; 34 places that re|turn Parliament Men, or Boroughs; 30 Castles for the Defence of the Country; and 214 Parishes in the whole. The chief City of all is Lon|donderry.
The Boroughs are are as following, Boroughs. viz. four in Antrim; Antrim, Belfast, Carrickfergus and Lisburn: Three in Londonderry; Colerain, Lamnevaddy and Londonderry: Six in Dunnagal; Balli|shannon, Dunnagal, St. Iohn's Town,

Kilberg, Lifford and Raphoe: Four in Tyrone; Agher, Dungannon, Omagh and Strabane: One in Fermenagh, viz. E|niskilling: Two in Cavan; Belturbet and Cavan: One in Monoghan, viz. Monoghan: Two in Armagh; Armagh, and Charlemont: Six in Down; Bangor, Down, Hilsburrough, Killileagh, Newry and New-Town: And Four in Louth; Atherdee, Carlingford, Drogheda and Dundalk.
The Religious Places in this Pro|vince, Religious Places. were once the Abbey of Dun|nagal; the Monastery of Derry; the Monastery near the River Liffer; that famous one at the Bay of Carrickfer|gus; also Millifont Abbey; and lastly, the most Renowned Monastery at Armagh, out of which many others were propagated in Britain and Ire|land. These Places, when standing, were very much frequented by Pil|grims.
This Province, before the English History. Conquered it, was a Kingdom of it self, under its own Kings: First Con|quered by Iohn Curcy, a valiant Eng|lish-Man, in the Reign of King Henry the Second: Soon after it was so neg|lected by the English, that it was cau|sioned

into many Estates and Princi|palities by the Natural Irish. In this Estate it continued (the Kings of Eng|land having but little Profit of it) till Tir-Oens Rebellion; the Conquest of whom, brought this Province in full Subjection to the Kings of England, and has ever since continued so, but not without some considerable Distur|bances.
It was Anciently divided among the Old Di|vision. Erdini, in and about Fermanagh; the Venicnii, in part of Dunnagal; the Robognii, in Londonderry, Antrim, and part of Tyrone; the Volontii about Ar|magh; and the Darni about Down and the Western parts. Afterwards by the English divided into three Counties, viz. Down, Louth and Antrim.
It stands now divided into Ten New Di|vision. Counties, viz. 1. Antrim, 2. London|derry, 3. Dunnagal, 4. Tyrone, 5. Fer|managh, 6. Cavan, 7. Monoghan, 8. Armagh, 9. Down, and 10. Louth, of these, Five Borders on the Sea, viz. Louth, Down, Antrim, Londonderry, and Dunnagal: Tyrone, Armagh, Fer|managh, Monoghan and Cavan, are Midland Counties. These Counties are Subdivided into 60 Barronies.


1. Antrim.
ANtrim is the most Northern Coun|ty in Ireland; it has on the East Bounds. St. George's Channel; on the West, Londonderry, from which parted by the River Banne; on the North the Ducalidonian Ocean; and on the South, or rather South East Down: It is in length, 46 Miles, and in breadth 27; a County of it self sufficiently Fruit|ful.
It is divided into nine Barronies, Division. viz. Bally Carie, Dunluce, Kilconway, Tome, Antrim, Glenarm, Carickfergus, Belfast, and Killultagh: In which is one Market Town and four Boroughs. The chief Town is Carrickfergus.
Principal places are, 1. Dunluce Towns. Castle, on the North parts upon the Ocean; a very strong Pile, seated on a Rock hanging over the Sea, and par|ted from the Land by a Ditch. 2. Connor, 28 Miles South East of Dun|luce, a small Bishoprick united to Down, not else of Note. 3. Antrim, five Miles South of Connor, nigh the Lake Neagh: It is a Borough, but a very ordinary

one, though it gives Name to thi County. 4. Carick fergus, or Knoc fergus, 12 Miles East of Antrim on  Bay of the same Name: It is a Bo|rough and Market Town, a very ric and populous place, the chief of th County; it has an excellent goo Harbour, and is well strengthned wit a Castle, but is at present somewha decaying: This place stands 90 Mile North of Dublin. 5. Belfast, 8 Mile almost South of Carrick fergus, on th Mouth of Lagen-Water by Carrick fer|gus Bay. It is a Borough, and  thriving Town, every day increa|sing. 6. Lisborn, or Lisnagarve,  Miles South West of Belfast, on th River Lagen-Water, by the Border of Down, remarkable for nothing bu for sometime quartering our Army.


2. Londonderry.
LOndonderry, or the County of Col|rain, sometimes Krine, has on the East Bounds. Antrim, from which parted by the River Banne; on the West Dunnagal; on the North the Ducalidonian Ocean; with some of Dunnagal; and on the

South, or South West Tyrone. It is in ngth 36 Miles, and in breadth 30.  Country somewhat Champion, yet ery fruitful.
It is divided into sive Baronies, viz. Division. olerain, Loghinsholm, Kenoght, Tyrekeri, nd the Liberties of Londonderry: In hich is one Market Town, and three oroughs. The chief Town is Lon|onderry.
Principal Places are; 1. Colerain, Towns. n the River Banne, by the Borders f Antrim, four Miles of Sea, and six outh of Dunluce Castle: It is a Bo|ough, and a considerable Place, once iving Name to this County. 2. Lam|evaddy, a little Borough, 10 Miles lmost West of Colerain, on the River Roe-Water, nigh Lough-Foyle. 3. Lon|donderry, sometimes Derry, and Dory, 14 Miles almost South West of Lam|evaddy, on the River Lough-Foyle, nigh he Borders of Dunnagal: It is a Mar|ket Borough and Bishoprick, made a London Colony, Anno 1612. a place of no great bigness, but of singular strength and notable Fame, for other noble Resistances, as well as for the last Siege. It is now the most consi|derable City in the Province of Ulster,

and has a very convenient Haven. It stands 108 miles almost North-west of Dublin. 4. Cumber a small Town about 8 miles South-East of London|derry, by the borders of Tyrne. 5. Tome Castle, a Fortress 26 miles almost East of Cumber on Lough-Neagh.


3. Dunnagal.
DUnnagall or Tir Connel, and some|times Connallea, has on the East Bonds. Londonderry and Tyrone, on the West the main Western Ocean; on the North the Ducalidonian Ocean; and on the South Fermanagh and the Bay of Dunnagall. It is in length 64 miles, and in breadth 35. a Country in a manner Champion and full of Havens.
It is divided into five Barronies, viz. Enish Owen, Killmakrena, Ra|phoe Division. or Lagen, Boylagh and Bannogh, and Tyrehugh. In which is one Mar|ket Town and five Burrough; the chief Town is Dunnagall.
Principal places are 1. St. Iohns-Towns, a little Borough Town on the Towns. River Lough Foyle by the borders of Tyone, nigh 6 miles South West of

Londonderry. 2 Raphoe, 8 miles South West of St. Iohns Town, a poor for|saken place, once a City and a Bi|shoprick, since joyned to Londonderry. 3, Lifford, a small Borough Town 5 miles South East of Raphoe, on the Ri|ver Lough Foyle by the borders of Ty|rone. 4. Dunnagall, 35 miles South-West of Lifford, on a large Bay of the same name nigh the Mouth of the River Eask. It is a Borough and a Market-Town, the Chief of the Coun|ty, and stands 100 miles North West of Dublin. 5. Kilbeg or Calebeg, 12 miles West of Dunnagall, a Borough-Town affording an Haven and a Com|modious Harbour for Sailers. 6. Bal|lishannon or Bellishannn, 12 miles South East of Kilbeg, and 8 South of Dunnagall, having a good Haven and stands nigh the borders of Fermanagh, nigh the Sea.


4. Tyrone.
TYrone or Tir-Oen, sometimes Tir-Eogain, Bounds. has on the East Lough-Neagh and Armagh; on the West Dun|nagall, on the North or North East

Londonderry; and on the South and South West Monaghan and Fermanagh It is in length 47 miles, and in breadth 33. A County tho' rough and rugged, yet sufficiently fruitful.
It is divided into four Barronies, viz Strabane, Omagh, Clogher, and Dun|gannon. Division. In which are four Boroughs but never a Market Town; the chief Town that I find here is Dungannon.
Chief Places are 1. Strabane, a Bo|rough Town and Castle, nigh the Ri|ver. Lough Foyle, by the borders of Towns. Dunnagall, 12 miles South of London|derry. 2. Omagh or Drummaragh, a Borough Town on the River Poe Wa|ter, about 15 miles almost South of Strabane. 3. Monjoy, a strong Fort 24 miles East of Omagh, on the Lough Neagh. 4. Dungannon, above 6 miles South West of Monjoy. a Borough-Town esteemed the head of the Coun|ty, a place of some strength, standing on a Hill 4 miles from Charlemont in Armagh. It lies 72 miles almost North of Dublin. 5. Binburb, a little Town on the borders of Armagh, 6 miles South of Dungannon. 6. Agher, a small Borough 15 miles West of Binburb, and 9 almost South of Omagh. 7. Clog|her,

nigh 3 miles South of Agher, a ishops See, but a very slender one.


5. Fermanagh.
FErmanagh or Farmanagh, has on the Bounds. East Monoghan; on the North West Dunnagall; on the North and North East Tyrone, on the South Cavan, nd on the South West Letrim in Con|aught. It is in length 38 miles, and  breadth 24. a County full of Woods nd Boggs, being a third part fill'd ith the Lough-Earne.
It is divided into Eight Baronies, Division. iz. Lurge, Maghereboy, Terekenedy, ionawly, Maghere, Klonekelly, Knock|inie, and Coole. In which is never a Market Town, and but one Borough, he Chief Town is Eniskilling.
Principal Places are 1. Tarmon, a Towns. Castle of considerable Note on the North parts of the great Lake, on he borders of Dunnagall. 2. Balleck,  Town 10 miles almost West of Tar|on, by the Mouth of the Lake, by he bordars of Dunnagall, 3 miles East f Ballishannon. 3. Tully Castle, 9 iles almost East of Balleck by the

borders of the Lake. 4. Eniskilli or Inskilling, 7 miles South East  Tully Castle, and 42 South of Londo derry. It is a Borough, the only pla of Note in this County, but small, ye of notable strength and fame in the Wars; It's scituated on a little Islan in the middle of the Lake or rathe between two Lakes, having too Forts the one called the old Fort, the othe the New Fort. It stands 78 mile North West of Dublin. 5. Crom Castle on the Lake 12 miles South East o Eniskilling.


6. Cavan.
CAvan or Cavon, sometimes East Bra|eny, has on the North East Monog|han, Bounds. on the West Letrim in Connaught on the South Longford, West Meath and East Meath in Leinster. It is i length 47 miles, and in breadth 22; a County whose Inhabitants live in Piles and Forts rather than Towns.
Ir is divided into seven Barronies, Division. viz. Tullagha, Tullahonoho, Cavan, Tul|lagarvy, Clonchy, Castle Raghen, and Clo|nomoghan. In which are two Boroughs,





but never a Market Town. The hief Town is Cavan.
Principal Places are; 1. Belturbet, a Towns. ttle Borough Town on the end of ough Earne, nigh the Borders of Fer|anagh, above 16 Miles South East of niskilling. 2. Cavan, 7 Miles South f Belturbet, a Borough Town of no ote, but for being the head of this County: It stands 55 Miles North West of Dublin. 3. Kilmore, a little own, about three Miles South West f Cavan: It is a Bishops See, but a ery poor one. 4. Castle Raghen, a astle which gives Name to a Barony 3 Miles South East of Kilmore and avan, nigh the Borders of East-Meath  Leinster.


7. Monoghan.
MOnoghan, has on the East Armagh; on the West Fermanagh; on the Bounds. North Tyrone; on the South Cavan; nd on the South East Louth, with art of East-Meath in Leinster: It is in ength 34 Miles, and in breadth 20.  Country mounting aloft with Hills, nd well covered with Woods.

It is divided into five Baronies, viz Trough, Monoghan, Dartree, Cremorne Division. and Farny Donaghmaine: It has bu one Borough, and never a Marke Town. The chief Town is Monogha the rest are scarce worth Naming.
Chief Places are; 1. Glashlogh,  small Town, not far off the Borders o Towns. Armagh and Tyrone. 2. Monoghan five Miles South of Glaslogh, and fou from the Borders of Armagh: It is  Borough Town, and the chief o the County, but not else worth the Observation. It stands 60 Miles al|most North West of Dublin. Fo Methods sake. I shall mention, 3 Clonish, a little place twelve Mile South West of Monoghan, on th Borders of Fermanagh. 4. Lislea  a Castle four Miles South East o Clonish, not far off the Borders o Cavan.


8. Armagh.
ARmagh, or Ardmagh, has on the East, Down, partly seperated by Bounds. the River Newry; on the West Tyron and Monoghan; on the North, the

Lough-Neagh; and on the South Louth: t is in length 32 Miles, and in breadth 7. A County for rich and fertile Soil, is said to surpass any in Ire|and.
It is divided into five Baronies, viz. Division. Onealan, Towrany, Armagh, Fewes, and Orior. In which is one Market Town, nd two Boroughs. The chief Town s now Charlemont.
Principal Places are; 1. Charle|ont, Towns, a Borough and strong For|ress, now the chief of the County, emarkable for the last Siege. It tands on a River called Blackwater, n the Borders of Tyrone, four Miles South East of Dungannon. 2. Ar|agh or Ardmagh, about seven Miles South of Charlemont, once a very fa|mous City, now a poor place, scarce any thing remaining but a few small wasted Cottages, with the ruinous Walls of the Monastery, Priors, and Primates Palace; yet it is still an Archbishops See, and the Metropoli|tan of all Ireland, and keeps the Name of a Borough, and Market Town. 3. Tyan, a small place seven Miles al|most West of Armagh, on the Borders of Tyrone and Monoghan. 4. Mayre-Castle,

19 Miles South East of Armag on the Borders of Louth, nigh five Mil North of Dundalk.


9. Down.
DOwn, has on the East St. George Channel; on the West Armag Bounds. partly seperated by the River Neury on the North, or rather North We Antrim; and on the South Carling ford Bay, (which parts it from Louth and the Ocean. It is in length 4 Miles, and in breadth 30. A Count very fertile, though in some places i|cumbred with Woods and Bogs.
It is divided into eight Baronies viz. Ards, Castlereagh, Dufferin, Lek Division. ale, Kinalearty, Lower Evagh, Upp Evagh, and Moourne. In which is on Market Town and six Boroughs. Th chief Town is Down.
Chief Places are; 1. Bangor,  Borough Town on Carickfergus Bay Towns. seven Miles South East of that place 2. Newtown, four Miles nigh Sout of Bangor, a Borough Town o the North of the Louth of Strang|ford. 3. Hillsburrough, a Boroug

Town, 16 Miles South West of ewtown, and three from Lisburn in ntrim. 4. Dromore, four Miles nigh outh of Hillsburrough, a small Bi|oprick. 5. Kilileagh, a little Bo|ough, 17 Miles East of Dromore, n the Louth of Strangford. 6. trangford, six Miles South East of Killileagh, a little Town on the Mouth f a Lough of the same Name. 7. own, or Down Patrick, a Borough, nd head of this County, six Miles igh West of Strangford: It is a ishoprick united to Connor in An|im, and is one of the most ancient owns in Ireland, famous for the ones of St. Patrick, St. Bridget, nd St. Columbus: It stands 65 Miles llmost North East of Dublin. 8. eury, 25 Miles South West of Down,  Borough and Market Town, on the iver Neury, by the Borders of Ar|agh.


10. Louth.
LOuth, anciently Luva and Luda, in Bounds. Irish Iriel, has on the East St. George's Channel; on the West Mo|noghan

and East-Meath and Leinster on the North Armagh and Carling|ford Bay, which parts it from Down and on the South East Meath, fro which parted by the River Boyne It is but 25 Miles long, and 13 broad A County full of Forage, and suffici|ently Fruitful.
It is divided into four Baronies viz. Dundalk, Louth, Atherdee, an Division. Ferrard; in which little compass ar five Market Towns, and four Baronie The chief Town is Drogheda.
Chief Places are; 1. Carlingford nigh the Borders of Down, a Boroug and Market Town, a considerabl Towns. Place of good Resort, standing on  commodious Bay of the same Name 2. Dundalk, eight Miles South Wes of Carlingford, a Borough, Marke Town, and Bishoprick: It was for|merly Walled, but now Dismantled it has a very commodious Haven, an is remarkable for the quartering ou Forces. 3. Louth, seven Miles Sout West of Dundalk, a small Marke Town, not now remarkable for an thing, but giving Name to the County 4. Atherdee, or Ardee, a Borough an Market Town, six Miles South o

Louth. 5. Drogheda, or Tredagh, 12 Miles South West of Atherdee, a Bo|rough and Market Town, the chief of this County, a very fine strong and well inhabited Place, and has an excellent Haven. It stands on the River Boyne, on the Borders of Leinster, about 24 Miles North of Dublin.

Thus much for ULSTER.



CHAP. V.

Of Connaught shewing its Name, Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Products, Remarks, c. and describing all its Counties, Towns and Castles.

THe Province of Connaught, or Co|naught, sometimes Connagh, by Name. the Latines Conacia, and sometimes Conachtia, by the Irish Connaughty and Connaughly, and sometimes called the County of Clare.
It is bounded on the East with the Bounds. Province of Leinster, from which se|parated by the River Shannon; on the West, with the Main Western Ocean; on the North and North-East, with some part of the Ocean; and the Pro|vince of Ulster; and on the South and South-East, with the Province of Munster, from which parted by the River Shannon. The Form of it is long, and towards the North and South ends narrow.
It is in length from the North parts of the County of Letrim, to Cape Dimensi|ons. Leane, the most South Point in Tho|mond



CONNAUGHT PROVINCE
map of Connaught



County, about 130 Miles: In breadth, from the East parts of Letrim, o Black-Harbour in the West parts of Mayo, about 84 Miles: The Circuit, (reckoning all the little Windings and Turnings) may be about 500 Miles.
As for the Rivers, here are few of Rivers. considerable Note besides that great one of Shannon, spoken of before. The chief are, 1. Moy, in the County of Mayo, which for a little way divides hat County from Slego, and falls into he Ocean by Mayo and Killala. . Suck, which divides the County of Roscommon from Gallway, and falls into he River Shannon, not far off Clonefert. . Droses, a little River in the Coun|y of Thomond, which falls into the hannon, a little East of Clare. 4. Gyll,  small River in the County of Gall|ay, which falls into the Bay of Gall|ay.
This Province abounds with many Products. onvenient Bays and Creeks fit for Navigation: In some places it is fresh d fruitful, in some places dangerous,  reason of the many Bogs, and thick  with Woods, (though of late much eared of both) the Air not so clear as  some places, by reason of the va|pourous

and foggy Mists. The Soi sufficiently fruitful, were not the In|habitants so much wanting, producing abundance of Cattel, good store o Deer and Hawks, and plenty of Ho|ney. It is the meanest of the fou Provinces in general.
In this Province is one Archbishop|rick, viz. Tuam; five Bishopricks Remarks. besides Angchony and Mayo united t Tuam, and Achonry united to Elphin viz. Gallway, Atblone, Killala, Clonefert and Killalow; seven Market-Towns viz. Athlone, Clare, Gallway, Kingstown Roscommon and Slego; eight Place of Commerce and Trade; 12 Place that return Parliament-Men, or Bo|roughs; 24 Castles of old Erection besides Fortresses raised in later Trou|bles; and 366 Parishes. The princi|pal Town of the whole is Gallway.
Those that go by the Name of Bo|roughs, are as follow; viz. two i oroughs. Letrim, Iames-town and Carrickdrum|rush: One in Slego, viz. Slego: On in Mayo, viz. Castlebar: Four in Ros|common; Elphin, Tulsk, Athlone an Roscommon: Three in Gallway; Athen|ry, Gallway and Tuam: And one i Thomond, viz. Enistown.

The Religious Places of this Pro|vince Religious Places. were once the Monastery of Col|man (a devout Saint) at Inisleath; the Monastery of Mayo, built by thirty Men of the English Nation; a famous Abby in the Barony of Boil, under Curlew Hills, together with the Abby of Beatitude. These Places are now become the Ruines of Time.
This Province was, before the En|glish History. Conquest of it, a Kingdom of it self. First Conquered by several En|glish Adventurers in the Reign of King Henry the Second; not long after, so neglected by the English, that it was cantoned again among the Irish and degenerate English till Tir Oen's Re|bellion, by whose Conquest the Pro|vince was also reduced to the English Government, but never so throughly Conquered as the rest; Governed by a principal Commissioner under the Lord Lieutenant. It is now the only Province that remains unreduced.
It was anciently divided (that is, in Old Di vision. Ptolemy's time) among the Gangani, said to dwell about the Counties of Thomond and Gallway; the Auteri, in and about the County of Mayo; and the Nagnati in Roscommon, and the

North-Eastern parts. After it became one Province, here is to be noted that Thomond was for a long time counted a part of Munster.
It is at present divided into six Coun|ties, New Di|ision. viz. 1. Letrim, 2. Slego, 3. Mayo, 4. Roscommon, 5. Gallway, and 6. Tho|mond, or Clare County. Of these, four border on the Sea, (besides Letrim) viz. Slego, Mayo, Gallway and Thomond. Roscommon is a Midland County, so may also Letrim be counted so. These Counties are subdivided into 51 Ba|ronies.

1. Letrim.
LEtrim, the most Northern Eastern ounds. County, has on the East and North-East Cavan and Fermanagh in Ulster; on the West and South-West Slego and Roscommon; on the North (where it is very small) the Ocean, with a lit|tle of Dunnagal in Ulster; and on the South-East and South Longford in Lein|ster. It is in length 44 Miles, and in breadth 18. A County mounted with Hills full of rank Grass, feeding an infinite Number of Cattel.





It is divided into five Baronies, viz. Division. Rosclogher, Drumhaire, Carrigallen, Le|trim, and Mohil. In which are two Boroughs, but never a Market-Town. The chief Town is Letrim.
Principal Places are, 1. Letrim, standing Towns. not far off the River Shannon. It gives Name, and is reckoned the chief of the County, but not else of Note at pre|sent. It stands 75 Miles almost North-West of Dublin. 2. Carrick-drumrush, a small Borough-Town, nigh three Miles South-West of Letrim, standing on the River Shannon by the Borders of Roscommon. 3. Iames-town, another Borough, nigh four Miles South-East of Carrickdrum, on the same River, by the Borders of Roscommon.


2. Slego.
SLego, has on the East, Letrim; on Bounds. the West, part of the County of Mayo; on the North, or North-West, the Western Ocean; and on the South and South-West, Roscommon and Mayo. It is in length 36 Miles, and in breadth 34. A very plentiful County for feed|ing and raising of Cattel.

It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Carbuy, Tiraghril, Corran, Coolavan, Le|ney, Division. and Tyreragh: In which is one Market-Town, and but one Borough, the chief Town is Slego.
Chief Places are, 1. Slego, five Miles off the Borders of Letrim, on a Bay Towns. of the same Name, having a very com|modious Harbour, and a strong Ca|stle: It is the chief and only Town of Note in this County, and is a Borough and Market-Town. It stands 95 Miles almost North-East of Dublin. 2. A|chonry, 17 Miles almost South of Slego, once a City and Bishoprick, now quite ined; and the Bishoprick united to Elphin in Roscommon. 3. Castel-Connor, 17 Miles nigh West of Achonry on the River Moy, by the Borders of Mayo.


3. Mayo.
MAyo, or Majo, has on the East and North-East Roscommon and Slego; Bounds. on the West the Main Western Ocean; on the North with the same Ocean; and on the South with the Country of Gallway. It is in length 58 Miles, and

in breadth 44. A fertile County, a|bundantly rich in Cattel, Deer, Hawks, and plenty of Honey.
It is divided into nine Baronies, Division. viz. Tyrawly, Erris, Burithoole, Gallen, Costello, Clonemorris, Killmain, Corrah, and Morrisk; in which there is but one Borough, and never a Market Town. The chief Town is reckoned Mayo.
Principal Places are; 1. Killala, or Towns. Killaloo, a small Town, which is a Bishops See, standing by the Sea side, or rather by a large Bay. 2. Mayo, or Moy, about three Miles South East of Killala, reckoned the chief Town of the County, but now much decay'd: It was once a Bishoprick, now joyn'd to Tuam, and the Jurisdiction to Killa|la; it stands on the Mouth of the Ri|ver Moy, on the Borders of Slego, about 115 Miles almost West of Dublin. 3. Castlebar, 22 Miles South of Mayo, a small Borough Town, standing on a little River, which falls into the Lough Conn. 4. Shroule, a little Town in the Borders of Gallway, 23 Miles South of Castle-Bar.



4. Roscommon.
ROscommon has on the East Longford, Bounds. East-Meath, and part of Kings-County in Leinster, with part of Letrim, from which parted by the River Shan|non; on the West Mayo and Gallway; on the North and North-East Slego and Letrim; and on the South and South-East Gallway and Kings-County: It is in length 54 miles, and in breadth 28: A County plain and fruitful, and with mean Husbandry yieldeth plenty of Corn.
It is divided into Six Baronies, viz. Division. Boyle, Ballintuber-West, Roscommon, Bal|limoe, Athlone, and Moyearne: In which are two Market-Towns, and four Boroughs; the principal Town is Athlone.
Chief Places are, 1. Boyle. a little Place by the Lake Key, nigh the Bor|ders Towns. of Slego, of some Note in these Wars, and remarkable for an old Ab|bey. 2. Elphin, a Bishop's See, 10 miles South of Boyle, but of no great Note. 3. Tulsk, a small Borough Town, nigh three miles South-West

of Elphin. 4. Roscommon, 13 miles South of Tulsk, a Borough and Market Town, which gives Name to this County, but is but a poor place, all the Houses being mean and thatch'd. 5. Athlone, a Borough, Market Town, and a Bishop's See, about 15 miles South-East of Roscommon: It is a place of considerable strength, and the Key of all Connaught, and the chief of these parts: It stands on the River Shannon, on the Confines of West-Meath in Lein|ster nigh Lough Ree; and has a Castle, and a very beautiful Bridge of hewen Stone: It stands 60 miles West of Dublin. 6. Ballinasloe, a little Town 12 miles South-West of Athlone, on the River Suck, by Gallway.


5. Gallway.
GAllway has on the East part of Bounds. Kings-County and Tipperary (from which parted by the River Shannon) and some of Roscommon; on the West, the main Ocean; on the North and North-East the Counties of Mayo and Roscommon; and on the South Thomond: It is in length 82 miles, and in breadth

48: A County very fruitful to the Husbandman, and no less profitable to the Shepherd.
It is divided into 17 Baronies, viz. Division. Ballinananen, Rosse, Moycullin, Clare, Donamore, Ballimore, Kellehane, Tiaquin, Killconnell, Clon-Mac-Owen, Loughreagh, Kiltartan, and the Isles of Arran. In which are two Market Towns, and three Boroughs: The chief Town is Gallway.
Chief Places are, 1. Tuam or Toam Towns. an Archbishop's See, 7 miles off the Borders of Mayo, once a famous City, but now reduced to a meer Village. 2. Gallway or Gallive, a Bishop's See, Market and Borough, 17 miles South of Tuam, a very strong, neat, and rich City, the third (by some counted the second,) in all Ireland: It is built almost round, and in a manner Tower|like, of entire Stone: It is situated by the fall of the Lake Corbes into the Sea, and by a large, safe, and dilicate Har|bour, call'd the Bay of Gallway, capa|ble of a vast Fleet of Ships, so well seated for Merchandize, that it has been looked upon as the greatest place of Trade in all Ireland: It stands 102 miles West of Dublin. 3. Athenree or

Aterith, a Borough Town 9 miles East of Gallway, enclosed with a Wall of great Circuit, but slenderly inhabited. 4. Clonefart, a decaying Town 25 miles East of Athenree, and 2 from the Shan|non: It still keepeth the Title of a Bishop's See. 6. Portumny, a small place 8 miles almost South of Clonefart upon the River Shannon nigh Lough-Derg.


6. Thomond.
THomond or Clare County, sometimes Twomond and Twowoun, or North-Munster (then part of Munster,) has on Bounds. the East and South the River Shannon, which parts it from Tipperary, Limrick, and Kerry in Munster; on the West the Ocean; and on the North Gallway: It is in length 55 miles, and in breadth 38: A County of a very fruitful Soil, and commodious for Navigation.
It is divided into eight Baronies, viz. Division. Burrin, Inchiquin, Tullagh, Bunratty, Islands, Ibrickan, Clanderlay, and Moy|sarta. In which are two Market-Towns, and but one Borough: The chief Town is Killalow.

Principal Places are, 1. Killalow or Labu, a Market Town and a Bishop's Towns. See, once a very considerable place, but now decaying, though still counted the chief of the County: It stands on the River Shannon, on the Borders of Tipperary, 10 miles almost North of Limrick, and about 90 miles almost South-West of Dublin. 2. Enis Town, a Borough about 20 miles West of Killalow. 3. Clare, nigh three miles South of Enes Town, a Market Town, which gives Name to this County, there|fore by some reckoned the head there|of: It stands nigh a Lake made by the River Shannon. 4. Bunrotty, 11 miles South-East of Clare, a little Town standing by the River Shannon, and fortified with a Castle.

Thus much for CONNAUGHT.





LEINSTER PROVINCE
map of Leinster



CHAP. VI.

Of Leinster, shewing its Name, Bounds, Dimentions, Rivers, Products, Re|marks, c. and describing all its Coun|ties, Towns, and Castles.

THE Province of Leinster, some|times Name. called Lemster, by the La|tins Lagenia, and in more Ancient Times Lagen; it is called by the na|tural Irish Leighnigh and Leighingh; and by the Welsh Lein.
It is bounded on the East with the Bounds. rish Ocean or St. George's Channel; n the West with the Province of onnaught, from which separated by he River Shannon; on the North with he Province of Ulster; on the South ith the Ocean; and on the South-West with the Province of Munster, a little way parted by the River Shure: In form it may be said somewhat to re|semble a Triangle.

It is in length from the most North parts of the County of East-Meath, to Hooke-Tower, the Southern Point in the County of Wexford, about 112 Miles; in breadth from the Town of Wicklow, to the most West part of King's County, about 70 Miles. The Circuit (reckoning the Windings and Turnings) may be about 360 Miles.
The chief Rivers are; 1. Barrow, which arises in Queen's County, running Rivers. East, and then South, washes Caterlagh and Lughlin, then takes the Shure nigh Waterford, and together with it falls into the Ocean. 2. Boyne, which a|rises in King's County, and run to|wards the North East, washes Trim, Navan, Slaine, and Drogheda, and immediately after looses it self in the Ocean. 3. Liffe, or Leffy, arising in the County of Wicklow, about 15 Miles from its fall into the Sea, and takes a large compass, and falls into the Sea at Dublin. 4. Nuer, beginning in Queen's County, washes Kilkenny and Thomas-Town, and falls into the River Barrow, a little above Ross. 5. Urrin, or Slane, beginning in Wicklow, washes Ballinglass and Inishcorthy, and falls in|to the Sea at Wexford. 6. Inny in

Kings-County, falling into the Shannon at Lough-Ree.
This Province is very fertile and Products. fruitful in Corn and Pasture-Ground, and well watered with Rivers; the Air clear and gentle, mixt with a tem|perate Disposition, yielding neither ex|remity of Heat nor Cold. It is plen|tiful both in Fish and Flesh, and in o|ther Victuals, as Butter, Cheese, and Milk. The Commodities chiefly con|sists in Cattel, Sea-Fowl and Fish, and breeds excellent good Horses. The Inhabitants come nearest the Civil Dis|position of the English, from whom they are for the most part descended; so that I look upon this to be the most considerable Province in Ireland.
In this Province is one Archbishop|rick, Remarks. viz. Dublin; three Bishopricks, (besides Loughlin united to Fearnes, and Glenelach united to Dublin,) viz. Fearnes, Kildare and Kilkenny: 16 Market-Towns, viz. Athboy, Arcklo, Ardragh, Carbre, Dublin, Kildare, Kil|kenny, Longford, Loughlin, Mariburrough, Molingar, Philips-town, Ross, Trim, Wex|ford and Wicklow: 47 Places of Com|merce, and as many that return Par|iament-Men, or Boroughs: 102 Ca|stles

well fortified by the English, and 926 Parishes. The chief place i Dublin, also chief of the Kingdom.
The Boroughs are; Three in Long|ford; Boroughs St. Iohns-Town, Lanesburroug and Longford: Three in West-Meath Foore, Killbegan and Molingar: Six i East-Meath; Athboy, Duleck, Kells, Na|van, Ratooth and Trim: Three in Dub|lin; Dublin, Newcastle and Swords. Four in Wicklow; Arcklo, Ballinglass Blessen and Wicklow: Three in Kil|dare; Arthy, Kildare and Naas: Thre in Kings-County; Bir, Bunalin an Philips-town: Three in Queens-County Ballinekill, Mariburrough and Port-Ar|lington: Eight in Kilkenny; Callen, St Canice, Gowran, Inis-teige, Kells, Kil|kenny, Knocktopher and Thomas-Town. Two in Catherlagh; Catherlagh an Loughlin: And eight in Wexfor; Ban|nae, Clamine, Clonegeen, Feathard, Inis|corthy, Rosse, Taghmon and Wexford.
The Religious Places of this Pro|vince Religious Places. were once the Monastery of S Mary of Oustmanby; the Magnificen Abby called St. Thomas-Court at Dubli built by King Henry the Second o England: Likewise Tintern Monaste|ry, that notable Abby founded b

William Marshall Earl of Pembrook, who called it de Voto, because of a Vow that he made. These Places have now little remaining.
This Province was, before the En|glish Conquest of it, divided into two History. Kingdoms, viz. Leinster and Meath, both under their own Kings; till a falling out hapned between the King of Meath and he of Leinster, which caused King Henry the Second of Eng|land to make a Conquest of it. Lein|ster has been inseparably annexed to England ever since, but Meath was granted in Fee-Farm to Hugh Lacy, a Noble English-man. Since which it came wholly under the King of Eng|land, and now the Province of Meath is united to Leinster.
It was anciently divided among the Old Di|vision. Brigantes, inhabiting Kilkenny, Cater|lagh, Kings and Queens Counties; the Menapii, in and about Wexford; the Cauci, in and about Wicklow; and the Blanii or Elbanii in Dublin, East-Meath and West-Meath. Afterwards divided into Meath and Leinster, (as before was said;) Meath contained the Coun|ties of East-Meath, West-Meath, and Longford.

It is now divided into 11 Countie New Di|vision. viz. 1. Longford, 2. West-Meath, 3. Eas Meath, 4. Dublin, 5. Wicklow, 6. Ki dare, 7. Kings-County, 8. Queens-Count 9. Kilkenny, 10. Catherlagh, and 11. Wex|ford. Of these, four borders on th Sea, viz. East-Meath, Dublin, Wicklo and Wexford; the seven others ar Midland Counties. These Countie are again divided into 90 Baronies.

1. Longford.
LOngford (by some made in Con|naught) is the most North-We|stern Bounds. County, and has on the East and South, West-Meath; on the North and North-East, Letrim in Connaught, and Cavan in Ulster; and on the West, the River Shannon, which parts it from Roscommon in Connaught. It is in lengt 27 Miles, and in breadth 16. A small but a rich and pleasant County.
It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division. Longford, Granard, Ardagh, Moydoe, Rath|lin and Shrowle: In which are two Market-Towns and three Boroughs; the chief Town is Longford.
Principal Places are, 1. St. Iohns-Town, Towns. or Ballanalie, a Borough-Town

on the River Camlin, in almost the iddle of the County. 2. Longford,  the same River, five Miles almost est of St. Iohns-Town, a Market-own and a Borough, the chief of the ounty, but of no great Note. It ands about 58 Miles almost West of ublin. 3. Ardagh, six Miles South-ast of Longford, a little decayed Mar|et-Town. 4. Lanesburrough, almost 2 Miles West of Ardagh, a Borough-own standing on the River Shannon, which has a Bridge over it into Ros|ommon.


2. West-Meath.
WEst-Meath, has on the East, East-Meath; Bounds. on the West the River hannon, (which parts it from Roscom|on in Connaught) and Longford; on he North, Cavan in Ulster; and on the South, Kings-County. It is in length 0 Miles, and in breadth 20. A Coun|y which gives place to none in Ferti|ity and Populousness.
It is divided into 11 Baronies, viz. Division. Foore, Delyn, Moygoish, Corkery, Molingar, Fabill, Furtullagh, Moycashell, Rathconrath, Kilkenny and Clunlona: In which is one

Market-Town, and three Boroughs; the chief Town is Molingar.
Principal Places are, 1. Foore, a Bo|rough-Town, Towns. two Miles off the Bor|ders of East-Meath, of little Note 2. Molingar or Mullenger, 13 Miles South of Foore, a Market and Bo|rough-Town, of considerable Note and Strength, not only the chief of this County, but of the whole Province of Meath. It stands 40 Miles nigh West of Dublin. 3. Ballimore, 13 Miles West of Molingar; a small Town nigh the South-parts of Longford. 4. Kill|began, 10 Miles South-East of Balli|more; a little Borough-Town on the River Brasmagh, by the Borders o Kings-County.


3. East-Meath
EAst-Meath, has on the East, the Bounds. Ocean and Dublin; on the North and North-East, Cavan and Louth in Ulster; on the West, West-Meath; and on the South, Kildare. It is in length 38 Miles, and in breadth as many. A County very rich, pleasant and populous.
It is divided into 11 Baronies; viz Division.





Moyrgallon, Slane, Duleck, Skreene, Na|van, Kells, Lune, Moysenragh, Deece, Ra|toh, and Dunboyne. In which are two Market-Towns, and six Boroughs; the chief Town is Trim.
Chief Places are, 1. Kells, a little Towns. Borough on a small River called Black-Water, which falls into the Boyne nigh Navan. 2. Slane, a little Town on the Boyne, 12 Miles East of Kells, and se|ven West of Drogheda. 3. Duleck, a Borough seven Miles nigh East of Slane, and four South of Drogheda, on the River Nenny. 4. Navan, a small Borough on the River Boyne, 10 Miles West of Duleck, and seven almost South-East of Kells. 5. Athboy, or A|boy, eight Miles South-West of Navan, a Borough and Market-Town, well in|habited, and of good resort. 6. Trim, six Miles almost South-East of Athboy, on the River Boyne, a Borough and Market-Town of good Trade, reck|oned the chief in the County. It stands 23 Miles almost North-West of Dub|lin. 7. Ratooth, a little Borough-Town 12 Miles East of Trim, and as many North-West of Dublin.



4. Dublin.
DUblin, or Divelin, has on the East Bounds. the Irish Ocean, or St. George's Channel; on the West and North-West, Kildare and East-Meath; and on the South, Wicklow. It is a small County but 28 Miles long, and 16 broad. A County very rich and fer|tile in Corn and Grass, but destitute of Woods, so that they have a kind of a fat Turff or Coal.
It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division. Ballrudery, Cross, Cooleck, Castleknock, Newcastle and Rathdowne. In which is one Market-Town and three Bo|roughs; the chief is Dublin.
Chief Places are, 1. Swords, a little Towns. Borough-Town nigh the Sea, eight Miles North of Dublin. 2. Dublin, or Balacleigh, an Archbishoprick, a Market and Borough, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, the Seat of the Vice-Roy, and an University. It is a very Noble City, (surpassing any in Eng|land except London) adorned with ma|ny Glorious Buildings, seated on a de|lectable and wholsom place, (first built on Piles of Wood) on the River

Liffe, which affords it an excellent Haven: To the South are Hills, West|ward an open Champion Ground, on he East the Sea at Hand in sight. It as a very strong Wall of rough uilding Stone, towards the South for|ified with Rampiers. It openeth at ix Gates, from whence there run forth Suburbs of great length: Towards he East stands the Kings Castle on igh, most strongly fenced with Dit|hes and Towers: Just over against t is a beautiful College, richly En|owed and Consecrated unto the Name of the Holy Trinity. Here re also many other fine Buildings, as he Cathedral, the Archbishops Pa|ace, the Collegiate Church, the Town-Hall, c. 3. Newcastle, a Bo|ough-Town eight Miles almost West f Dublin. Here also stood the City f Glendelach, a Bishop's See; now uined, and the Bishoprick united to Dublin.


3. Wicklow.
WIcklow, (sometimes a part of the Bounds. County of Dublin) has on the East St. George's Channel; on the West,

Kildare and Catherlagh; on the North, Dublin; and on the South, Wexford. It is in length 36 Miles, and in breadth 28. A County sufficiently fruitful.
It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division. Rathdown, (part in Dublin) Newcastle Talbotstone, Ballinecur, Arcklow and Shel Aly. In which are two Market-Town and four Boroughs; the principa Town is Wicklow.
Chief Places are, 1. Blessinto, a smal Borough-Town on the River Liffe Towns. bordering on Kildare. 2. Baltinglasse another Borough, 13 Miles South o Blessinto, on the River Urrin or Slane by the Borders of Catherlagh. 3. Wick|low, a Market-Town and Borough, 2 Miles East of Baltinglasse. It is the chief of the County standing on the Sea, and has a narrow Haven at the Mouth of the River Letrim, ov which stands a Rock in stead of a Ca|stle, enclosed with a strong Wall: I stands 24 Miles nigh South of Dublin 4. Arcklow, a Market-Town and a Bo|rough, 12 Miles South of Wicklow. I stands by the Sea, and once gave Name to a County, and now a Title to the Duke of Ormond, who is Baron of this place.



6. Kildare.
KIldare, has on the East, Dublin and Bounds. Wicklow; on the West, Kings-County and Queens County; on the North, Est-Meath; and on the South, Catherlagh. It is in length 38 Miles, and in breadth 23. A County most rich and plentiful in all things.
It is divided into eight Baronies, Division. viz. Carburny, Ikeathy, Salt, Naas, Con|nel, Ophally, Noragh and Reban, Kileah and Mone. In which are two Market-Towns and three Boroughs; the chief Town is Kildare.
Principal places are, 1. Carbury or Towns. Carbre, towards the North-West part a Market-Town, but much decayed. 2. Naas, a Borough-Town 13 Miles South-East of Carbury, nigh the River Liffe. 3. Kildare or Kildar, 11 Miles almost West of Naas; it is a conside|rable place, the chief of the County, a Market-Town, a Borough and a Bi|shop's See, formerly much celebrated for the Holy Virgin Briged. It stands 27 Miles South-West of Dublin. 4. Ar|thy, a Borough-Town 12 Miles South of Kildare, on the River Barrow, not

far off of the Borders of Queens-County.


7. Kings-County.
KIngs-County, formerly called Offaly, Bounds. has on the East, Kildare; on the West, the River Shannon, (which parts it from Gallway in Connaught) and part of Tipperary in Munster; on the North, West-Meath; and on the South and South-East, Tipperary and Queens-Coun|ty. It is in length 48 Miles, and in breadth 14. A County not so rich as some others.
It is divided into 11 Baronies, viz. Division. Warrenstown, Coolestown, Philipstown, Geshill, Kilcoursi, Ballicowen, Balliboy, Carri-Castle, Eglish, Ballibrit and Clon|lisk. In which is one Market-Town and three Boroughs; the chief Town is Phillipstown.
Principal Places are, 1. Phillipstown or Kingstown, towards the North parts, Towns. three Miles off the Borders of West-Meath, a Market-Town and Borough, not remarkable for any thing but for being the Head of the County. It stands 38 Miles West of Dublin. 2. Bunalin or Bannahet, a small Bo|rough-Town,

25 Miles almost South-West of Phillipstown, standing on the River Shannon, on the Borders of Gall|way in Connaught. 3. Bir, another lit|tle Borough-Town six Miles South of Bunalin, standing on the Borders of Tipperary in Munster, on a River that runs into the Shannon.


8. Queens-County.
QUeens-County, in Irish Lease, has on Bounds. the East, Kildare; on the North and West, Kings-County with Tipperary in Munster; and on the South, Kil|kenny. It is in length 35 Miles, and in breadth 32. A County full of Woods and Bogs.
It is divided into seven Baronies, Division. viz. Portneh inch, Stradbally, Balliadam, Slewmargie, Cullinagh, Mariburow and Upper Ossery. In which is one Market-Town and three Boroughs; the chief Town is Mariburow.
Chief Places are, 1. Port-Arlinton, Towns. a small Borough-Town in the North parts of this County on the River Bar|row, on the Borders of Kings-County. 2. Mariburow or Queenstown, 10 Miles South of Port-Arlinton: It is a Bo|rough

and a Market-Town, but no otherwise remarkable than for bein the Head of the County. It stand 72 Miles almost South-West of Dubli 3. Ballinekill, another Borough-Tow eight Miles South of Mariburow, an about a Mile from the Borders of Kil|kenny.


9. Kilkenny.
KIlkenny, has on the East, Catherlag Bounds. and Wexford; on the West, Tip|perary in Munster; on the North, Queens-County; and on the South; Waterford i Muster, from which parted by th River Shure. It is in length 40 Miles and in breadth 22. A County wit Towns and Castles on every side makes a fine shew, and in plenty o all things gives place to none.
It is divided into 11 Baronies, viz. Fassadinig, Galmoy, Cranagh, Kilkenn Division. lib. Shellilogher, Gowan, Kells, Knock pher, Ida, Ibercon and Iverk. In which is one Market-Town, and 8 Boroughs; the chief Town is Kilkenny.
Chief Places are, 1. Kilkenny, a Mar|ket, a Borough, and a Bishoprick, in Towns. the middle of the County on the River

Nuer. It is a large and strong Ci|ty, the most populous, Rich, and well Traded Inland Town in Ireland: It consists of two parts, the Irish Town, in which is the Cathedral; and the English, which was built since, and is now the principal, the former being only a Suburb to it. It stands 56 Miles South West of Dublin. 2. Gowran, a Borough, 8 Miles East of Kilkenny, nigh the Bor|ders of Catherlagh. 3. Callen, a Bo|rough 15 Miles almost South West of Gowran, on the River Callen, the third Town of the County. 4. Kells, a Borough Town on the same River, six Miles West of Callen. 5. Thomas-Town, a Borough four Miles West of Kells, on the Kiver Nuer: It is a Walled Town, the Second in the County. 6. Inishteige, a Bo|rough on the same River, four Miles South East of Thomas-Town, and the Fourth in the County. 7. Knockto|pher, another Borough seven Miles West of Inisteige: Here is a little Borough called St. Canice, three Miles-West of Kilkenny.



10. Catherlagh.
CAthelagh, Caterlagh, or Carlogh, Bounds. has on the East Wicklow and Wex|ford; on the West Kilkenny, and part of Queen's County; on the North Kildare; and on the South and South East Wexford: It is in length 28 Miles, and in breadth 18. A County of a fertile Soil, and well shaded with Woods.
It is divided into five Baronies, viz. Division. Ravilly, Catherlagh, Forth, Idrne, and St. Mullin. In which is one Market-Town and two Boroughs. The chief Town is Catherlagh.
Principal Places are; 1. Catherlagh, or Caterlogh, standing on the River Towns. Barrow, on the Borders of Queens County. It is a Market-Town, and a Borough, the chief of the County, and is fortified with a Castle: It stands 38 Miles almost South West of Dublin. 2. Loughlen, Laghlin, or old Loughlin, eight Miles almost South West of Catherlagh, a Borough Town of no Note. 3. Loughlin, or Laghlin, three Miles East of the other, on the River Barrow, once a conside|rable

City, and a Bishoprick, now reduced to a Village, and the Bi|shoprick anited to Fearnes in Wex|ford.


II. UUexford.
WExford, or Weesford, by the Irish Bounds. Loghhagarm, has on the East the Ocean; on the West Catherlagh and Kilkenny; on the North Wicklow; and on the South and South West the Ocean, and some of Waterford in Munster, from which parted by Wa|terford Haven: It is in length 47 Miles, and in breadth 27. A County fruitful in Corn and Grass.
It is divided into eight Baronies, viz. Division. Gory, Scarewalsh, Bantry, Ballageen, Shelmaliere, Sheilbourne, Bargie, and Fourth. In which are two Market Towns and eight Boroughs. The Principal Town is Wexford.
Chief Places are; 1. Fearnes, or Towns. Ferns, towards the Northern Parts, a Town of no Note but for being a Bishops Sec. 2. Inishcorthy, a Borough Town, eight Miles nigh South of Fearnes, on the River Urrin or Slany. 3. Ross, a Borough and Market-Town,

on the River Barrow, 15 Miles South West of Inishcorthy, on the Borders of Kilkenny, once a famous City now al|most ruined. 4. Wexford, or Wees|ford, 17 Miles East of Ross, a Market Town and Borough. It was once reckoned the chief City in all Ireland, and was the first Colony of the Eng|lish, still a fair and large Town, which has a very commodious Haven at the Mouth of the River Urrin or Slany: It stands about 62 Miles South o Dublin. 5. Taghmon, a little Borough Town seven Miles nigh West of Wex|ford. Clamine, a Borough five Mile South West of Taghmon. 7. Banne another four Miles South of Clamine by a convenient Bay of the sam Name. 8. Duncannon, nigh five Mile West of Banne, a considerable Castl on Waterford Haven, so that no Ship can go to Waterford or Ross withou leave. 9. Featherd, a little Boroug two Miles from Duncannon.

Thus much for LEINSTER.





MUNSTER PROVINCE
map of Munster



CHAP. VII.

Of Munster, shewing its Name, Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Products, Re|marks, c. and describing all its Coun|ties, Towns and Castles.

THE Province of Munster, many Name. times called Mounster; it is called by the Latines Momonia, and by the natural Irish Mown, and in common construction of Speech Wown.
I is bounded on the East and South-East with the Province of Leinster Bounds. (from which partly separated by the River Shure,) and the Ocean; on the West with the Atlantick or Western Ocean; on the North with the Pro|vince of Connaught, from which sepe|rated by the River Shannon; and on the South and South-West with the Virgivian Ocean: The form thereof is a kind of a long Square.
It is in length from Waterford Ha|ven Dimensi|ons. to the Western-point in the County of Kerry, not far off Dingle, about 135 miles; in breadth, from the North parts of Tipperary to Baltimore, in Corke,

120 miles; but from Baltimore to the North parts of Kerry, (which is more natural,) is but 68 miles. The circuit, (by reason of the great Windings and Turnings,) is above 600 miles.
The chief Rivers of this Province Rivers. are, 1. Shure, Sewer, or Shower, which begins in Tipperary, runs South, and washes Thurles, and passes by Cashell, then runs East and washes Clonmell, Ca|rick, and Waterford, then it takes in the Barrow, with which it falls into the Ocean. 2. Black Water, Awiduffe or Avenmore, which begins in Kerry, runs East, and washes Mallo and Lismore, then runs South, and falls into the Sea at Youghill. 3. Lee, in the County of Corke, runs East and washes Corke, and soon after falls into the Sea, making several small Isles. 4. Bande, likewise in Corke, runs East, and washes Bandon-Bridge, and falls into the Sea at King|sale. 5. Leane, in Kerry, runs West, and falls into Dingle-Bay. 6. Cashen, in Kerry, which falls into Shannon|mouth.
This Province abounds with many Products. ecellent Bays and Havens, with many rich Towns; the Air mild and tem|perate, neither too hot nor too cold;

the Sol in some places is hilly, looking aloft with woody wild and solitary Mountains; yet the Vallies below are garnished with Corn Fields, all both pleasant for Sight and fertile for Soil. The most general Commodities of this Province are Corn, Cattel, Wood, Wool, and Fish, the last whereof it affords abundance of all sorts, especially Herrings.
In this Province is one Archbishop|rick, Remarks. viz. Cashell; Five Bishopricks (besides Ross and Cloyne united to Corke, and Lismore united to Waterford,) viz. Waterford, Limerick, Corke, Ard|feart, and Emly: Seven Market-Towns, viz. Carrick, Clonmell, Corke, Dingle, Kingsale, Limrick, and Wa|terford: Twenty Five places that re|turn Parliament Men, called Boroughs; Sixty Six Castles of old Erection, and (according to Morden,) 80 Parishes in the whole. Chief City of the whole is commonly reckoned Waterford, but Limerick at present deserves the Pre|heminence.
The Boroughs are as following, viz. Boroughs Five in Tipperary; Cashell, Clonmell, Fe|therd, Tipperary and Thurles: Four in Waterford; Dungarvan, Lismore, Tal|lagh

and Waterford: Three in Lim|rick; Askeaton, Kilmalock, and Lim|rick: Three in Kerry; Ardfeart, Ding|le, and Trally: And 10 in Corke; Bal|timore, Bandon-Bridge, Caraby, Charle|ville, Clone, Corke, Kingsale, Cloyne, Mal|lo and Younghill.
The Religious Places in this Pro|vince Religious Places. were once the two Abbies a Youghill, one called North-Abby, an the other South-Abby: The two Ab|bies at Limerick, St. Francis-Abby, an Dominick-Abby: The two Abbies a Corke, St. Francis-Abby, and the Abb of the Isles. And lastly, that famou Abby of the Holy-Cross in Tipperary These are now quite ruined, and whol|ly out of use.
This Province, before the Englis Conquest of it, was a Kingdom of i History. self, and ruled by its own King. I then contained some part of Connaugh (that is, the County of Thomond;) sinc the English became Masters of it, i has been kept close to that Crown only the Spaniards at one time be|came Masters of a little of it, bu were soon driven out. It is now Go|verned by a Lord President, who ha one Assistant, two Learned Lawyers

and a Secretary to keep it in Obe|ience.
It was anciently divided among the Old Di|vision. lterni in Tipperary; the Coriandi, in imerick, Waterford, and part of Tip|erary and Corke; the Luceni in Kerry; he Velibori in Desmond in Corke; and he Vodii in some part of Corke. After|wards divided into Deswown, Hierwown, Meanwown, and Urwown. Of later imes it was divided into two parts, viz. West-Mounster, and South-Mun|ter.
It stands at present divided into five Counties, (by some into six,) viz. New Di|vision. 1. Tipperary, 2. Waterford, 3. Corke, to which is joyned the County of Des|mond, 4. Limerick, and 5. Kerry. Of these, three border on the Sea, viz. Waterford, Corke and Kerry; Tippera|ry and Limerick are Midland Counties. These Counties are again divided in|to 52 Baronies.

1. Tipperary.
TIpperary, or Holy-Cross, by the Irish Thobruidearum Cuntae, has on the Bounds. East, Queens-County and Kilkenny in Leinster; on the West, Limerick and

the River Shannon, which parts it fro Gallway and Thomond in Connaught on the North or North-East, Kings County in Leinster; and on the South Waterford. It is in length 58 Miles and in breadth 36. The South-part are exceeding fertile, and well furnish|ed with good Buildings.
It is divided into 14 Baronies, viz. Division. Lower Ormond, Ormond, Arra, Owny, Ikerin, Ileagh, Eliogurty, Kilnalong, Kil|namama, Clonwilliam, Middlethird, Slew|wardagh, Comsey, and Iffa and Ossa. I which are two Market-Towns, an five Boroughs; the chief Town is Clon|mell.
Chief Places are, 1. Thurles, a Bo|rough-Town, Towns. on the River Shure, si Miles from the Borders of Kilkenny 2. Cashell or Cassel, 12 Miles South o Thurles. nigh the River Shure, a Bo|rough and an Archbishoprick, but no else of Note. 3. Fethard, a little Bo|rough-Town, eight Miles almost Eas of Cashell. 4. Tipperary or Holy-Cr a Borough-Town 17 Miles West  Fethard. It gives Name to this Cou|ty, and was once a very famous pla 5. Emly or Awn, above seven Mil West of Tipperary, nigh the Borde

 Limerick: It is a Bishop's See, once famous City, but now much decay|. 6. Clonmell, a Market-Town and orough 26 Miles nigh East of Emly:  is now the chief of the County, a ch Place of great strength, and stands  the River Shure, on the Borders of Waterford, about 82 Miles South-West f Dublin. 7. Carick, or Carick-Mac-Griffen, a Market-Town on the same River, 10 Miles East of Clonmell. It s situated on a Rock between the Li|its of Waterford and Kilkenny.


2. Waterford.
WAterford, has on the East, Water|ford-Haven, Bounds. which parts it from Wexford in Leinster; on the West, Cork; on the North, the River Shure, which parts it from Tipperary, and Kilkenny in Leinster; and on the South, the Ocean. It is in length 46 Miles, and in breadth 24. A fine County as well for Pleasure as Riches.
It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division. Glanehery, Upperthird, Middlethird, De|sees, Coshmore, and Cosbrid. In which is one Market-Town, and four Bo|roughs; the chief Town is Waterford.

Chief Places are, 1. Waterford,  the Irish Phurtargie, a Market,  Towns. rough, and Bishops See, standing  the River Shure on the Borders of K|kenny. It is a very Wealthy, we traded, and populous City, the seco for bigness in this Kingdom, endow with many ample Privileges: T Streets are narrow, thrust close, an pent together: It stands in an un|healthful Air, but for Trade as con|veniently seated as any Port in the World, having a most excellent Ha|ven, though a good distance from the Sea, yet Ships of the greatest Burden may easily ride at the Key. It stands 75 Miles nigh South of Dublin. 2. Dun|garvan, 20 Miles almost South-West of Waterford: It is a Borough-Town seated on the Sea, well fortified with a Castle, and has a very commodious Road for Ships. 3. Lismore, a Bo|rough-Town, 13 Miles West of Dun|garvan, on the River Blackwater, once a Bishops Sea, but now united to Wa|terford, and is in a decaying condition. 4. Tallagh, a Borough-Town, above five Miles South of Lismore, by the Borders of Cork.



3. Limerick.
LImrick or Limerick, has on the East, Bounds. Tipperary; on the West, Kerry; n the North, the River Shannon, which parts it from Thomond in Con|ught) with a little of Tipperary; and n the South with Cork. It is in length 48 Miles, and in breadth 27. A fer|tile County, and well inhabited, but able to shew few good Towns: The West parts are Mountainous, and the rest plain.
It is divided into nine Baronies, viz. Division. Clonello, Kenry, Limerick, Ownyheg, Con|nagh, Clanwilliam, Smale County, Cosh|ma, and Coshled: In which is one Mar|ket-Town, and three Boroughs. Prin|cipal Place is Limerick.
Chief Places are, 1. Limerick, or Towns. Lough-Meagh, a Market, a Borough, and a Bishop's See, now the Metro|polis of Munster. It is an eligent, rich and populous City, and of singular Strength, situated partly on an Island n the River Shannon. It is counted two Towns, the Upper, wherein stands the Castle, and the Cathedral Church, has two Gates opened into it,

and each of them a fair Bridge o Stone into it, with Bulwarks, an little Draw-Bridges, the one leading unto the West, the other unto the East: Unto which the Lower Town joyn|eth, fenced with a Wall, and a Castle also thereto, and a Fore-gate at the Entrance into it. The Bridges and Castles are very beautiful. It stands 60 Miles off of Sea, yet Ships of Bur|then can come up to the Walls. It stands about 95 Miles almost West of Dublin. 2. Askeaton, a little Borough nigh the Shannon, 13 Miles almost West of Limerick. 3. Athdora, a small Town eight Miles South-East of Aske|aton, and nine South-West of Limerick, of old time fortified. 4. Killmallock, 16 Miles South of Limerick, a Bo|rough-Town both rich and populous, and enclosed with a Wall.


4. Kerry.
KErry (reckoned a County Palatine) has on the East, Limerick and Bounds. Cork; on the West, the Atlantick O|cean; on the North, the River Shan|non, which separates it from Thomond i Connaught; and on the South, Des|mond

in Cork, with part of the Ocean. It is in length 60 Miles, and in breadth 47. A County full of Woody Moun|tains, and in many places good Corn-Fields.
It is divided into eight Baronies, Division. viz. Iraghticoner, Klanmoris, Corkaguinie, Trughenackmy, Magunihie, Glanaroghty, Dunkeron, and Iveragh: In which is one Market-Town and three Bo|roughs; the chief Town is Dingle.
Principal Places are, 1. Ardfeart, a Towns. Borough-Town nigh the Sea, which is also a Bishop's Sea, but a very poor one. 2. Trally, a little Borough-Town about five Miles South-East of Ard|feart, and four from Sea, a place of no Note. 3. Dingle, a Borough and a Market-Town 23 Miles almost West of Trally. It is the chief Town of this County, and the most Western of Note in all Ireland. It stands very commo|dious for Navigation, upon a very large Bay of the same Name. It stands 164 Miles almost South-West of Dublin.


5. Cork.
COrk, or Coreach, has on the East, Wa|terford, Bounds. with a little of Tipperary; on the West, Kerry, with some of the Sea;

on the North, Limerick; and on th South and South-East, the Virgeria Ocean. It is (taking in Desmond, whic is 30 Miles long and 8 broad) the lar|gest County in Ireland, being in length 86 Miles, and in breadth 50. A County said to be wild and woody, yet has many good Towns.
It is divided into 15 Baronies, viz. Dunhallo, Orrery and Kilmore, Armory or Division. Earmoy, Condon or Clongibbon, Kilnat|alloon, Imokilly, Barrimore, Barrets, Corke, lib. Kinalea, Kineatmeaky, Muskery, and Carbury: Desmond contains the other two, viz. Bantry and Bear. In these are two Market-Towns and 10 Bo|roughs; the chief place is Cork.
Chief Places are, 1. Charleville, the Towns. most North-Town, a Borough on the Borders of Limerick. 2. Mallo, a little Borough on the River Blackwater, 14 Miles South of Charleville. 3. Youghill, a Borough on the Mouth of the River Blackwater, by the Borders of Water|ford, 30 Miles South-West of Mallo. It is a rich and populous Town, well Walled round, in form somewhat long, and has a very commodious Haven, and a well fenced Key. 4. Cloyne, 8 Miles nigh West of Youghill, a little Bo|rough

and Bishoprick, said to be united  Cork. 5. Ballicora, a small Borough 4 Miles almost West of Cloyne. 6. Cork, 3 Miles West of Ballicora, a Market, Borough, and Bishop's See, the chief of his County. It is a neat, wealthy and opulous City, inhabited most by Eng|ish, standing on the River Lee, where it as a commodious Haven. It is of good trength, enclosed within a Circuit of Walls in form of an Egg, with the Ri|ver flowing round about it, and running between, not passable through but by Bridges, lying out in length as it were in one direct broad Street, and the fame having a Bridge over it. It stands 124 Miles South-West of Dublin. 7. King|sale, 12 Miles South of Cork, a Borough and Market-Town, nigh the Mouth of the River Banne. It is a populous and well traded Town, the second in the County. It has an excellent Haven for Ships, and is fortified with old Walls. 8. Bandon-bridge, a Borough on the same River 8 Miles almost West of Kingsale. 9. Rosse, 16 Miles South-West of Bandon|bridge, on the Sea, and a City and a Bi|soprick now united to Cork, and is a meer Village. 10. Baltimore, a Borough, and Commodious Port 14 Miles nigh South-West of Rosse.







An INDEX Of all the Provinces, Counties, Baronies, Ci|ties, Towns, Forts, Castles, Rivers, Lakes, Havens, Bays, Mountains, Promonto|ries, c. in such a manner as may serve for a Geographical Dictionary for Ireland. The Longitude of the Towns is reckoned from London. P. stands for Province, C. for County, and B. for Barony.

A.
ABoy. See Athboy.
Achill Islands, by the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Achonry, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Slego, and B. of Leney; Lon. 9. 12. Lat. 53. 58.
Agher, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Ty|rone, and B. of Clogher; Lon. 7. 44. Lat. 54. 25.
Allin, a Bog in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare.
Allyn, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim.
Annagh, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of

Cavan, and B. Tullagarvy; Lon. 7. 46. Lat. 54. 5.
Annagh, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Upper Evagh; Lon. 6. 46. Lat. 54. 19.
Antrim, a County in the P. of Ulster.
Antrim, a Barony, and Town, in the County of Antrim; Lon. 6. 46. Lat. 54. 45.
Archdale, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Eermenagh, and B. of Lurge; Lon. 8. 14. Lat. 54. 28.
Arcklow, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow; Lon. 6. 35. Lar, 52. 41.
Ardagh, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Longford; Lon. 8. 8. Lat. 53. 34.
Ardagh, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. and B. of Letrim; Lon. 8. 22. Lat. 53. 56.
Ardagh, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Slane; Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 53. 54.
Ardagh, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Corke, and B. of Carbury; Lon. 9. 16. Lat. 51. 32.
Ardbracan, a Town in the P. Munster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Navan; Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 53. 38.
Ardee. See Atherdee.
Ardfeart, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Kerry, and B. of Klanmore; Lon. 10. 54. Lat. 52. 9.

Ardmagh. See Armagh.
Ards, a Bar. in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down.
Armagh, or Ardmagh, a County in the P. of Ulster.
Armagh, a Barony, and Town in the C. of Armagh; Lon. 7 12. Lat. 54. 20.
Armoy, or Earmoy, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Arra, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Arran, a Barony, and Isles, in the P. of Con|naught, and C. of Gallway.
Arthy, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Kildare, and B. of Noragh and Reban; Lon. 7. 28. Lat 52. 55.
Askeaton, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Limrick and B. of Clonello, Lon. 9. 20. Lat. 52. 26.
Athboy, or Aboy, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Lune; Lon. 7. 24. Lat. 53. 36.
Athdora, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Limrick and B. of Coshma; Lon. 9. 7. Lat. 52. 24.
Athenree, or Aterith, a Barony and Town in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway; Lon. 9. 4. Lat. 53. 50.
Atherdee, or Ardee, a Barony and Town in the P. of Connaught and C. of Roscommon, Lon  3. Lat. 53. 50.
Athlone, a Barony and Town in the P. of Connauht, and C. of Roscommon; Lon. 8. 25. Lat. 53. 21.

Aerith. See Athenree.
Avenmore.  See Black-water.
Awiduduff. See Black-water.
Awn, a Town in Munster. See Emly.


B.
BAllageen, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Ballanalie, in Longford. See St. Iohnstown.
Balleck, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Fermanagh, and B. of Lurge, Lon. 8 39. Lat. 54. 24.
Balliadem, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Queen's County.
Balliboy, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and King's County.
Ballibrit, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and King's County, Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 52. 55.
Ballicora, a Town in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke, and B. of Imokilly, Lon. 8. 25. Lat. 51. 47.
Ballicowen, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and King's County.
Ballimore, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon.
Ballimore, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Ballimore, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of West-Meath, and B. of Rathconrath, Lon. 8. 10. Lat. 53. 25.

Ballinananen. a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Ballinasloe, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Roscommon, and B. of Moycarne, Lon. 8. 42. Lat. 53. 14.
Ballinekill, a Town in the P. of Leinster, Queen's County, and B. of Cullinagh, Lon. 7. 42. Lat. 52. 48.
Ballinetur, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow.
Ballintaber, a Brony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon.
Ballishannon, or Bellishannon, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and B. of Tyre|bugh, Lon. 8. 44. Lat, 54. 23.
Ballrudery, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Dublin.
Balltinglass, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wicklow, and B. of Talbotstown, Lon. 7. 6. Lat. 52. 53.
Baltimore, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 32. Lat. 51. 17.
Bande, a River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Bandonbridge, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Kineameaky, Lon. 8. 56. Lat. 51. 36.
Bangor, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Ards, Lon. 6. 13. Lat. 54. 44.
Bankaule, a Castle on the P. of Connaught,

C. of Thomond, and B. of Banrathy, Lon. 9. 00. Lat. 52. 35.
Bannaher, a Town in the P. of Leinster, King's County, and B. of Garri-Castle, Lon. 8. 24. Lat. 53. 5.
Bannae, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Sheilbourne, Lon. 7. 5. Lat. 59. 9.
Bannae, a River in the P. of Ulster.
Bantry, a Barony, Bay, and Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork and Desmond, Lon. 9. 40. Lat. 51. 31.
Bantry, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Bargie, another Barony in the same County.
Barretz, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Barrimore, another in the same County.
Barrow, a River in the P. of Leinster.
Bear, a Barony, Town, and Isle on the P. of Munster, C. of Cork and Desmond, the Town stands, Lon. 10. 4. Lat. 51. 20.
Belfast, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim, Lon. 6. 28. Lat. 54. 38.
Ballishannon, see Ballishannon.
Belturbet, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Cavan, and B. of Loughte, Lon. 7. 54. Lat. 54. 6.
Binburg, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Tyrone, and B. of Dungannon, Lon. 7. 27. Lat. 54. 23.

Bir, a Town in the P. of Leinster, King's C. and B. of Eglish, Lon. 8. 22. Lat. 53. 00.
Blackwater, Awiduffe, or Avenmore, a River in the P. of Munster.
Blackwater, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone.
Blackwater, a River in the P. of Leinster, in the C. of East-Meath.
Blany-Castle, in the P. of Ulster, C. of Mo|noghan, and B. of Cremorne, Lon. 7. 13. Lat. 54. 7.
Blessinto, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wicklow, and B. of Talbotstone, Lat. 7. 2. Lat. 53. 8.
Bloemy, or Slew , a Mountain in the . of Leinster, and Queen's County.
Boile, see Boyle.
Boylalagh and Bagh, a Barony in the P. of lster, and C. of Dunnagal.
Boyle, or Boile, a Barony and Tow in the  of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon, Lon. 8. 6. Lat. 53. 54.
Boyne, a River in the P. of Leinster.
Burdale, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. f Dunnagal.
Burithoole, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, nd C. of Mayo.
Burrin, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and . of Thomond.



C.
CAlebeg, see Kilbeg.
Callen, a Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny, Lon. 7. 46. Lat. 52. 25.
Cam-Owen, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone.
St. Canice, a Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny, Lon. 7, 42. Lat. 52. 36.
Cara, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego.
Carbury, or Carbree, a Barony, and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare, Lon. 7 20. Lat. 53. 22.
Carbury, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Carbuy, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego.
Carichdrumrusk, a Town in the P. of Con|naught, and C. and B. of Letrim, Lon. 8. 36. Lat. 53. 52.
Carrickfergus, or Knockfergus, a Barony, and Town on the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim, Lon. 6. 24. Lat. 54. 57.
Carick Mac-Griffin, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Iffa and Ossa, Lon. 7. 44. Lat. 52. 15.
Carlingford, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of

Louth, and B. of Dundalk, Lon. 6. 43. Lat. 54. 4
Carne-Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Antri and B. of Glenarm. Lon. 6. 30. Lat. 54. 57.
Carrigallen, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim.
Cari-Castle, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and King's County.
Cashell, or Cassels, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Middletherd, Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 52. 23.
Cashen, a River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Cassels, see Cashell.
Castel-Connor, in the P. of Connaught, C. of Slego, and B. of Tyreragh, Lon. 9. 38. Lat. 54. 3.
Castello, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Castlebar, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Mayo, and B. of Corrah, Lon. 9. 47. Lat. 53. 46.
Castlehaven, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 22. Lat. 51. 22.
Castleknock, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Dublin.
Castlemain, an Harbour in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Castle-Raghen, a Barony, and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Cavan, Lon. 7. 42. Lat. 53. 48.
Castlereagh, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down.

Catherlagh, or Caterlagh, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Catherlagh, a Barony, and Town in the C. of Catherlagh, Lon. 7. 18. Lat. 52. 46
Cavan, or Cavon, a County in the P. of Ulster.
Cavan, a Town in the C. of Cavan, and B. of Loughte, Lon. 7. 52. Lat. 53. 58.
Charlemont, a Town in rhe P. of Ulster, C. of Armagh, and B. of Onealan, Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 54. 26.
Charleville, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Corke, and B. of. Ossery, Lon. 9. 2. Lat. 52. 13.
Cilly, a Lake in the P. of Connaught. and C. of Slego.
Clamine, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Sheilbourne, Lon. 7. 5. Lat. 52. 13.
Clanderlag, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Thomond.
Clanvilliam, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick.
Clare County, see Thomond.
Clare, a Town in Thomond, in the B. of I|slands, Lon. 9. 22. Lat. 52. 42.
Clare, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Clogher, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ul|ster, and the C. of Tyrone, Lon. 7. 44. Lat. 54. 23.
Clonawly, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Clonchy, a Bar. in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Cavan.

Clonefeart, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Gallway, and B. of Longford, Lon. 8. 32. Lat. 53. 15.
Clonello, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick.
Clonemorris, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Clonish, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Mo|noghan, and B. of Dartree, Lon. 7. 45. Lat. 54. 18.
Clonlisk, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and King's County.
Clon Mac Owen, a Barony in the P. of Con|naught, and C. of Gallway.
Clonmell, or Clommell, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Iffa and Ossa, Lon. 8. 00. Lat. 52. 15.
Clonomoghan, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Cavan.
Clonwilliam, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Clorne, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Letrim, and B. of Mohill, Lon. 8. 18. Lat. 53. 46.
Cloyne, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Imokilly, Lon. 8. 19. Lat. 51. 43.
Clunlona, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West Meath.
Colerain, a Barony, and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry, Lon. 7. 17. Lat. 55. 7.
Comsey, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.

Condon, or Clongibbon, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and County of Cork.
Conn, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Connagh, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick.
CONNAUGHT, one of the Four Pro|vinces in Ireland.
Connel, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare.
Connor, a Town in the P. of Ulster in the C. and B. of Antrim, Lon. 6. 47. Lat. 54. 48.
Coolavan, a Barony in the P. of Connaught and C. of Slego.
Coole, a Barony in the P. of Ulster and C. of Fermanagh.
Cooleck, a Barony in the P. of Leinster and C. of Dublin.
Cooles-town, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Kings-County.
Cockagvinie, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Corke, a County on the P. of Munster.
Corke, a Town in the County of Corke, Lon. 8. 48. Lat. 51. 44.
Corkery, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Corrah, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Corrau, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego.

Corrib, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C of Gallway.
Cosbrid, a Barony in the P. of Munstea nd C. of Waterford.
Coshmas and Coshlea, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limerick.
Coshmore, a Barony in the P. Munster, and C. of Waterford.
Cranagh, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.
Cremorne, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Monoghan.
Crom-castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Ferma|nagh, and B. of Coole, Lon. 7. 56. Lat. 54. 20.
Cullinagh, a Barony in P. of Leinster, and Queens County.
Culmor-Fort by Londonderry.
Cumber, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Londonderry, and B. of Tyrekeri, Lon. 7. 47. Lat. 54. 52.
Curlew-Hills in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon.


D.
DArtree, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Monoghan.
Deece, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath.

Delyn, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Decureagh, a Lake in the same County.
Derg, a Lake made by Shannon, between the C. of Gallway, Tipperary and Thomond.
Derg, a Lake in the P. of Ulster in the C. of Dunnagall, from whence comes a River called Derg, in Tyrone.
Deseese, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Waterford.
Desmond, a County in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Disnie, a River in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.
Dingle, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Kerry, and B. of Corkagvinie, Lon. 10. 35. Lat. 51. 59.
Doghead, a Cape in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Doonkillin, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Doore, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagall.
Down, a County in the P. of Ulster.
Down, a Town in the same County in the B. of Lekeale, Lon. 6. 14. Lat. 54. 24.
Downamore, a Barony in the P. of Con|naught, and C. of Gallway.
Drogheda, or Tredah, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Louth, and B. of Ferrard, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 53. 42.

Dromore, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down and Low-Evagh, Lon. 6. 42. Lat. 54. 27.
Dss, a River in the P. of Connaught, and O Thomond.
n, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dn and B. of Castlereagh, Lon. 6. 28. Lat. 54. 36.
Drum, a Town in the P. of Connaught, in the C. of Roscommon, and B. of Athlone, Lon. 8. 30. Lat. 53. 17.
Drumhaire, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim.
Drummeragh. See Omagh.
Dublin, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Dublin, a Town in the same County, in the B. of Newcastle, Lon. 6. 43. Lat. 53. 20.
Duffe, a River in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim.
Dufferin, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Down.
Duleck, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and County of East-Meath, Lon. 6. 51. Lat. 53. 38.
Duncannon. See Dung-cannon.
Dundalk, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Louth, Lon. 6. 55. Lat. 54. 2.
Dundrum, a Town and Bay in the P. of Ul|ster, C. of Down, and B. of Kilnelearty, Lon. 6. 22. Lat. 54. 20.
Dungannon, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone, Lon. 7. 18. Lat. 54. 28.

Dungarvan, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Waterford, and B. of Desees, Lon. 7. 51. Lat. 51. 58.
Dungcannon, or Duncannon, a Fort in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Sheilbourne, Lat. 7. 13. Lat. 52. 8.
Dunhallo, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Dunkeron, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Dunluce, a Barony and Castle in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim, Lon. 7. 16. Lat. 55. 12.
Dunmanus-Bay in the P. of Munster, and C. of Coke.
Dunnagall, or Tirconnel, a County in the B. of Ulster.
Dunnagall, a Town in the same County, in the B. of Tyrebugh, Lon. 8. 38. Lat. 54. 33.


E.
EAst-Meath, a County in the P. of Lein|ster.
Eglish, a Barony and Town in the P. of Lein|ster, and Kings-County, Lon. 8. 18. Lat. 53. 4.
Eliogarthy, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Elphin, a Town in the P. of Connaught, and C. and B. of Roscommon, Lon. 8. 40. Lat. 53. 45.

Emly, or Awn, a Town in the P. of Mn|ster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Clonwilliam, Lon. 8. 42. Lat. 52. 20.
Enishlaveg, a Lake in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry.
Enishowen, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagall.
Eniskilling, or Inskilling, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Fermanagh, and B. of Tereke|nedy, Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 54. 17.
Enish-town, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Thomond, and B. of Islands, Lon. 9. 24. Lat. 52. 43.
Earne, a Lake in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Erris, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Evagh, Upper and Lower, two Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down.
Evagh, Mountains in the B. of Upper Evagh in the C. of Down.


F.
FAbill, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Fairhead, a Cape in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim.
Farmanagh. See Fermanagh.

Farny Donaghn, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. or Mnagh
Fartin, a River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Fassadinig, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.
Fearnes, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Scarewalsh, Lon. 16. 46. Lat. 52. 35.
Fermanagh. or Farmanagh, a C. in the P. of Ulster.
Ferns. See Fearnes.
Ferrard, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Louth.
Fethard, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Sheilbourne, Lon. 7. 10. Lat. 52. 8.
Fethard, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Middlethird, Lon. 8. 2. Lat. 52. 22.
Fewes, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh.
Fini, a Lake and River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagal.
Foore, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Fourth, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Foyle, a Lake and River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry.

Freath, a Castle in the P. of Connaught, C. of Thomond and B. of Ibrickan, Lon. 9. 51. Lat. 52. 43.
Furtullagh, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.


G.
GAlleacliff, a Castle in the P. of Connaught, in the C. of Slego, and B. of Carbuy, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 54. 16.
Gallen, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Gallen, or Slew-Gallen Hills, in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone.
Gallway, a County in the P. of Connaught.
Gallway, a Town in the same County, the B. of Doonkillin, Lon. 9. 29. Lat. 53. 10.
Gally, a River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Gallmoy, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.
Garde, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego.
Geshill, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Kings-County.
Glanaraghty, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Glandagh, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagal.

Glaneherg, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Waterford.
Glaslogh, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Monoghan, and B. of Trough, Lon. 7. 26. Lat. 54. 18.
Glenarm, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim, Lon. 6. 36. Lat. 55. 3.
Gory, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Gowran, a Barony and Town in the P. of Lein|ster, and C. of Kilkenny, Lon. 7. 22. Lat. 52. 34.
Granard, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Long ford.
Grean-Lake, or Bay in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Gualty Mountains, in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Gyll, a River in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.


H.
HAnnel, a Lake in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Hillsburough, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Castlereagh, Lon. 6. 53. Lat. 54. 42.
Holywood, a Town in the same County, and Barony, Lon. 6. 23. Lat. 54. 42.
Horrib, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.

Hoyle, a Lake in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Humes, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Fer|managh, and B. of Magherboy, Lon. 8. 17. Lat. 54. 18


I.
IAmes-Town in the P. of Connaught, and C. and B. of Letrim. Lon. 8. 31. Lat. 53. 50.
Ibecon, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, an C. of Kilkenny.
Ibrickan, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of .
Ida, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.
Ine, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Catherlagh.
Iffa and Ossa. a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Ikeathy, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kidare.
Ikerin, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Ileagh, a Barony in the same County.
Imokilly, a Barony in the P. of Muster, and C. of Cork.
, an Isle in the P. of Ulster, and C. o Dunnagal in the Lou-Swilly.
Inchiquin, a Barony in the P. of Connaught and C. of .

Inishcorthy, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Scarewalsh, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 52. 27.
Inishteige, a Town in the P. of Leinster C. of Kilkenny, and B. of Gowran, Lon. 7. 19. Lat. 52. 24.
Iniskilling, or Inskilling. See Eniskilling.
Inny, a River in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Inny, a River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Inskilling, or Iniskilling. See Eniskilling.
St. Iohns Cape in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagal.
St. Iohns Point, a Cape in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down.
St. Iohns Town, or Ballanalie, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Longford, and B. of Granard, Lon. 8. 9. Lat. 53. 41.
St. Iohns Town, or Tabone, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and B. of Enish-Owen, Lon. 8. 5. Lat. 54. 53.
Iraghticcoor, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Iveragh, a Barony in the same County.
Iverk, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.



K.
KElls, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 7. 2. Lat. 53. 42.
Kells, a Barony and Town in the P. of Lein|ster, and C. of Kilkenny, Lon. 3. 6. Lat. 52. 27.
Kells, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. and B. of Antrim, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 54. 49.
Kelly, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Corke, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 5. Lat. 51. 56.
Kenoght, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry.
Kenry, a Barony in the P. of Muuster, and C. of Limrick.
Kerry, a County in the P. of Munster.
Key, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon.
Kilbeg, or Calebeg, a Town and Bay in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and B. of Boylagh, and Bannogh, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 54. 33.
Kilbegs, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Kells, Lon. 7. 20. Lat. 53. 46.
Kilcours, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Kings-County.
Kiloare, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Kildare, a Town in the C. of Kildare, and B. of Ophally, Lon. 7. 24. Lat. 53. 8.

Kileagh. a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare.
Kilkenny, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Kilkenny, a Barony and Town in the same County, Lon. 8. 18. Lat. 53. 24.
Killala, or Killalow, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Mayo, and B. of Tyrawly, Lon. 9. 44. Lat. 54. 7.
Killalow, or Labu, a Town in the P. of Con|naught, C. of Thomond, and B. of Tullagh, Lon. 8. 51. Lat. 52. 32.
Killbegan, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of West-Meath, and B. of Moycashel, Lon. 71 57. Lat. 53. 18.
Kilconnell, and Killehare, Baronies in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Killglass, a Town in the P. of Connanght, C. of Slego, and B. of Tyreragh, Lon. 2. 33. Lat. 54. 8.
Killileagh, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Dufferin, Lon. 6. 13. Lat. 54. 27.
Killmackrena, a Barony and Town in the C. of Dunnagal, Lon. 8. 22. Lat. 54. 56.
Killmain, a Barony in the P. of Connaught; and C. of Mayo.
Killmallock, a Town in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick, Lon. 8. 53. Lat. 52. 15.
Killonway, and Killultagh, Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim.
Killmare, a Bay and River in the P. of Mun|ster, and C. of Kerry.

Kilmore, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Cavan, and B. of Loughte, Lon. 7. 55. Lat. 53. 56.
Kilmore, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Deece, Lon. 7. 10. Lat. 52. 27.
Killnaloug, and Kilnamama, Baronies in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Kilnatalloon, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Kiltarton, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Kinalea, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Kinalearty, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down.
Kineleatmeatry, a Barony in the P. of Mun|ster, and C. of Corke.
Kingsale, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Corke, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 8. 44. Lat. 51. 33.
Kings Coun, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Kings-Town. See Philips-Town.
Klanmrris, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Kerry.
Klonekelly, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Knock fergus. See Carick fergus.
Knockninie, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Knocktopher, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny, Lon. 7 36. Lat. 52. 24.



L.
LAgen-Water, a Kiver iu the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dwn.
Laglit. See Loughlin.
Lamnevaddy, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Londonderry, and B. of Kenoght, Lon. 7. 3. Lon. 55. 3
Lanesburough, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Longford, and B. of Rathliu, Lon. 8. 28. Lat. 53. 34.
Leane, a Lake and River in the P. of Mun|ster, and C. of Kerry.
Leane, a Cape in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Thomond.
Lee, a River in the P. of Munster.
LEINSTER, or Lemster, one of the four Provinces in Ireland.
Lekeale, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and  of Down.
Lemster. See Leinster.
Leney, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, a C of Slege.
Letrim, a County in the P. of Connaught.
Letrim, a Barony and Town in Letrim Lon. 8. 34. Lat. 53. 54.
Letrim, a Barony and Town in the P. of , and C. of Gallway, Lon. 8. 5. La. 

Letrim, a River in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow.
Liffe, a River in the P. of Leinster.
Lifford, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunagal, and B. of Raphoe, Lon. 8. 5. Lat. 54. 47.
Limrick, Limerick, or Lymrick, a County in the P. of Munster.
Limrick, a Barony and Town in Limrick, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 52. 32.
Lisborn, or Lisnagarve, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Killultagh, Lon. 6. 36. Lat. 54. 33.
Lislea, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Mo|ghan and B. of Dartree, Lon. 7. 39. Lat. 54. 7.
Lismore, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Waterford, and B. of Cmore, Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 52. 1.
Lismore, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Cvan and B. of , Lon. 7. 5 Lat. 53. 55.
Lisnagarve, or Lisnagrave. See Lisborn.
Legll, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Armagh, and B. of Onealan, Lon. 7. 11. Lat. 54. 25.
Leghinshlm, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londnderry.
Londondrry, or Colerain, a County in the P. of Ulster.
Londonderry, a Town in the same County, and B. of Tyrekeri, Lon. 7 55. Lat. 54. 57.
Longford, a County in the P. of Leinster.

Longford, a Barony and Town in the same County, Lon. 8. 17. Lat. 53. 39.
Longford, a Barony in the P. of Connaught and C. of Gallway.
Longford Fort in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Slewverdagh Compsrey, Lon. 8. 00. Lat. 52. 35.
Loughlin, or Laglin, two Towns in the P. of Leinster, C. of Catherlagly, and B. of Idrone; one Lon. 7. 24. Lat. 52. 40. the other Lon. 7. 18. Lat. 52. 38.
Louth, or Lough, a County in the P. of Ulster.
Louth, a Barony and Town in the same County, Lon. 7. 5. Lat. 53. 57.
Lune, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath.
Lymrick or Limerick. See Limrick.


M.
Mkeen, a Lake in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermangh.
Maghere, and Magherely, Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Maghie, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of .
Mine, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of .

Majo. See Mayo.
, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Mallo, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Corke, and B. of Mallo, Lon. 8. 54. Lat. 51. 58.
Mayo, or Majo, a County in the P. of Con|naught.
Mayo, or Moy, a Town in the C. of Mayo, and B. of Trawly, Lon. 9. 40. Lat. 54. 7.
Maiburrough, or Queens-Town, a Town in the P. of Leinster, and Queens-County, Lon. 7. 43. Lat. 52. 57.
Mayre-Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Ar|magh, and B. of a Orior, Lon. 6. 51. Lat. 54. 5.
Meath, a Province now joined to Leinster.
Melvie, a Lake in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Middleihird, two Baronies in the P. of Mun|ster, one in Tipperar, the other in Waterford.
Missenhead, a Cape in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Mihill, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim.
Molingar, or Mllengar, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath, Lon. 7. 50. Lat. 53. 27.
Mety, a Bog in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Monjoy, or Munjoy, a Fort in the P. of Ulster, C. of Tyrone, and B. of Danganon, Lon. 7. 11. Lat. 54. 33.

Monoghan, a County in the P. of Ulster.
Monoghan, a Barony and Town in the same County, Lon. 7. 27, Lat. 54. 14.
Moourne, a Barony and Mountain in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down.
Morgith, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Mounster. See Munster.
Moy, a River in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo; for the Town of Mayo, see Mayo.
Moycashell, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Moyearne, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon.
Moycullen, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Moydoe, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Longford.
Moyr-Gallen, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath.
Motsarta, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Thomond.
Moysenragh, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath.
Mullengar. See Molingar.
Mullin, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Catherlagh.
MUNSTER, or Mounster, one of the four Provinces in Ireland.
Muskery, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork.



N.
NAas, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare, Lon. 7. 9. Lat. 53. 12.
Navan, a Barony and Town in the P. of Lein|ster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 7. 11. Lat. 53. 37.
Neagh, a Lake in the P. of Ulster.
Neury, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Upper Evagh, Lon. 8. 50. Lat. 54. 12.
Neury, a Water, a River in Down and Armagh.
New-Castle, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Dublin, Lon. 6. 59. Lat. 53. 17.
Newer. See Nuer.
New-Town, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Ards, Lon. 6. 15. Lat. 54. 38.
Noragh and Reban, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare.
Nuer, or Newer, a River in the P. of Leinster.
North-Cape in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal.


O.
Old-Fleet, an Harbour in the P. of Ulster' and C. of Antrim.

Oldhead, a Cape in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Omagh, or Drummaragh, a Town and Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone, Lon. 7, 49. Lat. 54. 33.
Onealan, a Barony in Armagh, in the P. of Ulster.
Ophally, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare.
Orior, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh.
Ormond Upper and Lower, Baronies in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Orrery and Kilmore, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Corke.
Ossery, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Queens-County.
Owen-Nassa a River in the same County.
Owny, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Onheg, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick.


B.
PAtrick, or Knock Patrick, a Mountain in the P. of Munster, and C. of Eimrick.
St. Patrick's Purgatory in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and B. of Tyregh.

Phillipston, or Kings-Town, a Town and Ba|rony in the P. of Leinster, and Kings-County, Lon. 7. 45. Lat. 53. 15.
Philipston, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Louth, and B. of Dundalk Lon. 7. 5. Lat. 54. 3
Poe Water, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone.
Port-Arlinton, a Town in the P. of Leinster, Queens County, and B. of Portneh Inch, Lon. 7. 39. Lat. 53. 7.
Portneh Inch, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Queens County.
Portumny, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Gallway, and B. of Letrim, Lon. 8. 3. Lat. 52. 59.


Q.
QUeens County, a County in the P. o Leinster.
Queens-Town, or Mariburrough, a Town in the same County, Lon. 7. 43. Lat. 52. 57.


R.
RAphoe, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and County of Dunnagal on. 8. 13. Lat. 54. 8.

Rathconrath, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Rathdown, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklw and Dublin, Lon. 6. 35. Lat. 53. 9.
Rachbin, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Longford.
Ratooth, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 6. 54. Lat. 53. 28.
Ravilly, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Catherlagh.
Redboy, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Antrim, and B. of Glenarm, Lon. 6. 45. Lat. 55. 7.
Ree, a Lake made by the Shannon, between Connaught and Leinster.
Rinbane, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Antrim, and B. of Ballycarie, Lon. 7. 00. Lat. 55. 15.
Roe, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Lon|donderry, and B. of Colerain, Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 55. 2.
Roo-Water, a River in the same County.
Rosologher, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim.
Roscommon, a County in the P. of Con|naught.
Roscommon, a Barony and Town in that County, Lon. 8. 42. Lat. 53. 32.
Rosse, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.

Rosse, or New Rosse, a Town, in the P of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Bantry, Lon. 7. 16. Lat. 52. 18.
Rosse, a Town en the P. of Munster, C. of Corke, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 13. Lat. 51. 24.
Rosse, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Slego, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 5. Lat. 54. 14.
Rosse, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Mayo, and B. of Corrah, Lon. 9. 38. Lat. 53. 38.


S.
SAlt, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare.
Scarewalth, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Sewer, or Shower. See Shure.
Shannon, a great River between Connaught, Munster, and Leinster.
Sheilbourne, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Shel Aby, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow.
Shellilogher, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.
Shelmaleire, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Shower, or Sewer. See Shure.
Shrowle, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Longford.

Shure, Sower, or Shower, a River in the P. of Munster.
Sillin, a Lake in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
Skreene, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 7. 7. Lat. 53. 34.
Slane. See Urren.
Slane, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 7. 4. Lat. 53. 42.
Slego, a County in the P. of Connaught.
Slego, a Town in that County, and B. of Carbuy, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 54. 13.
Slew Margie, a B. in the P. of Leinster, and Queens-County.
Slewwardagh, a Barony in the P. of Munster and C. of Tipperary.
Smale-County, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limerick.
Strabane, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone, Lon. 8. 4. Lat. 54. 46.
Stradbally, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Queens-County.
Strandmore-Bay in the P. of Munster, and C. of Waterford.
Strangford, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Lekeale, Lon. 6. 14. Lat. 54. 24.

Streamston, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of West-Meath, and B. of Moycashell, Lon. 8. 2. Lat. 53. 22.
Suck a River in Connaught, between Gallway and Roscommon.
Swilly, a River and Bay in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagal.
Swinzado, a Castle in the same County, and B. of Boylagh and Bannogh, Lon. 8. 56. Lat. 54. 52.
Swords, a Town in the P. of Leinster C. of Dublin, and B. of Cross, Lon. 6. 43. Lat. 53. 28.


T.
TAbone. See St. Iohnstown in Dunnagal.
Taghmon, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Shelmaliere, Lon. 6. 58. Lat. 52. 17.
Talbotston, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow, Lon. 6. 59. Lat. 52. 54.
Tallagh, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Waterford, and B. of Cosbrid, Lon. 8. 16. Lat. 51. 56.
Tanragoes, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh.
Tarmon, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Fermanagh, and B. of Lurge, Lon. 8. 21. Lat. 54. 27.

Temoleague, a Town and Haven in the P. of Munster, C. of Corke, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 8. 57. Lat. 51. 27.
Terconnel. See Dunnagal.
Terdkenedy, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Thomastown, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C, of Kilkenny, and B. of Gowran, Lon. 7. 28. Lat. 52. 26.
Thomond, or Clare, a County in the P. of Connaught.
Thurles, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Eliogurty, Lon. 8. 9. Lat. 52. 55.
Tiaquin, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gllway.
Tipperary, a Counry in the P. of Mun|ster.
Tiraghill, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Sligo.
Tirconnel, or Terconnel. See Dunnagal,
Tir-Oen. See Tyrone.
Tam. See Tuam.
Tome, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ul|ster, and C. of Antrim, Lon. 7. 3. Lat. 54. 45.
Towrany, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh.
Trally, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Kerry, and B. of Trughenackmy, Lon. 9. 58. Lat. 52. 7.
Tredagh. See Drogheda.

Trim, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Navan, Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 53. 33.
Trough, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Monoghan.
Trughenackmy, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry.
Tuam, or Toam, a Town in the P. of Con|naught, C. of Gallway, rnd B. of Downamore, Lon. 9. 18. Lat. 53. 24.
Tullagarvy, and Tullagha, Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Cavan.
Tullagh, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Thomond.
Tullahonoho, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Cavan.
Tully-Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Ferma|nagh. and B. of Maghereboy, Lon. 8. 21. Lat 54. 22.
Tullymor, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Upper Evagh, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 54. 18.
Tulsk, a Town in the P. of Connaught, and C. and B. of Roscommon, Lon. 8. 42. Lat. 53. 44.
Tyan, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh.
Tyrawly, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Tyrehugh, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagal.

Tyrekeri, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry.
Tyreragh, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and the C. of Slego.
Tyrone, or Tir-Oen, a County in the P. of Ulster.


U.
ULSTER, one of the four Provinces in Ire|land.
Upperthird, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Waterfore.
Urrin, or Slane, a River in the P. of Lein|ster.


W.
WArrenston, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Kings-County.
Waterford, a County in the P. of Munster.
Waterford, a Town in the same County, Lon. 7. 27. Lat. 52. 10.
West-Meath, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Wexford, or Weesford, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Wexford, a Town in the same County, and B. of Shelmalcire, Lon. 6. 46. Lat. 52. 19.

Wicklow, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Wicklow, a Town in the same County, and B. of Arklow, Lon. 6. 30. Lat. 52. 57.


Y.
YOughill, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Corke, and B. of Imokilly, Lon. 8. 7. Lat. 51. 48.
Youghill, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Arra, Lon. 8. 44. Lat. 52. 47.

FINIS.





