




A SERMON Preached on the 29^t^h of May 1661.
THE DAY OF His MAIESTIE'S BIRTH, AND HAPPY RESTAVRATION, After along Exile, to His CROWN and KINGDOME.
Before His EXCELLENCY VVILLIAM L^d MARQVIS of NEWCASTLE. at his House of WELBECK.
By CLEMENT ELLIS M. A. Houshold Chaplain to his EXCELLENCY.
OXFORD, Printed by Henery Hall Printer to the University, for Edward and Iohn Forrest, 1661.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY VVILLIAM L^d MARQVIS OF NEW-CASTLE, PRIVY COUNCELLOUR TO HIS MAIESTY, c.
My most Noble Lord and Patron.
May it please your EXCELLENCY,
_THe Duty which I owe, first unto GOD, as his Mi|nister, then to my SOVERAIGN, as his Subject, and in the next place to Your EXCEL|LENCY,

as Your Domestick Chap|lain, made the threefold cord where|by I found my self indispensibly obliged, to contribute that little I was able, towards the Solemnity of that memorable and happyest Day, which this poor Kingdome hath in many yeares beheld. And having, after my weak manner, preach'd this plain and short Sermon, which had then Your Excellency's approbation, and (I hope) since GOD's pardon for my failings there|in; I had very well satisfied my self; as I shall alwayes have great reason to doe, when by serving GOD, I can please Your EXCEL|LENCY. I confesse, I then understood no obligation that lay

upon me to doe, what now I am commanded to doe, to preach it o|ver again this Second time to the VVorld; beeing (I blesse GOD for it) yet uninfected with that ambitious itch of making my self known abroad, and loving to be gazed upon, as some-body by the Multitude. 'Tis very fitt that they, and onely they, should wear great names, who have great meritts to support them; and that they alone should be permitted to praesent their labours to the publike eye, whose great abilities, by being so made manifest, may become more instrumentall to the publike Good: But (My LORD) Your HO|NOUR seem'd very well to un|derstand

the' extent of that Talent wherewith GOD hath intrusted mee, when You presented mee to the charge of my little Flock in the Country; but too much to value it, when You committed to mee that other of Your Family: being thus en|tertain'd and employ'd, I need not seek abroad for more worke or more honour: and therefore (My LORD) that I now expose this rude piece,  my selfe with it, to the forward cen|sures of all that see it, it is a piece of meer Obedience to Your EXCEL|LENCYS expresse, and indeed, importunate Commands: I alwayes resolving, soe farre as they are Iust (and I know they will ever be most exactly so) rather to suffer by them, then to disobey them.

I have often heard Your EX|CELLENCY, and My Lord, (would it signifie any thing to say what pleased mee) I would say, with much pleasure I have hearken'd to You, discoursing of that satisfa|ction You reap'd, from that sweet privacy and retirement his MA|IESTY is pleased to grant Your LORD-SHIP here in the Coun|try, where You live free from the Noise and Cumbrance of Court and Citty. Indeed, the greatest reward his MAIESTY can possibly re|compense Your matchlesse services withall, is thus to bestow YOUR-SELF upon YOUR-SELF; and I know You think it greater hap|pinesse to enjoy My LORD

MARQVIS of NEW CASTLE at WELBECK, then all the Offi|ces and Honours which your exem|plary Loyalty has meritted: And there's all the reason in the VVorld for it, that Hee who hath so Nobly sacrificed the Fairest of his Yeares, and the Amplest of his Revenues, to the service of his King and Country, should now have leave to Conse|crate the remainder to his Health and Quiet. My LORD, could I ever hope to merit of Your EX|CELLENCY, I would not yet leave begging a Favour of the same kind; that, as I have an Ho|nourable place in Your Family, so I might live retiredly from all the world besides. But seeing. (My

LORD) Your commands lye so heavy upon me, I will endeavour to bear them with the best strength I have, and still incourage my selfe with this confidence, that it is all one with Your EXCELLENCY to Command and Patronize: And therefore after others have served in their solemne joyes, with all be|coming State and Magnificence, I hope I may (atleast) obtaine a par|don, If I make bold to drop in, in the Rear, and offer too my poor dish of cold water in the name of a Disciple. Many, 'tis true, goe before mee, and it is very fit they should; Others come with richer cloathing, and finer language, and why not? They that weare soft rayment, and they that speak

soft words too, are in Kings houses. It is the great freedome Your EXCEL|LENCY is pleas'd to indulge me, to speak mine owne sense in mine own words, fully and freely; and I am so much the servant of my greatest Master, that I greedily embrace all the Liberty can be granted mee in this kind. If there be any thing in this short Discourse, disrelishing to the palates of those that read it; it will be enough for mee to tel them, it is a Sermon, and therefore not pur|posely suited to any man's humour: and yet, I will adde; it hath passed Your EXCELLENCY'S ap|probation, and that will be enough to answer whatever may be obje|cted against it. Let men say what

they will, I have abundantly satis|fied my selfe, by praying that all, even they that dispise it (if it be pos|sible) may be better'd by it; and in taking this opportunity of expres|sing my selfe, by this, as by all ho|nest meanes, I shall alwayes labour to doe, My LORD,
Your EXCELLENCY'S most obedient Servant, and Chaplain CLEM. ELLIS.







Psal: CXVIII. v: 22, 23, 24.
v: 22. The stone which the builders refused, is become the Head-stone of the Corner.
23. This is the LORD's doing, and it is marveilous in our Eyes.
24. This is the day which the LORD hath made, we will re|joyce and be glad in it.

_SHould the great GOD forbear to expresse his Goodnes to|wards the sinfull sons of men, 'till man begin to un|derstand what is best for himself; we should soon become all as mi|serable,

as at present we are ignorant; we should die in our sins, and drop into Hell, ere we would understand the happynes of an Heaven, or the lovelinesse of that way which leads unto it. And yet doth our grossest Ignorance fall much short of our per|versenes; what now aggravates our guilt, and (without a timely repentance) will adde to our torments hereafter, is this, that we so often know what we ought to doe, when we yet stubbornly refuse to doe what we know to be our duty. So that if our good GOD did delight only there to shew Mercy, where he meets with meritt, did he not, on the contrary, love to magnifie his Goodnes, by pittying even those, whose dayly busines it has been to provoke his Iustice: Blessings would soone be as rare, as Sins are rife; and Heaven would at last be as empty of men, as Hell is of Saints.
But (Blessed be our Good GOD!) his mercy endureth for ever. The unnaturall sin|ner ever Kicks and spurns at the yerning bowells of a tenderly compassionate Father;

and they onely swell the more, and extend the wider towards the miserable wretch; even so wide, till they reach a Miracle; such a miracle as forceth Stupidity it self into wonder and Admiration; yea such a won|der as cannot contain it self, but suddenly breaks forth into a signall joy, and a solemne thanks-giving. This, and more then all this, we read in the Text.
1. A blessing proffer'd, no sooner proffer'd but rejected, and though rejected, yet sent againe, and that with advantage. The stone which the builders refused is become the Head stone of the Corner.
2. This great mercy thus rejected, and thus returning, is (as it ought to bee) hum|bly acknowledged, highly admired. This is the LORD's doing, and it is marvailous in our Eyes.
3. This great wonder and Humility are seasonably seconded with an Hearty Joy, and Solemne Thangs-giving. This is the day which the LORD hath made, we will rejoyce and be glad in it.

Thus, the Text wants nothing that's fit: for the day, presenting us with a Wonderfull Blessing, an Humble Reception, and a Ioy|full Thanks-giving: In all which we shall. briefly consider, first, the History and the Doctrine; next, the Parallel and the Use.
1. We begin with the great Blessing: con|cerning which, let us enquire, 1. What it was? 2. To whom it was proffer'd? 3. What welcome it found?
1. This Blessing in the Metaphor, is a Stone; in the History, David in the Prophecy, Christ: and whether David; the Type of Christ, or Christ the Seed of David; still wee shall find it a Precious Stone, and a great Blessing.
1. The Stone in the History is David, thatho|ly King, in whose Royall Person most of the Happinesse of the Old,  in whose Heaven|ly Seed all the Happinesse of the New Israel of GOD did consist. David the Author and the Subject of this Gratulatory hymne, an Hymne composed and set for the Solemne Quire of Israel to be sung by them in their

joyfull commemoration of the happy return of God's Anointed, and their long exiled King: He is the stone. A stone hewen out of the rock, by God's own hand; consecrated with the Holy Oyle by God's own Prophet; set apart by God's appointment, to smite down the great Goliah of the Philistines, to dash in pieces the Tyranny of a wicked Saul, to crush to nothing the Enemies of God and of his chosen Israel. A stone fitted and squa|red to be the foundation, and pillar of his Hierusalem, his Sion; solid and firme, such as the hottest fires of Persecution could not crack; nor all the stormes and tempests of Af|fliction impaire; of that weight, and so well fixable, that all the strength and art of Sa|than and his Instruments could not remove or shake it; but still he stood fast, the Foun|dation, the Pillar, the sure stay and support of God's Church and People committed to his Charge. Hee is the stone in the History: which in the Prophecy is.
2. Christ IESVS our Lord, the everlasting seed of David. The sure rock of our Salva|tion.

So He himself applies the text to him|selfe. Math: 21.) and after him, his Apo|stle S^t Peter (1 Pet: 2.) He, who was a stone of stumbling, and a Rock of Offence, to the Iew first, and then to the Gentile; is a most sure hold, and a strong Tower of defence to all those that stedfastly believe in him; the firme and everlasting Foundation of the New Hierusalem: the chief corner-stone, In whom all the building fitly framed together, groweth unto an Holy Temple in the Lord. Ephes: 2. 20.  21. This is the living stone, of which that former was no more but the bare shadow: the stone whereon our Hopes, our Comforts, our present pri|viledges, and our future Inheritance, all are surely founded: the Rock on which, if we be once well bottomed, let the winds blow, and the waves beat, and all these with all the violence they can, yet shall we stand sure and unshaken to all eternity. These be the stones here proffer'd in the Text, David first and afterwards Christ; and (what I would desire you to note) both these Kings

A good King is indeed a most precious stone, the most solid foundation of the Church's peace and the Peopl's happynes: remove this stone, and the whole house comes down upon your head; touch but the Lord's anoin|ted, and you disjoint all, the whole King|dome shatters into confusion; all falls into pieces, and all the wit of man is not able to bind it up again: Proofs and instances of this sad truth we have too many, our own lamentable experience, still fresh in our me|mories, renders all citations of them at pre|sent needlesse: Hereby we have found, that whosoever wildly pushes at these sacred stones, he onely runs his head against an hard Rock, which though he should have the unhappy strength to shake a little, yet he shall be sure withall to dash out his own brains, at lest he must expect to receive such a wound, as cannot easily be healed but he is like to bleed into a too late repentance: He that fights against the powers set up by God, can onely beat the skin off his own fingers. It will be therefore our Prudence as

well as our duty, not to strike with too much violence upon these holy stones, left like men hammering too boldly on a good flint, wee thence produce such a fire as will not again be quenched: Saint Paul dares not warrant so strange a Confidence, when he tels us, (Rom. 13.) They that resist the power shall re|ceive to themselves Damnation. Rather pray we, that we may never come to want such a Stone as God here profer'd in the Text. but,
2. To whom did he proffer it?
Even to those, who wanted not eyes to see it, nor experience to understand the worth and value of it, nor skill sufficient to make a right use of it. David was profer'd, not to the poor rude Israelites, that could not distinguish their right hand from their left, but to the Grandees of Israel, to Saul and his Councellours; whose businesse and Profes|sion it was to deal in such Stones. Our Bles|sed IESVS was profer'd, not onely to a few blind Gentiles, who had all their knowledg but at the second hand; the wonder had

not been great if these had refused what they so little understood; but he was proffer'd to the VVise men and Rulers of the Iews, to the great Maister-builders of that Church, Scribes and Pharisees, Lawyers and Doctors; those that knew the Law, and had read the Prophets, and understood what was fore|told, and prefigured concerning him: whose bare acceptance of him, had been precedent and warrant enough for the Peo|ples Faith; as appears by that question (Iohn 7, 48.) have any of the Rulers or of the Phari|sees believed on him? So would they doubt|lesly have said, Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees received this stone? If they have, then so will we.
This is God's method, he so proffers his great Blessings as to leave the refuser without excuse; to those who best could discerne the worth of it, and therefore should first in all reason have begun to use it, was this Gift proffer'd: lest afterwards they should goe about to excuse themselves with a Non novi|mus, we knew is not: The fittest Blessing to

the fittest persons, the stone to the builders.
3. Lett's now see, what's it's welcome.
Indeed very course and more strange, con|sidering the persons to whom it was prof|fer'd: so foolish were they, or so selfish, or both; they refused it.
1. David is thrust out from the presence of Saul, bannish'd the Land, driven into Caves and Dens, to lead a sad  melanchol|ly life with Bears and Tygres; or at best, a|mongst strangers, too frequently more in|humane and barbarous, then those beasts of prey. He is hunted like a silly partridge upon the Mountains, and no means that a cruell and jealous Saul could invent, left un|attempted, to rid him of his Kingdome and the world at once.
2. And in this particular too, was our Blessed JESVS, very truly the Son of Da|vid. He is refused of his own People and Nation: rejected by the chief Rulers, and High-priests, with aNo King but Caesar:Not this man, but Barabbas. Any murthe|rer, rather then the Lord of life; a bloody

Tyrant, rather then the God of mercies; a|way to the Crosse with him. This is the ve|ry voyce of the builders, No stone of God's squaring for our building, out with it a|mongst the rubbish: Give us rather a Nero, any lump of clay kneeded up in Christian blood: Give us such stones as will admit of no Cement, but what's made of the blood of us and of our Children: that blood which Caesar sheds, be it on the heads of us and ours, but this stone which God would in mercy bestow upon us, be it thrown out in|to the streets, and trampled under our feet forever. This is the language of these prudent builders.
Thus, even thus doe the builders too of|ten prove the unhappy demolishers, and when they should strengthen, rase to the ground the walls of Hierusalem: whilest they lay their own ambition, their Humors, and their Interests, the onely Foundations of all their actions; they are sure to refuse that stone, which is sent down from Heaven. Here's the Wisedome of the Wise, this is the Coun|saile

of the Prudent, when they have not God before their Eyes. The stone is refused, which yet in spite of all their little Policies, and petty devices, shall most certainly return the Head-stone of the building. Which brings us from the Folly and Basenesse of the buil|ders, to the unerring Wisedome, and Con|stant Goodnesse, of God Almighty.
They cast out the stone, God brings it in a|gain, They reject it with scorn, He sets it in with advantage, They refuse it as uselesse, and unfit for any thing, He restores it the Beuty, the strength of the whole Fabrick.
David, after his long and tedious exile, is call'd home again, even by those same per|sons who at first were as ready as any to re|ject him; with the shouts and acclamations of Israal he is welcomed, and made the Glory of that people, and their bulwark, by whom he had been so much sleighted.
And thus was it with the great Rock of our Salvation, after his numerous and grie|vous sufferings, hardly ending in a bitter and a shamefull death; He rose again, and as|cended

into Heaven in Glory and Triumph, and is become the Head of the Universall Church, and the onely Sanctuary those very Enemies who refused him can confide in.
God will have his designe, let man do his worst; he will make all those in his due time to understand their own folly, who would not when they ought, embrace his Counsaile. The stones which He sends are more precious in his eyes then to lye always unreguarded on a Dung|hill: David's Palace and Kingdome shall not forever be a Cave and a wildernesse; Christ's Crown shall not alwaies be made of Thornes; Those Cruell hammerings, and rougher usages, which the despised stone at present undergoes, shall not break and Crush it, but, on the Con|trary, Square and smooth, and polish it, and make it the more serviceable, and fitter for the building; His Enemies at length shall know, that those many torments they barbarously in|flicted on him, shall reflect with doubled force upon themselves; and by a seasonable and un|expected restauration they shall be made to ac|knowledge, that the undeserved exile of their

David, was not the punishment of his Sins, but the greatest curse could be lay'd upon his very Persecutors.
And here, on the one hand, we may clearly be|hold, the folly and blindnesse of worldly men, even of those who would fain be esteem'd the wisest and skilfull'st builders  repairers of a broaken state; on the other hand, the Infinite Wisedome and Providence of God, even in those actions which seem lest considerable to the dim eyes of men. Here we see man's Unworthy|nesse and perversnesse in slighting and refusing the very choisest of God's blessings, there God's Infinite mercy and unalterable Goodnesse in re|doubling his blessings after they have been refused: In short, here's man's impiety in rejecting the stone which God had design'd, and by proffering it, Commended: there's God's Justice in mak|ing that despised stone to become at last, all that he intended it for at first, even the Head-stone of the Corner.
2. Thus are we, from the wonderfull mercy, come to the cheerfull reception thereof. It is received (as so great a blessing ought to be) with an humble

acknowledgement of the Author, with an high ad|miration of the Mercy.
1. This is the Lord's doing: There King David acknowledgeth, and there he would have all those that joyne with him, to acknowledge the Divine Author of this great blessing. To the Ho|nour Glory of his gratious GOD, to the Comfort and Iustification of the late suffering David, to the shame confusion of his once insulting persecutors, he utters it aloudIt is the Lord's doing. The Re|stauration of this Royall person, and in him of Israel's happines, was a work more peculiarly  properly the Lord's whereby he was wo~derfully pleased to exhibit to the world, as it were, under his hand and seal, a most signall testimoniall of David's Just and Righteous cause: Most things He brings to passe by such ordinary  common Instruments, and after so plain and easie a man|ner and method, that, though they be the Lord's doings too, yet the homelinesse of the visible In|strument, together with the frequency of such operations, keep us from taking so much notice of them, as we ought to doe: But such rare and remarkable passages of providence as this was,

cannot goe by us without a due observation, a seasonable wonder, and an humble reflection upon the glorious and Omnipotent agent: If David had yet had any visible meanes left him, of ridding himselfe out of Danger, and attain|ing unto that Crown, which was fitted by God for his head, they would have been lesse apt through the multitude of humane means, to eye the hand of God in his advancement: But that he should be restored even now and thus, whose doing should this be but the LORD's? for
1. Behold the poor exiled Prince, wandering to and fro, in a rude wildernesse, as destitute of all hopes to man's thinking, as of companions: his strength failing him, his lovers and his friends standing aloof from his Soul, many enemies on all sides, and perhaps some few well wishers, but, alas, no helpers:
2. Behold the sweetnesse of his generous  Princely Soul, abhorring to be cruell more then desiring to be King: more delighting in Mercy, and contented in his sufferings, and confiding in his GOD, and reverencing a King, though a Saul, a Tyrant, then to revenge himself, when

GOD had put the life of his Enemies into his hand.
3. Behold his Enemies, for multitude innu|merable, for malice implacable, for Interest insa|tiable; no force could subdue, no Reasons per|swade, no condescensions mollifie, no hopes of a reconciliation or agreement upon terms or arti|cles; so that in the first place to the Glory of the Author we must confesIt was the LORD's doing.
And again, for the Justifying of David's righ|teous cause, and for the abatement of his adver|saries confidence and boasting, he shewes, it was the LORD's doing. Prosperity and Success accompany'd with Oppression and Violence, make but a slender argument, for the Honesty and Innocence of a thriving Tyranny: but a sud|den promotion out of the dust, by an unexpected hand from Heaven, conducting a poore rejected David, through the fury of his Enemies, into the embraces of his friends, fro~ a Cave to a Throne, may beget a very strong perswasion of a Righte|ous cause: when the mouth of the fierce Lyons are closed by a naked Daniel; when the ex|treame raging of a fiery Furnace is still'd and

cool'd at the approach of three fetter'd Inno|cents; when the Bolts fall off, and the doors fly open without a Key or a File, to set the sha|kled Apostles at Liberty; who will not present|ly say, that GOD's favour is Sanctuary enough for an Injured Innocence; his purpose to save, armour enough against man's endeavours to de|stroy; that there is no Policy against Providence, no stratagem against Heaven? Had David by force of armes, with a great Hoste of men enter'd the Land, and so made havock of his Enemies, the residue of them might still have cbeer'd them|selv's up with such hopes as these, that seeing there were yet more men in the world, they might yet come to regain all, as they got it a first, or lost it now, by an arme of flesh. But now when they be|hold the LORD making bare his own arme from Heaven,  shewing himself mindfull of David in his lowest condition, bringing all the subtile devices of the long prosperous sinner to none ef|fect,  without the help of man, even against all the projects of man, restoring his Anointed to his own: how can they chuse, but seeing, be amazed  wonder, be silenced, and condemning them|selves

and their own Folly, with all humility, at least, with shame and confusion of face ac|knowledg, that it is the LORD's doing? and therefore
2. Truly Marveilous in our eyes.
Indeed all the works of GOD, when consi|der'd as they ought to be, are wonders, but such works as this was, the more immediate doings of the LORD, are to be acknowledged above measure wonderfull: Considering
1. The rarity of them, such blessings come not every day, the LORD makes a Day for them, and by them. He is not altogether pro|digall of his Miracles, but reserveth them for speciall occasions, and for great Ends: that he may thereby manifest his power in the weak|nesse of his servant David; and his adversary's weaknesse and folly, in the very height of their policy and Confidence; and the equity of Da|vid's cause in the midst of his Enemies triumph: Ordinarily GOD works by common and known methods, but when such a singular act of Providence, as unusuall and new, as true and effectuall, discovers it selfe to our view, must it not be marveilous in our eyes?

2. Again, when such deliverances are wrought by methods so farre above all, both expectati|ons and Inventions of friends; and not onely so, but above all fears too and preventions of Ene|mies: when so many means formerly, in the eyes of man more likely, had proved utterly in|effectuall; so many endeavours and projects, in the opinion of most men strong and sure, had been altogether quash'd and frustrated; and yet notwithstanding all this, the blessing, when e|ven almost despair'd of, comes at last, and that with interest; it must needs be truly marvellous.
3. Once more, When GOD so works, that man doth not see it, yea even secretly in the hearts of those who do not yet understand it; directing their actions to those very ends which, it may be, they least intended; strangely, and secretly charming the Disobedient into Duty, the Re|bellious into Loyalty: when the promoters of David's exile, are made the main Instruments of his restauration; and all those fretting Shimeies which would still fain curse, can or dare do no|thing but blesse and congratulate: certainly, This must needs be the LORD's doing, and altogether marvailous in our eyes.

And as it was the LORD's doing, thus graci|ously to re-establish, what man had so stubboru|ly and scornfully rejected; so must it too be ac|knowledged his doing, to make these foolish men embrace what the second time he profer'd them. However without all doubt, it is man's duty in receiving the many and great blessings which GOD of his infinite bounty conferres upon him, to look upon them as GOD's doings, not as the rewards  purchases of his own me|rits and endeavours;  withall to admire there|in the Goodnesse, the Power, the Wisdome and Justice of the Author and Donor; all which if we do but see as clearly as we ought and may, we shall not rest'till we break out into an holy Ioy and thanksgiving: after such a mercy and such a wonder, 'twere a greater wonder yet, if Israel should not be Glad and Rejoyce.
3. Which is the third branch of the Text. And truly David was never backwards, nor David's followers, to answer God's miracles of Meroy, with holy returnes of Praise. Whilest the Blessings of GOD, descend upon the wicked as

the dew of Heaven on a dung-hill, begetting nothing but a nauceous stench,  unwholsome weeds; when they meet with a David like the same dew upon a good and pleasant Garden, they produce first a fair Spring-tide of sweet and lovely flowers, and afterwards as full an harvest of sound and wholsome fruits. Good words of Praise, and better workes of Righteousnesse.
And, as private mercies challenge our private praises, so publike and Nationall blessings call for publike and Solemne thansgivings when the Crowne is restored to David, and David to his People, 'tis very fit that all Israel should keepe Holy-day: And thus they did, and for this they have a double warrant.
First, David's command, or (if any will ra|ther have it so) his invitation. He sends forth a Generall Summons unto all Israel, in the second verse; particularly to the house of Aaron, verse the third, and in short, to all that feare the LORD, at the fourth verse: and all the reason in the world they should comply with his will, who would share in his happinesse. And yet behold, a greater authority then David's is here, for

Secondly, 'Tis the Day which the LORD hath made. He that made every Day, is pleased to make some dayes over againe and againe: and so hath he new-made by some extraordinary mercy or other all those dayes, which Holy Church has commanded us (in commemoration of the same) to keep Holy: such was this Day, made a|gaine, by a new Sun shine of his Speciall favour overthe Land; a Day by a most glorious mercy, so guilded and dignified, that it were a profane|nesse to fully it with the low drudgeryes of our common employments: Graced it must be with hearts and countenances as glad and cheerfull, as the day it self is bright and glorious.
There must be gladnesse in the heart; not only in the mouth and in the cloathes: such new-made dayes are to be celebrated with all inward cheer|fulnesse and alacrity of soul, proceeding from a sweet and pleasing sense of his favour who made them for us: away wich that grudging and Irk|somenesse of spirit, we meet with Amos 8. 5. which is ever crying out, when will the Sabboth be gone, that we may set forth wheat? except wee please our selves in the observation of these

Daies, we cannot please the LORD that made them: And as Gladnesse is required; so is
2. Rejoycing: a signification of that gladnesse to the world: an externall expression and pro|fession ought always to be the inseparable atten|dant of that internall affection which GOD de|lights in; thus were the feasts of old celebrated with shoutings, and soundings of trumpetts, and distributing gifts c: all sober manifesta|tions of Joy become that day, whereon GOD vouchsafes to manifest his Favour: Onely men are to take heed, how instead of be glad and re|joyce, they read, be drunk and Prophane: that were not to sanctifie but pollute the Day: David and his Subjects expresse their joy, by entring into the Gates of Righteousnesse, into the Courts of GOD's house, provoking mutually each o|ther cheerfully to acknowledg; and heartily to sing aloud to his Honour and Glory, who had done such great things for them, whereof they are glad, with anO give thanks unto the GOD of all GOD's for his mercy endureth forever.
We have heard of the Day which the LORD once made for Israel, let us now descend to con|sider

the Day the LORD hath lately made for England: where it would be very easie, would it not be too tedious, almost in every particular to shew you, how King David and his Day is paralell'd by King CHARLES the Second (to whom God make many long and happy Dayes) and his Day.
How much of England's happinesse is bound up in the Prudence and Fortune of England's Kings: How long this famous Nation may pos|sibly continue one Body, without one Head, How long those two great sides of this glorious Fa|brick the Church and State, may stand firme and unshaken, as they ought to be, the beauty, the strength and support of each other, if not well knit together by these Corner-stones: Our ancient flourishing, and out late miserable and never sufficiently deplored condition, when compa|red together, will too manifestly evidence. We have known what it is to have Kings our Nur|sing Fathers, and Queenes our nursing Mothers: and how happily those two Twins: the Church and Commonwealth did thrive, and grow, and flou|rish, when fed and cherished at such brests: and,

alas! we have to our sorrow found, what sad Daies those were, wherein there was no King in our Israel, dayes full of nothing but black clouds, raging winds, and fat all stormes, in which both God's house and Cesar's were blowne downe to the ground; all honest and Loyall men driven out of the Land, or dispersed, and scatter'd, and hurled into the little narrow Corners of the earth, making privacy and poverty their sanctu|ary: nothing appear'd for many yeares together but the horrid face of Rebellion and confusion; no Religion, no Law, no Justice, no Charity, no Order, nay, nothing but the bare name of that, a meer pretence wherof was craftily impo|sed upon a deluded multitude as a sufficient warrant for their disobedience,  a sure basis for Anarchy, or what's neerest of Kin to it, a Demo|cracy, indeed nothing but the bare name of Li|berty. Was it ever thus, so long as England wil|lingly embraced the Corner-stones which GOD proffer'd her? and did she ever want such praeci|ous stones, till her State-Architects became alto|gether as wise as the foolish builders in the text, refusing the stone which GOD had prepared?

They rejected a stone such as England never saw before, and therefore could never know how to prize sufficiently, and I would to GOD, that it might truly be said in diminution of their guilt, that through Ignorance they did it! The singular worth and use of that Head-stone they first reje|cted (alas, so altogether brutish were we) no|thing could teach us to understand, but the suc|ceeding ruine of three most flourishing King|domes. A stone indeed he was so truly precious in himselfe, and for those many signall excellen|cies, which never shone brightes to the eye of the Christian world, then (as such true starres and Diamonds use to do) in the darkest night of his persecution; that he vvas highly and de|servedly valued of all that knew him, is still ca|binetted up in the hearts and affections of those that loved him, and shall (I doubt not) be found in the first row, in that great day, when GOD shall make up his Iewells. And as our Corner-stone, he was so exactly squared, so solidly laid by the great author of all piety and Justice, that nothing but Sathan and Envy could find a fault. His Pi|ous reign had left us nothing but a superfluity of

happinesse to be sick of, and his exemplary~ Cle|mency nothing but too much mercy to coplain of, the noted softnesse and freedome of his na|ture, gave those rude flints that came against him too great an advantage over him so good a man, and so gracious a King, that his most inveterate enemies had nothing else to fear, hardly to pre|tend, but that God's house vvould, by the help of such a stone, in a very short time, become more strong  glorious then their own. Late Posterity may indeed very well believe that God removed this stone so early, as too rich a Pearl to be thrown away upo~ such unworthy svvine; but what faith will be so daring as to believe, that the very Ma|ster builders did reject this stone as uselesse and cumbersome. Oh! that it might be however forgotten in Gath,  silently bury'd in the streets of Askalon, how that a Christian Nation, an English Subject rejected a King that vvas as a Saint,  such a Saint as CHARLES the First. Oh, the desperate tementy of a blinded zeale. The infatiable fury of a coveous, Sanctity. The horrible attempts of a malicious Hypocricy. What execrable villanies barbarisme may execute when is walke 

the vizard of purity and Reformation! for The LORD's Anointed was murther'd.
And, can it be so much as thought, that those very Builders who were call'd together to make up the breaches, and repair the decayes in the walls of Sion, should thus rashly pull out, and dash in pieces in the open street the Corner-stone thereof; and afterwards contrive and labour to fill up it's room with such Rubbish as a Com|mon-wealth; or such a rough and unhewen Flint, as that late prodigious Tyrant; which whilest with all their Art and skill they strove to fit and pollish, they could never hope to produce a|nything but a fire to consume at once both the builders and the building? But will it not yet seem more strange and incredble, that even our Spirituall builders too, those that pretended, to be joynt labourers with Christ for the aedification of his heavenly kingdome upon earth, should make it their Pulpit and their Lecture trade, to mete out to their auditors such large measure of factions and seditious doctrine each Market day, and like the Jewish High-priests move and in|cense the People to run raging up and down

the streets with a Crucifie him, Crucifie him, and never cease watching at the doors, with their trayterous Petitions in their hands, till they had obtain'd their request, the Murder of their King, and the ruine of his Kingdom? And yet such unskilfull builders had unfortunate England on all sides set on work, who had a farre greater longing to grow rich upon the ruines, then fa|mous by the repairs of Hierusalem.
Yet, as if this had amounted but to some light matter, and were a thing excusable, or (as they would have it) very commendable: Ob|serve how bravely and resolutely they go on. It had pleas'd our Indulgent GOD to hew us out a Second most excellent stone, out of the same Roy|all rock; exactly squared and fitted for the same place, and dignity too: and this again the Buil|ders reject, and throw as farre out of their sight as out of their affections, saying within them|selves, as those honest servants we know where, This is the Heir, come let us kill him, and the Inheri|tance shall be ours; thus stoutly resolve they, that neither they themselves who had been so long sools, would ever again grow wise; nor that

Church, which they had so Sacrilegiously ruin|ed, glorious.
But there is no fighting against Heaven, the same wise hand which fitted this Second stone is an Omnipotent hand too, and hath fixed it E|ven that same Royall stone, which (with shame we may speak it) for so many years together had layen in the dust, neglected by the People, Ha|ted by the Builders, beat upon by stormes and Tempests; and hath felt the heavy hammers of his implacable Enemies; is now sent home a|gain, more solid and firme for all that Ham|mering, more sound and undecayed by reason of that long obscurity, more welcome and ac|ceptable, after so long an absence. With whom is restored a lost Justice, a long time smoother'd amongst numberlesse Interests and Factions: a lost Liberty, so long shackled by a most intol|lerable Tyranny and Usurpation; a lost Religi|on, so long buried in grossest Atheisme, onely with a fair flourish of Hypocricy, and an inscrip|tion of Holinesse over her grave: This stone, the Basis of our Laws, the Pillar of our Church the Bulwork of our Peace, and I may truly adde,

the Landmark of our Estates, for whilest he was removed, no man knew what to call his own, even this stone, uncrack'd by the blows of his Enemies, unmollified by the flatteries of his false friends, which the builders for so many years have shamefully refused, is now become (Bles|sed be our good GOD) the Head-stone of the Corner.
And now, Whose doing is this?
Whose but his who is the great King of Kings, Protector of the Fatherlesse, Wise, Mighty, and lust, who putteth down one, and lifteth up another, and makes the most prosperous sinners to know them|selves to be but men: He alone it is, that could do these mighty things for us, whereof we are Glad, he that hath so strangly turned againe the Captivity of Sion, that we seem yet like men that dream: Novv vve see vvhat that is, whereof our adversaries so boasted themselves, Divine Pro|vidence; and in whose power it is, to still the raging of the waves, and in whose hands are the Hearts of the Mighty; and by whom it is that Kings do reign.
This is a work which the LORD hath

all this while reserved to make his own Doing, that all the Earth might see, and be afraid, be|cause there is a reward for the Righteous, there is a GOD that judgeth in the Earth. This cannot be the work of any hand but GOD's: for
1. If we cast an eye back upon our gracious David whilest under the cloud an Exile: what can we see, but the LORD alone, he had to con|fide in? How was he round about begirt with miseries? It is hard to say in which he was most unfortunate, his many inhumane Enemies, or his more cowardly friends. They of his own Religion (If they vvere of any) thought it more prudence to comply with a prosperous Tyrant, then to succour a banish'd Prince; The sons of Rome grudged him their friendship, who was afraid to share in their slavery: Nay such is the naturall sweetnesse wherewith GOD hath blest our Prince, and such a gracious Prince hath GOD designed for us, that he was afraid to be|come a King by Conquest, and chose rather to wait for the Affections, then to triumph over the Lives of his rebellious Subjects.

2. Again, amongst his enemies here at home, we saw nothing could befriend him: A Power seemingly invincible, a malice utterly implaca|ble, a Confidence built upon a long and won|derfull successe; and yet certainly a conscience full of guilt, and consequently full of jealousies, and therefore most vigilant: Interests espoused in Rebellion, and therefore onely to be maintai|ned by Injustice and Cruelty. Besides all these, a Confederacy of Oaches, Covenants, and Engage|ments, though these ('tis true) made little oppo|sition to any thing but honesty, and Loyalty, be|ing onely set up as meer engines of Policy, which might easily be scrued into all postures, to serve the Swearer's Interest Adde now unto all this, on the one hand, that grand and Master-craft of Hy|pocricy, whereby their enemies did their best endeavours to cozen even God himselfe as well as men into a false beliofe of their integrity and Innocence; and on the other hand the Irreligi|on  profanenesse of pretended friends, where|by too many were throughly perswaded that a King could have no favourite but wickednesse, no friend, but the profane: considering this lewd

temper of spirit in too many, and a coldnesse, an indifferency, a cowardise in more, we must needs confesse, it was the LORD's doing.
And certainly a very wonderfull Doing in our eyes. Hopes and expectations all dying, all Pro|jects and endeavours failing, enemies rejoycing, flourishing, triumphing; friends scatter'd, impo|verish'd, imprison'd, all disponding; the Con|querors sitting downe securely, and dividing the spoyle, and crying with David's enemies, Ah, so would we have it, persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him: even then God throws in the Apple of dissention, and in pieces they fall, and a sudden storme from the North scatters them. An Army marches up not knowing whi|ther; all Sects and Factions meet it, and congra|tulate, and know not for what; Well, the all|knowing God brings all this to an happy Issue; the LORD's Anointed is restored, his dying friends revived, all barking Shimeies silenced, Sectaries and Schismaticks confounded, Rome and her Children troubled and amazed. This surely was the LORD's doing, and therefore marvailous in our Eyes.

What Praises therefore do we now owe un|to God for all these his Marvailous workes? This is the Day, which God hath thus (as you have heard) re-made for England; a bright and clear Sunshine, after black clouds and thick darknesse, The Day of our Redemption from a more then Aegyptian bondage and slavery; the Day of our freedome from Tyranny and Oppression; the Day wherein our gracious King was at first usher'd into the world with a new miraculous light from Hea|ven; and the Day wherein he was welcomed in|to his Kingdome by all the lights of the Nation; Starres of all Magnitudes with all the lustre and Glory they could cloath themselves withall. A Day, by the light whereof we begin to see our late Follies, God grant we may truly repent us of them! And our present happinesse, Oh, that we could be heartily thankfull for it! A Day, wherein Religion begins to appear again in her own dresse, and all those maskes and vizors, too freequently worne in the darke night of Igno|rance, begin to fall off fro~ her face: All the Night|birds of prey and rapine begin to betake them|selves to their Holes:  the doors of God's house

are set wide open, that we his serva~ts may freely enter in and worship the God of our Fathers, after the manner of our Fathers, solemnly and decently. 'Twere an endlesse task, to recount half the blessings of this Day; the summe of all is this, The Anointed of the LORD, whom we fear'd to have been taken in their nets, is return'd in peace.
Let us therefore be Glad and Rejoyce: be Glad inwardly, and Rejoyce outwardly, be so glad, that God may accept of our Joy, as an accep|table sacrifice of praise and thansgiving for his great and provident mercy, in having reguard unto his holy One: and so rejoyce that the world may see we are glad indeed,  acknowledg him the Author of our Happinesse. It is most fit, that as the world hath seen us sad, yea, perhaps too sinfully dejected in the Day of our Afflictions; so it should now behold us cheerfull and full of joy, but still without sinfulnesse, in this Day which the LORD hath made.
Onely let us here beware, lest we so rejoyce as to forfeit againe the ground of our joyes: In vain do we observe this Day as a Thanksgiving|day,

except we labour to keep every Day of our life henceforward Holy-day. It is not enough to say LORD we thanke thee, but we are to Sa|crifice our Persons and our endeavours to his honour and glory; returning him not onely the Calves of our lips, but the Affections of our hearts, and the labours of our hands, and the o|bedience of the whole man for the abundance of his mercies. Our King, our Church, our Land have all too long groaned under our Sinfull re|joy cings, and let us take heed lest all these suffer over again by our confident and presumptuous re-assuming of such carnall Joyes: Why should it be any longer said, and that with so much co|lour of truth, that Loyalty and Piety cannot dwel together in the same brest? Why should it be any longer said to our shame, that swearing, drink|ing, and deriding Religion, and making a mock of Holinesse, are the Principall badges of such as call themselves Royallists? We know who and what they are who have long agoe publikely boasted, that they have been the King's best Subjects and Friends, the way to confute them is not to swear they are not so, but to prove by our actions that

we indeed are so: and to do this, there's no way left us but to be as sincerely Religious, as they hypocrytically: We may safely give leave to the Covenanter, the Engager, and the rest of a Schisma|ticall people to pretend as high as they can, whil'st we are sure we are as much as they can pretend to Let us but once out-doe and out live them, 'tis no great matter who out-talks, and out|braves us: but let us by no meanes give occasion to the enemies of God to Blaspheme; but whilst we endeavour to expresse our Loyalty in our Ioy, let our joy be most clearly manifested in our Obedi|ence to His just commands, and in our Confor|mity to his good example; whose first Proclamation was to condemne and prohibit, and whose whole course of life is to shame all manner of Profane|nesse and debauchery. Let but our good and righ|teous actions first stop the mouthes of our Ene|mies, and then our Righteous God will undoubt|edly bind their hands, and turne their hearts, and make us all at last charitably and unanimous|ly to joyne in the Praises of that great God, who hath miraculously restored our Corner-stone, and rebuilt our Hierusalem, and made her once more

a Citty in a fair way to be at unity within herself. He will then make our King a glorious Prince, and us happy Subjects, and all of us at last more happy Saints, when we shall all obtain Crownes and Kingdomes, and be built up together one tri|umphant Church on our Head Corner-stone Christ IESVS; full of all Gladnesse, and Rejoycing, and perpetuall singings, to the Honour and Glory of him that sitteth upon the everlasting Throne, who is LORD of Lords, and KING of Kings; to whom for his unspeakable mercy to our Gra|cious King, and to us his Subjects in his happy Restauration, let us ascribe all Honour and Glory, Praise and Thanksgiving now and for ever.
AMEN.





