



THE
Communicant's Guide:
SHEWING
A Safe and Easie WAY
TO THE
Lord's Table:
In Compassion to
The Poorer and Weaker Sort
OF
CHRISTIANS.
By CLEM. ELIS, Rector of Kirkby in
Nottinghamshire.
1 Cor. 11.  If we would Iudge our selves,
we should not be Iudged.
LONDON:
Printed for Iohn Baker at the Sign of the
Three Pidgeons in St. Paul's Church-Yard.
M DC LXXXV.




TO THE
Christian Readers: More especially to those who belong unto
my Charge; for whose Help this Book
is principally intended.
My Dear Friends,
I Hope none of you will think me
so vain, as to publish this Little
Book for this Reason, That I sup|pose
there are not many better of
the same Subject, and for the same Use,
already abroad in the World. I well
know, that there be very many; and
not a few of them so excellent, that if
you had them, and knew how to use
them, this that I now present you with
might well seem to be superfluous, if
not contemptible. But, I hope, till
you can be better provided, it may be
very useful to you, at least in this.

that it may help to fit you for the
using of those better: and if this only be
the use of it, you ought not to despise it.
The true Reasons then, why I thus
tender you my Service, are those,
which some of your selves have often
prompted me with. When you have
been admonished to prepare your
selves carefully for the worthy Recei|ving
of this Holy Sacrament, you have
been ready to say, That you wanted
good helps and Books for that purpose,
and you continue ignorant for want of
Instruction; for though you hear Ser|mons,
and have been Catechized in
publick, and have been examined and
instructed privately too by the Mini|ster,
yet your Understandings being
dull, and your Memories weak, you
are not much better for all this, be|cause
you want such Books to read as
may help you more fully to under|stand
your Duty. This is a Pretence,
and no more than so, in very many,
whose Love to Sin, and Carelessness
of their Souls and all their spiritual
Concerns, is indeed the real cause of

their Ignorance and Unfitness for this
and all other religious Duties. To re|move
this Pretence, and that you may
not delude your selves to your utter
undoing, by thinking you have a suf|ficient
Excuse for not doing so neces|sary
a Duty, when you have none, is
the cause of my presenting you with
this help to the doing of it.
Some of you say, That the most ex|cellent
of those Books already extant to
this purpose, are too dear, and you are
not able to buy them. Herein some of
you speak the Truth; such I mean as
have not wherewith to buy Bread for
their Mouths, or Cloaths for their
Backs. But the most of them who
thus plead their Poverty, say no more
in effect but this: That they think
their Money better bestow'd in a Lace
or Riband, a Cup of Ale, or a Game
at Cards, than on their Souls, which
were so dear to Christ, that he paid
his most precious Blood to redeem
them.
Others say, That those Books are too
learned and hard for their Understand|ing,

and they should be no wiser for them
if they had them. And indeed there is
too much Truth in this: yet are there
not wanting such as are so plain and
easie, that it can be nothing but your
unacquaintedness with the very Prin|cples
of Religion, that makes them
seem hard. If you were concern'd to
understand any other Language than
that of the Plow and Cart, or thought
it as needful to discourse sometimes of
matters relating to God and your own
Souls, as to talk to your Horses and
Oxen, you might soon learn much
Good from the Books you thus com|plain
of.
Some of these Books, you say, are too
long and tedious. And it is true, that
some of them are longer than they
should be for the use of the weaker
sort of Christians. But it is no won|der
if every good Book seem too long
to them who have no Delight in
Goodness, and to them that are wea|ry
of hearing a short Sermon of an
Hour, or it may be not so much. A
Book that will cost them some days to

read it over understandingly, must
needs be very tedious indeed. They
that think all their time little enough
to trade and drudge in for the World,
or their swinish Lusts, cannot spare
much of it for their Souls without
grudging and wearisomness.
Now that you may not hencefor|ward
have any colour for such Pre|tences,
I here offer you one that is, if
I mistake not, every way fitted to
your Condition and Capacity, for it
is cheap, and easie, and short; and yet,
I hope, sufficient to teach and direct
you in your Duty. I herein endeavour
to manifest my hearty Love and Care
for your Souls and everlasting Wel|fare:
and if I had no other Reason for
writing and publishing it but this on|ly,
that I desire to shew my Readiness
to serve you, and to cast in my small
Mite amongst those that offer more
largely out of their Abundance, to|wards
the enriching of your Souls, I
may, I hope, be at least excusable.
But, alas, what better will you be
for my Kindness if you will not make

use of it! This Book, nay all the Books
in the World, will not make you
Christians, or worthy Communicants,
by lying by you, or by a careless
reading, without understanding, ap|plying,
and practising, no more than
your Meat will nourish you without
eating it. Some few Years ago I gave
you, for the same Reasons which move
me now to give you this, a small Sum|mary
both of your Faith and Duty,
called, Christianity in short; which
hath with very many found a welcome
much above my Hope or Expectation;
the worst Entertainment it hath met
with, is from some of you for whose
Benefit it was chiefly intended, and
who had it gratis. The Reason why
it hath been so coldly entertained at
home whilst it was so welcome abroad,
I am apt to think is this, That you
know me better than Strangers do,
and seeing my Infirmities daily, do
more slightly regard my Endeavours
than they who see them not. But re|member,
I pray you, it is the Doctrine
of your Blessed Saviour, that in both

that little Book, and this I commend
unto you, and not my own Example.
Make but use of that as you ought, and
my Failings, what hurt soever they do
my self, shall not hurt you.
One thing you are to be here mind|ed
of: You read things of this nature
so imperfectly and so heartlesly, that
little of what you read remains with
you. An obscene Ballad or idle Tale-Book
you can read with Delight; and
though imperfectly at first, yet you
read them so often, till you grow too
perfect in them to your own great
Hurt. Why take you not the like
Pains in these Helps of Religion? Be|cause
you take no Pleasure in Religion,
nor care much what becomes of God's
Honour, or the Salvation of your Souls.
This is too sad a Truth, and you can|not
deny it. Your drowsie reading
makes all good Books mere Non-sense
to you.
If it were not so, you would never
be weary of learning your Christian
Duty, nor of practising it neither; and
you would particularly never rest till

you understood the right way of co|ming
worthily to this heavenly Ban|quet,
unto which I here direct you.
Whenever men are Christians indeed,
they will set a greater Price than now
they do upon this unvaluable Token
of Divine Love; and they will be
ashamed to think that the Table of De|vils
should have so many Guests, and
the Table of the Lord so few.
I have here very plainly, shunning
all Disputes and Niceties, laid the
whole Duty before you, with the ne|cessity
of it, and the way to perform
it aright; I have also removed out of
your way all the Rubs and Mormoes
which are apt to hinder or affright
you. Nothing can be wanting but a
Will in you to be Christians, and to
live so now as that you may live eter|nally.
This is that which I cannot
give you, but must not cease to beg it
for you of the only Giver of all good
Gifts, nor to beseech you, by the Mer|cies
of God, that you will by all
means endeavour after it.

To the Grace of God I do mo
heartily commend you in my Pray|ers,
beseeching him to bless this poor
Endeavour to the eternal Good of
your Souls.



THE
CONTENTS.

Chap. I. THE necessity of Receiving
this Sacrament.
II. The necessity and way of Receiving it
worthily.
III. How to examine our selves about our
Baptismal Covenant.
IV. A help for the Examination of our
Faith.
V. A help for the Examination of our
Repentance and Obedience.
VI. How to examine whether we be
rightly disposed for this Sacrament?
VII. What Affections of Soul are sutable
to this Sacrament.
VIII. How we are to behave our selves
at this Sacrament.
IX. The pretended Reasons for neglecting
this Sacrament briefly answered.
X. The Stumbling-blocks cast in our
way removed.
Some short Directions and Prayers.






THE
WAY
TO THE
Lord's Table.
CHAP. I. The necessity of receiving this Sacrament.
REverently and Devoutly to
receive the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is so indispen|sable
a Christian Duty, that
whosoever refuseth to do it, doth no
less, in effect, than refuse Salvation,
and renounce his Saviour.

There is no Salvation in
any other but IESVS
CHRIST:Acts 4. 12. No man co|meth
to the Father but by
him.Iohn 14. 6. There is no Salva|tion
by Christ for those that
keep not his Command|ments;Heb. 5. 9.
but as he is the
Author of Salvation to
them that obey him: So
will he come to take Ven|geance
on them that obey
not the Gospel.2 Thes. 1. 8. And his express Com|mand
he hath left us in these plain
Words, This do in Remembrance of me,
Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
He that hath given us
this Command is GODRom. 9. 5.
over all,Col. 1. 16. blessed for ever.1 Cor. 6. 19.
The great God that made
us;1 Pet. 1. 19. the good Lord thatMatt. 28. 18.
bought and redeemed usMatt. 17. 15.
with his own most preci|ousAct 3. 22.
Blood;Iohn 15. 9. 10. 13. he to whom
God the Father hath given
all Power both in Heaven
and in Earth,Rom. 5. 6. 8. and hath command|ed

us to hear him in all things whatso|ever
he saith unto us. It is the Com|mand
of a dear Friend, who loved us
as his Father loved him, who hath
called us Friends, and laid down his
Life for us in pure Love; and hath as|sured
us, that if we keep his Com|mandments
we shall abide in his Love.
The Command of this dying Friend,
when he was going to reconcile us
wicked Rebels by his own bloody
Death unto God, was this, This do in
Remembrance of me.
When dying for us, he bequeathed
unto us Pardon, and his Spirit and
eternal Life, this he required of us, that
by doing this we would preserve alive
a loving and thankful Remembrance of
him, and shew his Death,1 Cor. 11. 26.
and his Kindness therein to
our Souls, till he come again to re|ceive
us to himself, and put us into
full Possession of eternal Glory. And
how shall we then look him in the
Face if we have refused to do this?
In this Sacrament he offer|eth
us himself Crucified for1 Cor. 10. 16.

us, his Body and Blood; the most choice
Token of his wonderful Love. Can
we refuse it, and not renounce his
Love and Friendship thereby?
Thus would He have us de|clare
our Fellowship with
the Father and the Son,1 Iohn 1. 3. and with the
Holy Apostles and all Saints,
as joynt Members of his one
Body the Church,1 Cor. 11. 17. by feasting together
at his Table on this one Bread. Can we
refuse to do this, and not renounce
all Fellowship with the Father and the
Son, and the Communion of Saints?
Two solemn Rites he hath institu|ted
as peculiar to his Religion, Bap|tism
and the Supper of the Lord; where|by
we are to own him openly before
the World, and profess our selves in
Covenant with him. As he then that
refuseth to be Baptized, refuseth to be
a Christian; so he that having been
baptized refuseth this other Sacrament,
doth in effect renounce his Baptism,
disown the Covenant, apostatize from
Christ, and cast off the Profession of
Christianity.

He hath not commanded us many
chargeable and troublesome Sacrifices,
such as the Iews offered; nor the
Blood of our Sons and Daughters,
which the Gentiles grudged not to
offer unto Devils. The Cost we are
put to is of a little Bread and Wine;
the Pains we are put to, is, with ho|ly
and thankful Hearts to take, eat,
and drink, in Remembrance of our
Saviour. Can we now disobey so ea|sie
a Command of the God of Heaven
and Earth, the King of the World,
the Redeemer of Sinners, the only Sa|viour
of Souls, and not renounce God,
our Saviour, the Christian Religion,
and all our claim to Salvation? No,
'tis very plain, that tho' the want of
this Sacrament, when it is desired but
cannot be had, is no Sin, if not occasi|oned
by our Sin; yet the wilfull ne|glect
of it is no less than a damning
Sin, unless there be no such thing as
Damnation, and the Gospel be a Fa|ble;
from which blasphemous thought
Good God preserve us all.



CHAP. II. The Necessity and Way to Receive
worthily.
HE that eateth not at the Lord's
Table must dye, and he that eat|eth
unworthily is in danger of Death:
so St. Paul assures us; Whosoever shall
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 27.
and again, v. 29. He eateth and drink|eth
Damnation [or Judgment] to him|self.
If this seem hard to us, it is only
because we are unreasonable, and
had rather not do any Duty at all,
than be at the Pains to do it as we
ought. As the Duty is necessary, and
yet very reasonable and not burden|some;
so to do it worthily is as ne|cessary,
and no less reasonable or easie
if we have a Mind to be Christians.
The Direction how to communi|cate
worthily we have in these words,

Let a Man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup, 1 Cor. 11. 28. They who are ig|norant,
and are not sufficiently in|structed,
cannot examine themselves,
and therefore may not eat, and they
who, either because they are afraid to
awaken their Consciences and not be
able to sin in Quietness, or because
they are loath to be at the Pains, or
take so much time from their worldly
Business or Pleasures, will not exa|mine
themselves, may not presume to
eat.
What then must such Persons do, for
if they eat not they die? The ignorant
must be Catechised and learn: if they
be ashamed of this, they are ashamed
of Christ, and must perish for hating
Instruction. They that will not ex|amine
themselves, must consider how
they can dwell with everlasting Burn|ings.
Eat or Die, Examine or eat not,
that's all the Choice our Sins have
left us.
Yet Examination is not a thing
commanded for it self, but in order

to something else. Counterfeit Gold
is of no more worth than it was be|fore,
for being examined or tryed by
the Touch-stone. We must examine
our selves, that we may know what
we are. Examine your selves, whe|ther
you be in the Faith; prove your
own selves: Know you not your own
selves, how that Iesus Christ is in you,
except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5.
We might know whether we be Chri|stians
or no, would we try our selves,
and not be content, like false Gold,
to make a shew only. And to this
end must we by Examination learn to
know our selves, that we may be
able to approve of our selves in our
own Consciences before God, that we
are sincere Christians, that we may
not think our selves to be something
when we are nothing, and so deceive
our selves, let every Man prove his own
Work, and then shall he have rejoycing
in himself, Gal. 6. 4.
In short, we are to examine what
Graces God hath given us, and be
truly thankful; what is yet amiss in

us, and amend it; what we yet want,
and endeavour to obtain it.
The difficulty of this Duty affright|eth
many from this Sacrament: and
indeed, considering how most of us
live, it is no wonder that it seemeth
difficult. But we should remember,
first, That this Self-Examination is a
Duty, necessary, not only now and
then before a Sacrament, but at all
times, that we may understand how
far we are Christians indeed; and
therefore the Difficulty may as well
affright us from being Christians as
from this Sacrament; and so I fear it
doth too many, who therefore abstain
from the Lord's Table, because they
have no mind to be Christians any
farther than in Name only. And
then, secondly, We must remember,
that whatever Difficulty there is in
this Duty, it is of our own making,
and we may make the Duty more
easie if we will. For,
1. We continue willingly ignorant
of the Word of God, and its use; and
it must needs be hard for us to exa|mine

our selves by a Rule which we
understand not. But let us take pains
to learn perfectly the particulars of
our Christian Faith and Duty, gathered
from the Sacred Scriptures and ex|plained
in easie Catechisms, and often
beg the Minister's help for the right
understanding and due applying
thereof to our selves, opening freely
to him all our Ignorances and Doubts,
and this part of the Difficulty will
be removed.
2. We live loosly and carelesly, not
observing well our own Tempers and
Actions; and having let them slip
without any notice of them, we can|not
recall to mind and examine what
we never regarded. Let us but once
every day take a little time to con|sider
what Inclinations in us have that
day shewn themselves, and what have
been our Thoughts, Words, and Acti|ons,
and comparing them with the
Rule of Life, observe how they agree
or disagree with it: and heartily bles|sing
God for any Good that by his help
we have done, humbly bewailing,

confessing, and begging Pardon for all
our Failings of Omission or Commissi|on,
praying devoutly and seriously
for more Strength and Grace to live
better, resolve to do our utmost En|deavour
to amend and improve daily;
we shall soon find all the Difficulty
over: especially if we would, as of|ten
as we find cause to doubt of any
thing, open our Souls freely to our
Spiritual Guides, God's Ministers, for
their Assistance. Which course till i
be taken, we shall every where find
too few Christians: but if we would
do thus, we should learn to know our
selves so well, that it would be a ve|ry
easie matter to examine our selve
against a Communion.
Now that we may be worthy Com|municants,
we must examine our selve
both whether we be sound Christian
or no, and, whether we be rightly
disposed for this particular Christian
Duty.
1. We must be of Christ's Family,
as Christians, before we may feast at
Christ's Table as Communicants. W

are solemnly admitted into the Fami|ly,
or Church of Christ, by Baptism,
wherein we are dedicated to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and ad|mitted
into the Bond of a sacred Cove|nant
with the ever Blessed and Glo|rious
Trinity. So long as we continue
faithful in this Covenant, so long are
we Christians; and therefore this is
first to be enquired into, Whether or
no we faithfully stand to this Baptis|mal
Covenant?
2. Then are we duely disposed for
this Duty of Communicating, when
understanding the Nature, Ends, and
Benefits of this Sacrament, we find the
Affections of our Hearts in some mea|sure
suitable thereunto. And to this
purpose it is, that we are more espe|cially
before our Approaches to the
Lord's Table to examine our selves.



CHAP. III. How to examine our Selves about our
Baptismal Covenant.
THE faithful keeping of our Bap|tismal
Covenant is our Christiani|ty.
We are therefore impartially to
enquire both how we understand it,
how we have kept it, and how we
resolve to keep it.
1. To help us to understand it, we
must know four things; viz.
1.Gen. 1. 27. That our Good God ha|ving
made man a rational
Creature in his own Image,Eccl. 7. 29. and given
him an immortal Soul, void of any
Inclination to Evil, with sufficient
Knowledge to understand his Duty,
and Power enough to do it, did com|mand
him to live in perfect Obedi|ence
to God his Maker, whereby he
and his might live for ever happy in
the Love of God.
2. That Adam,Gen. 3. Rom. 5. 12. the first
Man and common Father of

us all, by the Temptation of the De|vil,
disobey'd this Command, and
thereby brought us all into a state of
Weakness, Sin, and Death: And
now in such a Condition
we come into the World,Rom. 8. 7, 8.
that, left unto our selves, we would
do nothing but sin against God, and
run upon our own Destruction.
3. That our gracious God, when
he might justly have cut off at once
the whole Race of Mankind in Adam
and Eve, or have left all their Posteri|ty
to perish by their own Doings; of
his wonderful Goodness and Mercy
took pity on Sinners, and opened 
to us a new way to Salvation, by pro|viding
for us a Saviour, even GOD
the SON, the only begotten of the
FATHER, who in our Flesh having
taught us what God now requireth of
us if we will be saved, laid down his
Life for us to satisfie for our
Sins and free us from Ven|geance,Mat. 1. 21.1 Thes. 1. 10.Mar. 16. 16.
and offereth us a
full Pardon on Condition
that we will believe in him and be

baptized, so signifying our Consent to
the new Covenant which God is pleased
to make with us in him.
4. The meaning of which Covenant
is this: That though we cannot now
be innocent, and so can never hope for
Life by obeying and fulfilling the Law
of Innocence given to Adam; yet, if
we will first,Act. 3. 19. truly repent,
and secondly,Ioh. 3. 36. believe the Gos|pel
of CHRIST,Heb. 5. 9. and third|ly,Heb. 8. 10.
sincerely obey his Com|mands,
God will yet be our God, and
take us for his People; and for his be|loved
Son Iesus Christ's sake pardon our
Sins, and sanctifie us by his holy Spi|rit;
and finally, glorisie us with him|self
in Heaven.
II. Next we must examine how we
have kept this Covenant. And here,
seeing we were baptized in our In|fancy,
and what was promised on
our parts, was promised by others
in our Name; we are to exa|mine,
1. Whether we have, since we
came to Understanding, at any time

own'd and confirmed this Engage|ment,
and taken upon our selves the
Performance of it. Our Church hath
well provided, that no Person shall
be admitted to the LORD's Supper till
he be Confirmed, or have declared his
willingness to be confirmed; that is,
till he have satisfied the Church, that
he understands the Covenant of Bap|tism,
and declareth his Resolution to
keep it.
2. If we have thus own'd our Bap|tismal
Engagement, we must dili|gently
examine how we have hither|to
performed it in all the Parts of it,
viz. Repentance, Faith, and sincer
Obedience. And this we are to do
by posing our selves in the several
Articles of our Christian Faith, and
in the Commandments of God. If we
find that we have not been faithful
to God in this Covenant, we must not
come to this Sacrament till we have
unfeignedly repented of our unfaith|fulness,
and seriously renewed our En|gagement
to keep it henceforward
Therefore,

III. We must examine how we re|solve
to keep it for the time to come:
And here we are to see to these
things:
1. That it be a serious, deliberate,
and well grounded Resolution, not ta|ken
up dissemblingly, nor rashly, nor
for weak Reasons. But being clearly
convinced and become sensible of God's
absolute Right in and to us and all
our Services, his sovereign Authority
to govern us and command us, and
his wonderful Goodness and Love to
us, more especially declared in his
Son Iesus Christ; this Sense and Con|viction
of God's being our Maker, our
Governour, and our Benefactor, should
be the reason and ground of our Re|solution
to be wholly his, to be ruled
by him, and love and honour him above
all.
2. That it be a full and compleat
Resolution, that we use no Ifs or
Ands, or rest in some faint Purposings;
but we must be throughly determined
and fixed upon it. That whatever we
may lose or suffer by it in this World,

we will by God's help go through
with it, without any Exception or
Limitation whatsoever, doing the
whole Will of God from the Heart.
3. That it be a humble and pious Re|solution,
without any proud Trust
or Confidence in our own natural
Strength to make it good; but yet
with all Trust and Confidence in the
Goodness of God, that if we conscien|tiously
use the means of Grace and
Strength which he hath ordained, as
he hath wrought in us to will, so he
will strengthen us to do his good Will,
and finally, reward us according to
his infinite Mercy.
When we have thus considered our
Covenant of Baptism, and are thus re|solved,
by God's help, to keep it, we
should earnestly pray unto God for his
Assistance: and, if we are not already
Confirmed, it is fit that we humbly
offer our selves to Confirmation so soon
as we can. The very sense of Shame
to break a Covenant after this solemn
Engagement in the Face of the Church
to keep it, and the Fear of drawing a

greater guilt upon our Souls, by
breaking a Covenant so renewed, must
needs be some Restraint upon us to
keep us from breaking it. And be|sides
this, we have good Cause to
hope, that the Prayers of the Church,
and the Blessing of God's Minister, the
Bishop, who by his Office blesseth in
God's Name, shall very much conduce
to our greater Strength and growth in
Christianity.


CHAP. IV. An help for the Examination of our
Faith.
WE promised in Baptism, to be|lieve
all the Articles of the
Christian Faith. These Articles are
briefly laid together in the Creed. To
examine our selves how we keep this
part of our Covenant, let us in the pre|sence
of God, the Searcher of Hearts,
ask our selves these Questions:

Have the Word and
Works of:Rom. 1. 20. God convinced
me,Heb. 11. 6. that there is an eter|nal,Iohn. 4. 24.
invisible,1 Tim. 6. 16. 1. 17. living Spi|rit,Ier. 23. 24.
every where present
throughout the World,Rev. 4. 8. in|finite
in all Perfections of
Power,1 Tim. 1. 17. Wisdom, and Good|ness,
called GOD?Ps. 119. 68.
Do I believe,1 Cor. 8. 4. that there
is but one only true and li|ving
God,1 Thes. 1. 9. even the FA|THER,Matt. 28. 19.
the SON,1 Iohn 5. 7. and
the HOLY GHOST, which being
three, are yet all three but one GOD
blessed for ever?
Do I believe,2 Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17. That the
Books of the Old and NewPsalm 32. 5.
Testament do contain the
very Word of God,Titus 1. 2. and
that therein God hath re|vealed
unto us all things that are
needful to our eternal Happiness;2 Cor. 1. 20. and
that he is a God of Truth and can|not
lie, and that all his Words are
true?

Do I believe,Acts 17. 24,  28. That God
is the Maker, Preserver,
and Governor of all things;Psalm 103. 19.
that I and all things are
his,1 Cor. 6. 20. and at his Disposal; that our
Life, Motion, and Being, are from
him, and all our Happiness depends
upon his Love and Blessing.
Do I believe,Gen. 1. 27. That Man
was made in the Image of
God, very good, with an immortal
Soul, with Knowledge and Power
enough to understand and do God's
Will?
Do I believe God madeCol. 1. 16.
many Spirits called An|gels,Heb. 1. 14. 12. 22.
and that some of these2 Peter 2. 4.
by Sin fell from their firstIude 6.
State,Mat. 25. 41. and these are theGenesis 3.
Devil and his Angels forRomans 5. 12.
whom Hell was prepared;Ephes. 2. 3.
and that the Devil tempt|ingHeb. 12. 14.
Man to sin in disobey|ing
God,Rom. 4. 6. all Evil came thereby into
the World: that we are all naturally
Sinners, and the Children of Wrath,
and cannot be happy without being

pardoned and cleansed, but must be
tormented for ever in Hell?
Do I believe,Ephes. 1. 4, 5, 6. That God
of his own free Grace andIohn 1. 14.
Goodness hath made us aActs 4. 12.
new way to Happiness
through his only begotten SON IE|SVS
CHRIST our Lord, and that
there is Salvation in none other?
Do I believe,1 Iohn 5. 20. That the
SON being the true God1 Timothy 2. 5.
and eternal Life,Matt. 1. 18. became
also the Man CHRISTLuke 2. 27.
IESVS,1 Tim. 3. 16. 1 being conceived
by the power of the HOLY
GHOST,Peter 2. 22. and born of a pure Virgin,
and being thus God manifested in the
Flesh,  an holy Life on Earth in
perfect Obedience to his FATHER's
Will?
Do I believe,Iohn 1. 41. 45. That this
is the promised Messias,Acts. 10. 38. the
Anointed holy one of God,Luke 24. 19.
who as the great Prophet
of God hath instructed us in the way
of Righteousness and Salvation;Iohn 15. 15. and
having taught us the whole Will of

his Father,Heb. 7. 27. 9. 26. after he had
suffered many things in
our Humane Nature,2 Cor. 5. 21. was
Crucified,1 Cor. 15. 4. and willingly di|ed
a Sacrifice of Atone|ment
for our Sins,Heb. 2. 17. and was buried,
and continued till the third day in the
state of the Dead, and herein was the
true High-priest, who offering himself
once for all, hath made Reconciliation
for the Sins of the People?
Do I believe, That on the third day
he rose again from the dead,Rom. 6. 9.
to die no more;Matt. 28. 19. and ha|ving
sufficiently instruct|ed
his Apostles in their
Office, and instituted the Sacrament
of Baptism whereby they were to ad|mit
men into his Church,Mark 16. 19
he was received up into Hea|ven,Luke 22. 69.
and sat down on theHebrews 8. 10.
right hand of God,1 Tim. 6. 15. in all
Power and Majestly,Eph. 1. 22. KingHebrews 7. 25.
of Kings,Acts 3. 26. and Head over
all things to the Church;Acts 17. 31.
and there,1 Thes. 4. 16. as the great
High-priest,Acts 10. 42. maketh Intercession for

us and blesseth us, rendring our Ser|vices
acceptable to God?
Do I believe, that at the day ap|pointed
by God, he shall come again
in Glory to judge the Quick and Dead,
according to his Gospel; and that we
must all appear before his Judgment
Seat,2 Cor. 5. 10. that every one may re|ceive
the things done in his
Body, according to that he hath done,
whether it be good or bad?
Do I believe,Luke 24. 29. That Christ
sent the Promise of his Fa|ther,Acts 1 4.
the Comforter,Acts 2. which
is the HOLY GHOST,Iohn 16. 13. to
guide the Church into all
Truth,Iohn 14. 16. to be with it for
ever,Rom. 15. 16. and to sanctifie our Hearts,1 Cor. 6. 11. to
believe, love, and obey the Truth,
and to prepare us by Holiness for Hap|piness
in the Presence of God for
ever?
Do I believe,Eph. 1. 22. that God
always had and will have
a peculiar People and So|ciety
of Men,1 Tim. 3. 15.Col. 1. 18. which make
One holy Catholick Church,Eph. 4. 11. 12.Eph. 2. 20. 21. 4. 4, 5.

or Body, whereof Christ is the only
Head, who ruleth and governeth it by
his Spirit and Word, and Ministers
under him, in Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline?
That all the true san|ctified
Members of this
Church are enlivened by
the holy Spirit of Christ,2 Cor. 13. 14Ephes. 2. 18.1 Iohn 1. 3.Heb. 1. 14.Heb. 12. 13.Eph. 4. 3. c.
and by the Communion
of the Spirit communicate in the Love
of the Father, and the Grace of our
Lord Iesus Christ, in the Ministry of
Angels, and the Prayers of glorified
Souls, and with all Saints in the same
holy Faith and Love and Offices of
Religion?
Do I believe,Acts 2. 38. that all who faith|fully
persevere in this holy
Communion of Saints have
the Pardon of their Sins gi|ven
them of God through Jesus Christ,Luke 24. 47.
proclaimed unto them by the Mini|stry
of the Word, and particularly ap|plied
and sealed unto them in the Sa|craments?

Do I believe,Acts. 24. 15. That the
Bodies of all men shall af|terIohn 5. 28, 29.
Death be raised up
again to Life,Mat. 25. 41. 46 and that
the Wicked shall go into everlasting
Torments,1 Thes. 4. 17. and the Righteous shall
live for ever in perfect Holiness and
Glory in the Presence of God in Hea|ven?1 Iohn 3. 2.
These are the chief Matters of
Faith, wherein we are to examine
our selves. But that we may know
whether we believe these things sa|vingly,
we are farther to enquire:
1. If we believe them understand|ingly.
To be satisfied herein, we
should do well to have the Approbati|on
and Judgment of God's Minister.
2. If we believe them with a divine
Faith, because of the Truth or Vera|city
of God who hath revealed them.
Be perfect therefore in the Scriptures,
that you may know they are taught
therein by God.
3. If we believe them firmly, so that
we are persuaded we dare even lay
down our Lives for the Truth.

4. If we believe them effectually and
practically, so that this Belief doth fill
our Hearts with the Fear and Love
of God, and produce strong Resoluti|ons,
servent Prayers, and strenuous
Endeavours to honour God by holy and
obedient Lives.
Yet here we are to note, That it is
not every doubting whether we under|stand
aright, or whether the thing be
a divine Truth, or whether our Faith
be firm and strong, or have sufficient
Influence on our Hearts and Lives,
that should dismay us: but whilst we
find, that notwithstanding some
Doubtings, our Faith is able to carry
us on in a Christian Course of Life,
trusting our Souls in well doing to the
Mercy of God through Iesus Christ, we
are to cheer up our selves, and using
the means of strengthening our Faith,
say, Lord, I believe, help thou my Un|belief.



CHAP. V. An help for the Examination of our Re|pentance
and Obedience.
IT is the great Blessing of
the Gospel,Matt. 9. 13. that CHRIST
came to call Sinners to Repentance.
That after the Law of Innocence was
broken,Luke 24. 47. and we were under the Curse
of Death, and an impossibility to be
saved by our own Righteousness, Re|pentance
is allowed of, and a new Obe|dience.
Repentance,Matth. 3. 2. in Scripture,Mark 1. 15.
is sometimes all one with
Conversion;Luke 13. 3. that is,Acts 3. 19. 26. 20. 2. 38. such a
turning and change of Heart
and Mind, that, being
brought to the Knowledge
of the true God and our Duty to him,
we renounce our former course of Life,
and resolve to serve and honour God
according to his Word. This fits us
for Baptism, wherein God's Minister,
in God's Name, admits us into the

Church, and assures us of Pardon up|on
our continuing living Members
of the same.
Repentance is also an
humbling sense of,Revelat. 2. 5. and
hearty Sorrow for any Sin
or Violation of our Baptis|mal
Covenant,2 Cor. 7. 9. 10. with a free
Confession of our Demerit,1 Iohn 1. 9. an earnest
begging of Pardon,Isai. 1. 16, 17. a resolving to
amend,Ezek. 36. 31, 32. and praying for God's Grace
so to do.
Now because all Sin is
Disobedience to the Law of
God,1 Iohn 3. 4. we may at once examine our
Repentance and Obedience by that Law,
it telling us our Duty, and our Con|sciences
telling us how we have either
done it, or are concerned for not do|ing
it. Ask then,
Have I done my best,1 Cor. 15. 34. by
such helps as God affords
me,Romans 1. 22. to attain to divine
Knowledge, and not contented my self
to live in Ignorance of God and of his
Truth? Hath the Knowledge of God
wrought in me a most high and ho|nourable

Esteem of him, an aweful
Reverence towards him, an entire
Resignation of my self to him, and
humble Obedience to his Govern|ment,
a total dependance and trust to
his Goodness, an unfeigned Love of
him above all things, and an ardent
Desire to enjoy him?
Do I love God for the ex|cellency
of his Nature,Matth. 22. 38. and
the beauty of his Holiness,1 Iohn 5. 3.
and his Goodness to me and all men;
especially as manifested in Iesus Christ?
Do I love him so, as to love his Laws,
and his Word and Worship, his Mi|nisters
and his Children; his House
and Day, and every thing that relates
to him? Is it the earnest desire of my
Soul to be able to honour him more,
and to be more like him in Holiness,
and can I find no rest to my Soul in
any thing but him?
Have I made his Wis|dom
my Director,Psal. 119. 24. and his
Will my Choice,Matth. 6. 25. and his
Promises my Confidence,Phil. 4. 6.
and his Laws my Rule,1 Pet. 5. 7. and depending

on his Providence in all dangers or
wants, using the lawful means which
he alloweth, and no other, without
any disheartning Fears, or anxious
Thoughts and Cares, commending the
Success to him in Prayer; dare I trust
all my Concerns, both in this World
and the next, to God, only through the
Mediation of Iesus Christ?
Do I not presume of Salvation by
Christ without the Sanctification of his
Spirit, nor hope for Mercy without
Repentance and Amend|ment
of my Life;1 Iohn 3. 3. but doth
my hope in God set me
upon cleansing my self from all Filthi|ness
of Flesh and Spirit,2 Corinth. 7. 1. and perfect|ing
Holiness in the Fear of God, never
despairing of his Mercy through Christ
so long as I sincerely desire and endea|vour
to serve him faithfully?
Have I been patient in
Wants,Mic. 7. 9. and Losses,Lam. 3. 39. and
Griefs,Iames 1. 4. without all repi|ning
at God's Dealings,Luke 22. 42. or
hard Thoughts of him?Romans 8. 28.
Do I thankfully receive his sharpest

Chastisements, improving them all
to Humility, and Amendment of Life,
and rejoycing in them as Tokens of
his Love, and as the Condition which
he hath chosen as best for me?
Have I not neglected to worship
God devoutly both in publick and in
secret,Iohn 4. 24. and do I not rest in
a formal outward Wor|ship,
and for low ends,Matth. 15. 7.
but heartily,1 Peter 2. 1. in pure Con|science
of Duty,Matthew 7. 7. to honour
God thereby?Romans 12. 12. Do I pray
fervently and reverently,Iames 5. 16.
and with a prepared and composed
Mind,1 Iohn 5. 14. and for such things as are a|greeable
to God's Will,Colos. 3. 16. especially for
Grace to enable me to honour him?
Have I reverently, attentively, and
constantly, read and heard God's Word,
treasuring it in my Heart as the Rule
of Life, and Foundation of Hope, not
enduring to hear it abused?
Have I kept holy the days of God's
solemn Worship, constantly frequent|ing
the publick Assemblies, and de|voutly
joyning in all the Services

there?Exodus 20. 8. Have I behaved my
self in God's House as in
his more especial Pre|sence,Matth. 21. 13.
and done what I was
able to maintain and up|hold
the holy Ministry,Heb. 10. 25. and
the Purity of God's Worship,Eccl. 5. 1. with|out
Heresie,Psalm 89. 7. Superstition,Luke 8. 15. Schism,1 Thes. 2. 13. or
Faction?
Have I duely and preparedly recei|ved
the Sacraments of Christ's Institu|tion,
and submitted my self to the
Government and Discipline of his
Church,Ephesians 4. 3. endeavouring to
hold the Unity of the Spi|rit
in the bond of Peace?
Have I had a religious
regard to the sacred Name
of God,Psalm 111. 9. in no case using
it blasphemously,Exodus 20. 7. profane|ly,Lev. 19. 12.
vainly,Rom. 2. 24. irreverently,1 Tim. 6. 1. or
willingly hearing it so
used,Titus 2. 5. either in common
swearing,Matth. 5. 34. needless swearing,Iames 5. 12. false
swearing, or in idle talk of God, or
hypocritical praying to God, or vent|ing
false Doctrine in God's Name, or

fathering any evil practice on God,
or by my wicked Life tempting others
to blaspheme the Name of Christ by
which I am called?
Have I made a right use of my Rea|son,
to judge of things as they de|serve,
and to consider my Obligati|ons
to God, and the great Concerns
of my Soul,Mark 8. 36. and to care for
it more than for my Body,
and to govern my self so by the Laws
of God, that I am ready to die, and to
give account of my self at the Judg|ment
Seat of Christ?
Have I check'd in my idle Thoughts,
and busied them in things useful?
Have I restrained and kept
in my Passions within the
Bounds of Religion,Colossians 4. 6. and
not been hurried by them unto any
Words or Deeds unbeseeming a Chri|stian?Ephes. 4. 29.
Have I well husbanded my time
in doing good, and lost wilfully as
little as may be?
Have I had just Thoughts of my
self as a vile Sinner, and hath not any
Opinion of my Birth, Parentage,

Strength,Metth. 5. 3. Beauty,Luke 17. 10. Riches,Rom. 12. 3.
Honours,1 Peter 5. 5. Wit, Learning,
any Action, Gift, Grace
or Vertue made me proud,
self-conceited, ambitious, or vain|glorious?
Have I thankfully acknow|ledged
all to be God's undeserved
gift, of which he may deprive me
when he will, and very justly, be|cause
I have not done so much good
by it as I ought?
Have I been temperate and sober,
not exceeding in Meat,Rom. 13. 13, 14.
Drink,1 Peter 2. 11. Sleep,Gal. 5. 16. Sport,Luke 21. 34. or
Apparel; and used them
all to the Health, Strength,
Refreshment, and Vigour
of my Body and Mind, that I might
the better serve God in the Duties of
my Calling? Have I not in any of
them wasted my time, weakened my
Body, disordered my Head, fed my
Lusts, consumed my Estate, disabling
my self to do my duties of Piety to
God, Justice to my Neighbour, Cha|rity
to the Poor, and providing for
my Charge, and educating my Chil|dren?

Have I carefully avoided super|fluous
Expences, bewitching Plea|sures,
tempting Company, Idleness,
and unprofitable Business?
Have I loved my Neigh|bour
as my self,Mark 12. 31. and done
to all men as I would they
should do to me,Matth. 22. 39. that is,Luke 6. 31.
all the good I could,1 Iohn 3. 18. and
no hurt;Heb. 3. 13. instructing,Col. 3. 16. ad|monishing,Heb. 10. 24.
reproving,Lev. 19. 17.
counselling,Iames 2. 16. comforting,Matth. 5. 42.
giving, forgiving, healing,
helping, relieving, speaking well of,
praying for him, and doing him all
good Offices according to my Power
and Opportunities?
Have I been thankful to others for
the like Kindnesses, studying to re|quite
them? Do I reverence with|out
Envy my Superiours in any kind,
am I loving and friendly to all my
Equals, and affable and helpful to my
Inferiours, without Pride or Disdain,
no way scorning, upbraiding, mock|ing
or vilifying them for any Infirmi|ties
or Imperfections?

Have I honour'd the
King and all inferiour Ma|gistrates,Rom. 13. 1. c.
praying for them
speaking no evil of them,1 Pet. 2. 13.
obeying their just Com|mands,1 Timothy 2. 1.
paying Tribute and Custom,1 Peter 2. 20. 3. 14.
suffering willingly for my Faults,Matthew 5. 10. and
patiently without resistance for well|doing,
discovering all Plots and Con|spiracies,
that I can know of, against
them, assisting them against their Ene|mies,
serving faithfully under them in
my lace and Calling, no way di|sturbing
the Peace, obstructing or re|proaching
the Government?
Have I esteemed the
Pastors and Governours in
the Church highly in love
for their Works sake,1 Corinth. 4. 1. not
defrauding them of,1 Thess. 5. 13. or
grudgingly paying,Heb. 13. 17. or by hard Bar|gains
diminishing their dues?Gal. 6. 6. Do I
pray for them,1 Cor. 9. 14. often consult them,
submit to their Teaching and Disci|pline,
and neither by my Absence
from Church, nor irregular Life, or
any war, discourage them.

Have I loved and ho|noured
my Father and Mo|ther,Matth. 15. 4.
concealing their Fail|ings,Exodus 20. 12.
bearing their Infir|mities,Ephes. 6. 2.
endeavouring their
Comfort,Col. 3. 20. obeying their Commands,Eph. 6. 1.
following their Counsel,1 Tim. 5. 4. praying for
their Happiness and long Lives, sub|mitting
to their Correction, relieving
and requiting them to my Power as
there was need?
Have I loved and done
all fatherly or motherly
Offices for my Children,Ephes. 6. 4.
given them devoutly to
God in Baptism,Heb. 12. 7. 9. pray'd for them,Col. 3. 21.
nursed them, instructed them, mo|derately
corrected them, restrained
them from Evil, given them good Ex|ample,
encouraged them in Goodness,
not pamper'd them in Back or Belly,
brought them up in Humility and
Modesty, provided them of honest
Callings, and married them religi|ously?
Have I loved my Brothers or Si|sters,
and manifested my Love to them

as there hath been occasion? Am I a
Father to the Fatherless, a Husband to
the Widow, a Deliverer to the Op|pressed,
a Reliever of the Poor? Do
I weep with those that
weep,Rom. 12. 1. and rejoyce with
those that rejoyce,Gal. 6. 9. 10. with a
fellow-feeling of their Joys
or Afflictions?Heb. 13. 1. c. Am I more especially
thus affected towards those of the
Houshold of Faith, mourning for the
Calamities of the Church, and pray|ing
for the peace and flourishing
of it?
Have I married no such as is for|bidden
by God, nor for unlawful ends,
nor against my Parents Will? Do I
use the Marriage-bed so|berly
and religiously?Heb. 13. 4. Do
I love,Eph. 5. 22. and live quietly and
kindly with my Husband
or Wife,Col. 3. 18. and faithfully
using his or her Bed only?1 Pet. 3. 2. c.
Do we bear with each others Infirmi|ties,1 Timothy 2. 9.
advising,Titus 2. 4. assisting,Mat. 19. 6. 9. comforting,
praying for and with each other, pro|mote
each others spiritual Welfare,

agree in governing the Family and
well-educating our Children?
Have I not used my
Servants hardly or cruelly,Colossians 4. 1.
but gently as Christian Bre|thren
or Sisters,Ephesians 6. 9. giving them their
due, instructing and allowing time to
serve God.
Have I diligently done
my Master's Commands,1 Timothy 6. 1.
studied his Profit,Eph. 6. 5. not
wasted his Goods,Titus 2. 9. or
wrong'd him of my time
or service by Idleness or any other
way?1 Pet. 2 18. Have I concealed his Secrets or
Infirmities, born his Rebukes and
Corrections without answering a|gain?
Have I done him Service as in
the Sight of God?
Have I murder'd no
man,Vid. hurt no man's Bo|dy,Romans 1. 29, 30, 31. 3, 4. 12, 9.
tempted no man to
Intemperance or any thing
which hath impaired his
Health or occasion'd his
Sickness or Death,1 Tim. 3. 3  11. 5. 13. 6. 4.Titus 3. 2. 3.Gal. 5. 19  26.Col. 3. 8. raised
no Quarrels or Dissenti|ons

among men, been angry causlesly,
or immoderately? Have I labour'd
to promote the bodily Welfare of
others as my own?
Have I defiled no man's
Wife,Mar. 7. 22. 10. 19. nor lusted after her,Matt. 15. 19.
committed no Fornication
or Uncleanness?2 Timothy 2. 3. Have I
checkt all lustful thoughts,1 Cor. 6. 8.
forborn all lascivious
words and Actions,Lev. 19. 16. not occasioning
Lust in my self or others by Idleness,Prov. 11. 13.
pampering the Body, using immodest
Dresses, amorous Gestures, obscene
Songs or Stories, unseasonable Fami|liarity,
and private Opportunities?
Do I use all means of preserving my
own and others Chastity?
Have I stol'n nor spoil|ed
no man's Goods,1 Peter 4. 15. nor
by force or fraud,Iames 3. 14. or co|lour
of Law,Ephes. 4. 31. injured him
in any part of his Estate?1 Thes. 4. 6.
Have I not begged with|out
need,Mic. 6. 10, 11. nor borrow'd
without punctually pay|ing
again,Gal. 6. 5.Rom. 14. 13.Luke 3. 11.Iames 2. 16.1 Iohn 3. 17.1 Cor. 10. 34.Luke 17. 3, 4. nor over-reach|ed

others in buying or selling by con|cealment
of faults, or taking advan|tage
of another's Ignorance or Neces|sity,
nor oppressed any by Usury or
Exaction? Have I laboured honestly
for my own Living, and freely gi|ven
and neighbourly lent as there was
cause? Do I make satisfaction for all
Trespasses, pay all Dues, and do what
I can to better another man's Estate as
mine own?
Have I no way injured
any one's good Name or
Credit,Matthew 5. 44. by false-witness,Rom. 12. 20.
railing,1 Thes. 5. 18. slandering,1 Pet. 3. 9. back|biting,1 Cor. 13 4. c.
busie prating of his
Behaviour,Mat. 5. 23. 7. 1. Infirmities or
Concerns; causless suspi|cions,
rash censuring and judging,
misconstruing and wresting his Words
or Actions, not checking or willingly
hearing others do so; gibing, scoffing,
playing upon him, or not righting
and defending him as much as we can
with Truth?

Have I not been too
selfish,Iames 5. 16. so that I could be
content to thrive by ano|ther's
Loss,Luke 19. 18. or value not
much the Publick or my Neighbours
Welfare,Ezek. 33. 15. so I may please my self?Rom. 13. 8. 12. 18.
Have I so learn'd to deny my self that
I can be heartily contented with, and
thankful for my present Condition be
it better or worse, and rejoyce to see
others in a better Condition than I
am in; that I can bear Poverty, and
Shame, and Injuries; and love, pray
for, and do good to Enemies? Am I
so little in love with the World, that
nothing therein can tempt me to
dishonour God or wrong my Neigh|bour,
or bear Malice or Hatred against
any man, or break the Bond of Love
and Charity, or to neglect the care
of my Soul?
These are the chief Branches of our
Christian Duty, whereby we may also
know our Sins, and what we have
more especially to repent of. And
here we are to note some things ve|ry
needful to be observed.

1. That though we are to aim at
the Perfection of Duty in all we do,
and not to satisfie our selves with
low degrees of Holiness, but to be
greatly humbled by the sense of our
Failings, and restlesly to strive after
better things; yet it is not a perfect
Obedience without Sin, but a sincere
Obedience without feigning and hy|pocrisie,
that is the Gospel-condition
of our Salvation through Christ Iesus.
It is not our duty to be perfectly inno|cent,
but it is our duty to labour after
Perfection. Tho then we find that
we offend in many things, and do all
that we do very weakly and imper|fectly,
we are not to discourage our
selves thereby, so long as we can find
our hearts sincerely bent to keep Co|venant
with God, and to honour and
serve him more perfectly.
2. That we are therefore narrow|ly
to search our hearts, to see that we
are sincere in our obedience. We are
to see, that all our obedience flow
from a true Love of God in our hearts,
and a sense of his Right to command,

and our Obligations to obey; that
our great design in all things be to
please God and to enjoy his Love,
and not any of those low ends of
pleasing men, or securing our own
Reputation, or our worldly Peace,
Profit, or Safety. And if our Obe|dience
be thus sincere, then do we
make a Conscience of those which
men account little Duties as well as
of greater, of shunning little Sins as
well as grosser Sins, of governing our
Thoughts and Desires, as well as
Words and outward Actions; we are
as religious in private as in publick,
where it is costly as where it is cheap,
where 'tis painful as where it is easie,
where it is against our natural Incli|nations
as where it suits with our na|tural
Temper, where it is discounte|nanced,
derided, or persecuted, as where
it is countenanced, commended, and
rewarded by men.
3. That having discovered our Sins,
we seek not any Excuses or Pretences
to cloak or lessen them, but endeavour
to view them in their ugliest and most

affrighting Shapes; as contrary to
the Purity of God, and the very Na|ture
of man as well as his Happiness:
against so much goodness, long-suffer|ing,
and patient Forbearance of God;
against so many Encouragements of
his present Bounty and rich Promises
of Reward; so many gracious Warn|ings
and Threatnings, so many father|ly
Chastisements and Corrections, so
much Light and Knowledge, so many
means, helps, and opportunities, so
many vows and engagements, so ma|ny
admonitions by Friends, and checks
by our own Consciences: after all this,
so long continued in, so much time,
strength, estate, wasted thereby; so
little of all this left to serve God
with, c. By such Considerations
must we labour to humble our proud
Hearts, and bring them to a perfect
Hatred of Sin.
4. That our Repentance be un|feigned,
and rest neither in confessing
our Sins, nor sorrowing for them, nor
begging Pardon, nor in any thing
else, till it come up to a hatred of Sin,

and a full Resolution to forsake it.
When it is come to this, we will be
very angry at our own Folly that we
have so long continued in it, very
thankful to God for any Chastisement,
thinking our selves mercifully dealt
with, whatever our Condition be, so
long as we are not in Hell; use cheer|fully
all helps and means, how hard
or sharp soever, to mortifie our Lusts;
thank any man that will reprove us
and shew us our Faults; watch dili|gently
against all Temptations, avoid
carefully all occasions of Sin; observe
jealously our Thoughts, Words, and
Actions; pray devoutly for more
Grace and Strength; abridge our
selves of many things lawful, and
punish our selves by crossing our own
Wills; not be ashamed to make pub|lick
satisfaction to the Church where
it is required, nor to open our Breasts
freely to the Guide of our Souls for
our own Satisfaction. We will do
any thing, or suffer any thing, to pre|vent
sinning against God.
These helps to Self-examination
might here have been omitted, had
I cause enough to believe, that they
for whose Ease and Benefit they are
chiefly design'd, had made as good
use of my little Book, called Christi|anity
in short, as I could wish they
had made. Those Summaries of
Faith and Duty which there they
have, might have served them for
this purpose. And here I think fit
to give my Readers notice, that I
suppose it would be very beneficial
to their Souls, once a Week or Fort|night,
or at least, when they have
examined themselves in order to this
Sacrament with the greatest Serious|ness
and Devotion, to use that form
of Resigning themselves to God, and re|newing
their Covenant with him,
which they have at the end of that
small Book.



CHAP. VI. How to examine whether we be rightly
disposed for the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper.
IF we be Christians, we have a right
to this Sacrament; yet, that we
may profit the more by it, we are
more particularly to examine our
selves both how we understand it,
and how suitable our Affections are
unto it.
I. We are to try how we under|stand
the Nature, Ends, and Benefits
of this divine Ordinance. To which
end, we are duely to consider the In|stitution
of it, as it is recorded in Scri|pture.
St. Matthew tells us,Matthew. 26. 26. c.
that as they were eating,
Iesus took Bread, and blessed
it,Mark 14. 22. c. (St. Luke saith, he gave
Thanks) and brake it,Luke 22. 19. c. and
gave it to the Disciples,1 Corinth. 11. 23. c. and
said, Take, eat, this is my

Body. (St. Luke addeth, Which is given
for you, this do in Remembrance of me:
and St. Paul saith, which is broken for
you, c.) And he took the Cup, and gave
Thanks, and gave it to them, saying,
Drink ye all of it; for this is my Blood of
the New Testament which is shed for ma|ny
for the Remission of Sins. (St. Luke
saith, This Cup is the New Testament in
my Blood which is shed for you) And
St. Paul saith, This Cup is the New Te|stament
in my Blood: This do ye, as oft
as ye drink it, in remembrance of me:
For as often as ye eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, ye do shew [or, shew ye]
the Lord's Death till he come.
By these Words of the Evangelists
and St. Paul, we may understand what
the meaning and use of this Sacra|ment
is.
1. It is a holy Christian Feast, not
much unlike the Feast of the Passover
among the Iews, at which this was
instituted by Christ.Exodus 12. When
they were in Bondage in
Egypt, God, in order to their Delive|rance,
destroyed all the first-born in

Egypt, commanding them to kill in
each Family a Lamb, and to strike the
Blood thereof upon the Door-posts of
their Houses, and so to feast upon it,
promising, that when he saw the
Blood he would pass over their Houses,
and not destroy their first-born. In
thankful Remembrance whereof, they
yearly kept the like Feast, called there|fore
the Lord's Passover. Thus by the
Sin of Adam we being all brought in|to
Bondage and Slavery under Satan,
it pleased God to destroy the Power of
the Devil, and deliver us by the Death
of JESUS CHRIST, the
Lamb of God which taketh
away the Sins of the World;Iohn 1. 29.
to redeem us by his precious
Blood as of a Lamb without Blemish and
without Spot:1 Pet. 1. 19.
so that Christ is our Pass|over
sacrificed for us.1 Cor. 5. 7. Therefore are
we to keep the Feast, eating our Pass|over,
the Body and Blood of Christ, in a
thankful Remembrance of this our
Redemption and Deliverance by his once
offering himself to God a Sacrifice for
our Sins.

In like manner, when according to
the Law, Men sacrificed Peace-offerings
unto God,Levit. 7. 20. they were al|lowed
to feast before God
on part of the same; to signifie, that
God now admitted them to an intimate
Communion and Friendship with him|self,
feasting them at his own Table,
of that meat which by their Oblation
was now in a special manner his. So
Christ, whom all the Sacrifices of the
Law did shadow forth and typifie, be|ing
offered once for all a Sacrifice of
Atonement for our Sins, calleth us
Christians to feast upon this Sacrifice,
though it was a Sin-offering; and even
upon the Blood of it (as the Iews were
not allowed to do in their Feasts) in
token of a more intimate Communion
and Friendship with God through him,
who hath made our Peace. This Sa|crament
then is a sacred Feast, and
that upon the sacrificed Body and Blood
of Christ: and as bodily we eat and
drink the broken Bread and poured|out
Wine, the Symbols of his Body and
Blood; so spiritually we eat his crucified

Body and drink his poured-out Blood.
2. The great end of this Feast is, to
keep up in the Christian Church a fresh
and joyful Remembrance of Iesus Christ,
and of all that he did and suffered in
the Flesh for us. This do, saith he,
in remembrance of me. It is his Plea|sure
that we more signally and so|lemnly
commemorate thus the Sacri|fice
of his Death by a lively Repre|sentation
of it at this Feast of Love,
and so shew his Death till he come.
1. We shew it hereby to our own
Hearts, for the stirring them up to an
holy rejoycing in Christ, praising him,
believing in him, loving him and
obeying him, and to bring them to
true Repentance and a perfect hatred
of Sin which crucified the Lord of
Glory.
2. We shew it to the World, decla|ring
to the Honour of our holy Iesus
what great things he hath done for
our Souls; that we are not ashamed
of a crucified Saviour, that we glory
before the World and rejoyce in him,
that he is the Food and Gladness of our

Souls, that we are resolved to be
faithful unto him whilst we live, and
are ready to dye a bloody Death for
him if he shall call us to it.
3. We shew it unto God, laying be|fore
him in our Prayers the Death of
his only begotten Son, as the most
powerful Argument, and all indeed
that we have, to prevail with him
for Pardon, and Grace, and Glory; of|fering
our Persons and our Services
to the Father as acceptable unto him in
the Vertue of this Sacrifice only.
3. The Benefits of this Sacrament
must needs be many, seeing herein
our blessed IESUS giveth himself unto
us to be the food of our Souls His Body,
which was broken for us, he here bids
us take and eat. His Blood, which was
shed for us, he here bids us drink, The
Cup of Blessing,1 Cor 10. 16. which we bless, is
it not the Communion or Com|munication]
of the Blood of Christ?
The Bread which we break, is it not the
Communication of the Body of Christ?
Christ, and all the Benefits of his Pas|sion,
are freely communicated to the

worthy Partakers of this Bread and
this Cup. The Cup of which we
drink, is the New Testament in his
Blood. Covenants were of old made
and confirmed with Sacrificings and
Feastings: the new Covenant of Grace
and Salvation was established with us
through the bloody Sacrifice of Iesus
Christ, and is renew'd and confirm'd
by our feasting before God on this Sa|crifice.
1. This Blood was shed for the Re|mission
of Sins, and by our worthy
drinking of it, we receive an Assu|rance,
That our Sins and our Iniquities
God will remember no more, Hebrews
8. 12.
2. God, by admitting us to his Ta|ble
to feast on this Sacrifice, owns us as
Members of his proper Family; and
will accordingly provide for us and
protect us. He will be to us a God, and
we shall be to him a People, Hebrews
8. 10.
3. The Promise of the Covenant was
this,Hebrews 3. 10. I will put my Laws
(saith God) into their,

Minds, and write them in their Hearts:
God will give the light of Knowledge
and the life of Grace; not only teach
us, but incline our Hearts to love and
delight in his Laws. Here is Life and
strength of Grace promised, but all
through Iesus Christ; he is the bread of
God which giveth Life unto the World;
and this bread is his Flesh which he gave
for the Life of the World, and he that
eateth this bread shall never hunger nor
die, John 6. 33. 51. 35.
4. The Bond of Vnion betwixt Christ
our Head, and us his Members, is
hereby strengthned. He (saith he)
that eateth my Flesh and drinketh my
Blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him,
Joh. 6. 56.
5. The Communion of Saints is here|by
preserved and maintain'd; by this
we declare, that we being many are one
Bread and one Body; for we are all Par|takers
of that one Bread, 1 Corinth.
10. 17.
6. Our Faith of the Resurrection is
hereby confirm'd; Whoso eateth my
Flesh (saith Christ) and drinketh my

Blood, hath eternal Life, and I will raise
him up at the last day, John 6. 54.
So many and inestimable are the
Benefits of the New Testament in
Christ's Blood by this Sacrament con|firmed
unto every worthy Commu|nicant.



CHAP. VII. What Affections of Soul are suitable to
this Sacrament.
HE eateth and drinketh
unworthily who dis|cerneth
not the Lord's Body.1 Cor. 11. 29. To discern
the Lord's Body, is to put a sufficient
Difference between this Divine Feast
and other common Feasts, both in our
Iudgment, Affection, and Behaviour.
How we are to judge of it, hath been
already shewn. We are next to see
what Affections it calls for.
We come not here to feast with
Men only, but with God; nor to feed
our Bodies with a little Bread and
Wine, but our Souls on the Body and
Blood of Christ. Let us then enquire,
1. Are we deeply sensible of our
spiritual Wants, and our great need
of this divine Food? Except we eat the
Flesh and drink the Blood of the Son of
Man, we have no Life in us, John
6. 53.

2. Are we highly sensible of God's
wonderful Goodness in providing so
graciously for our Wants? God so lo|ved
the World, that he gave his only be|gotten
Son, that whosoever beleveth on
him should not perish, but have everlast|ing
Life. All things (saith he) are now
ready, come ye to the Marriage. John
3. 16. Mat. 22. 4.
3. Do we verily believe, that who|soever
cometh preparedly shall be
kindly welcome? Him that cometh to
me (saith Christ) I will in no wise cast
out, John 6. 37.
4. Have we longing Appetites and
ardent Desires to this food of our
Souls? Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, for they shall
be filled, Matt. 5. 6.
5. Do we empty our Souls of car|nal
and worldly Thoughts and Cares
and Desires? Labour not for the Meat
which perisheth, but for that Meat which
endureth unto everlasting Life, which
the Son of Man shall give unto you, for
him hath God the Father sealed. John
6. 27.

6. Are we not ready to lay hold
on vain Excuses borrow'd from our
worldly Businesses of Pleasures? None
of those Men (saith God) shall taste of
my Supper, Luke 14. 24.
7. Do we labour to put our selves
into a fit habit and posture of Soul for
so divine a Feast? He that came with|out
his Wedding-garment was bound
hand and foot, and cast into outer Dark|ness,
Matt. 22. 13.
Now therefore we are as it were to
new trim up all our Graces, and ap|pear
with them before God in their
greatest Brightness, having our Souls
adorned, and adorning the Gospel of
Christ.
1. Let the Consideration of the
Odiousness of Sin to God, which he
would not pardon without the Death
of his only begotten Son, and of the
astonishing Love of God to Sinners
Souls, so that he would send his Son
to die rather than they should perish,
give Life to our Repentance.
2. Let this Consideration, that
Christ hath not only left us the History

of his Life, Death, and Resurrection,
in his Gospel, confirmed by many Mi|racles;
but hath also instituted a so|lemn
festival Commemoration of him|self,
which hath been constantly cele|brated
in his Church in all Ages,
wherein what by the Word is preach|ed
to our Ears is lively represented to
our Eyes, even Iesus Christ
evidently set forth crucified a|mong
us;Gal. 3. 1. set our Faith on work.
3. Let the wonderful Love of the
Father in giving his only Son, of the
Son in shedding his precious Blood for
us ungodly Sinners, rebellious Ene|mies,
hopeless Wretches, demonstrated
in this Feast of Love, enflame our
Hearts with the Love of God in Iesus
Christ.
4. Let the Promises of God that can|not
lie, first sealed in the Blood of the
everlasting Covenant, now renewed
and confirmed in this Sacrament, feed
and nourish our Hope.
5. Let the numerous Benefits of
Christ's Death, thus signally exhibited
and assured unto us, fill our Hearts

with Thankfulness, remembring that
this Sacrament is the Eucharist, a
thankful Commemoration of Christ,
and this Cup the Cup of Blessing, Praise,
or Thanksgiving.
6. Let our Deliverance from the
Vassalage of Sin and Torments of Hell,
and our new Title to the Kingdom of
Heaven,Ps. 116. 3. fill our Hearts with
spiritual Joy. Let us take the
Cup of Slvation, and call upon the
Name of the Lord, in joyful Songs and
Hymns of Praise.
7. As God, whom we have so often
provoked to Wrath and Indignation,
doth graciously condescend in Christ
Iesus to renew his Covenant of Mer|cy
to us; so let us most heartily come
to renew through the same blessed
Iesus our Engagements to him, and
do that which may correspond with
what Christ hath done for us.
Did he deny himself,Phil. 2. 5. ad 8. veiled
his God-head in mortal Flesh,
taking on him the form of a
Servant,Lu. 14. 26. humbling himself
to the Death of the Cross? Let us de|ny

our selves, take up the Cross, for|sake
all, and follow, him.
Was he Crucified for us?Rom. 6. 6. Let the Old-man be cruci|ed
in us with the Affecti|ons
and Lusts,Galat. 5. 24. 6. 14. let the World be cruci|fied
to us, and we unto the World,
let us make no more Provision for
the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof.
Did he give himself a
Sacrifice for our Sins?Psal. 51. 17. 107. 22. Let
us offer to God the Sacri|fices
of broken and con|trite
Hearts,Heb. 13. 16. the Sacrifice of Prayer
and Supplication, of Praise and Thans|giving,Rom. 12. 1.
of Almsgiving and Mercy;
and in a word, our Bodies a living Sa|crifice,
holy and acceptable to God.
8. Let this Feast of Love and holy
Communion oblige us to hold the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace,1 Cor. 5. 8. to purge out the
old leaven of Malice andEphes. 4. 32.
Envy,Gal. 6. 10. to forgive as God
for Christ his sake hathMat 5. 44.
forgiven us,Romans 12. 20. 21. to do good
to all men as we have opportunity,Mat. 5. 24.

especially to them that are of the
Houshold of Faith; to love our Ene|mies,
bless our Persecutors, pray for
our Haters, render good for evil, over|come
evil with good; and if going to
the Altar, we remember that our
Brother hath ought against us, go first
and be reconciled unto him.
When we are thus disposed we may
with an holy Boldness come to the
Lord's Table, and need not fear but we
shall have the Benefits thereof confer|red
upon us.



CHAP. VIII. How we are to behave our selves at this
Sacrament.
AS thou goest to the Church, medi|tate
all the way, or discourse
with thy Company of the Goodness of
God in inviting poor Sinners to his own
Table: Say thus with thy self.
O my sinful Soul, taste and see that
the Lord is good! O what a Love and
Goodness is this! that such wicked
Prodigals as we, who have so long
abused all the good Gifts which our
heavenly Father hath bestowed upon
us, in a vain, foolish, and sinful way
of living, should have such Encou|ragements
as these to return to our
offended God and Father! I will go
unto him, and say, Father, I have sin|ned
against Heaven and before thee,
and am not worthy to be called thy
Son, or to appear and feed amongst
thy Children. O Lord, not consider|ing
what thou hast made me, a ratio|nal

Creature, to know, love, and ho|nour
thee my great and good God, I
have used my self like a Beast, and
have fed with Greediness and Delight
amongst swinish Sinners, upon empty
Husks and Vanities. O blessed be thy
Name, who hast brought me to my
self again, to see, and lament, and hate
my past Folly. I am now in all Hu|mility
coming to feast my Soul with
thee in thy House, where there is
ever bread enough and to spare, even
the Bread of Life, my ever blessed
JESUS. O send out thy Light and
thy Truth! let them lead me, let them
bring me unto thy holy Hill and to
thy Tabernacles; then will I go unto
the Altar of God, unto God my ex|ceeding
Joy, and with all my Soul
will I praise thee O God, my God. I will
enter into thy Gates with Thanksgi|ving,
and into thy Courts with
Praise, I will be thankful unto thee and
bless thy Name: For the Lord is good,
his Mercy is everlasting, and his
Truth endureth to all Generations.

Entring into the Church, have
such Thoughts as these before the Service
begin.
O how dreadful is this place!
This is no other but the House of
God, and the Gate of Heaven. Holi|ness,
O God, becometh thine House
for ever. One day in thy House is bet|ter
than a thousand. Blessed is the man
whom thou choosest and causest to ap|proach
unto thee, that he may dwell
in thy Courts. I come, O Lord, into
thy House in the multitude of thy Mer|cy,
and in thy Fear will I worship
thee in thy holy Temple. I have lo|ved
the Habitation of thy House,
and the place where thine honour
dwelleth. O let me be abundantly sa|tisfied
with the Fatness of thy House,
and make me drink of the River of thy
Pleasures.
Ioyn devoutly with the Congrega|tion
in the Prayers of the Church, and
attend diligently to God's Word read
and preached. And when the Minister
is going to the Table, say thus:

Blessed be God for affording us Pa|stors
and Teachers: O how beautiful
are the Feet of them that preach the
Gospel of Peace, and bring glad ti|dings
of good things! O Lord bless
and assist this thy Servant in this
holy Ministration. Thou, O Lord, art
our Shepherd, we can want nothing;
thou preparest a Table before us, sure|ly
Goodness and Mercy shall follow
us all the days of our Life.
When the Bread and Wine are pla|ced
upon the Table, and thou art preparing
thine Offering, say thus:
O gracious Lord, what a miracle
of Divine Love do we here behold!
We have sinned against thee, and
yet thou callest not upon us for Sacri|fices
and burnt Offerings, but hast pre|pared
a Body for thy eternal Son, that
he in that might do thy Will, live
among us, and die a Sacrifice for us,
and here feed us on that Sacrifice of
himself to eternal Life. I have abun|dantly
deserved to be at this time in
Hell amongst the Devils, and dost
thou yet vouchsafe to feast me at thy

Table, amongst thy Children, on the
Body and Blood of thy dearest Son?
O astonishing Love! Let this thy love,
O God, pierce my Heart, and do thou,
O blessed JESUS, dwell therein for
ever.
The Earth is thine, O Lord, and
the fullness thereof. What can I ren|der
unto thee for all thine inestimable
Benefits. My Goodness extendeth
not unto thee, but to the Saints that
are in the Earth. Thou, O God of thy
Goodness, hast prepared for the poor.
Accept, I beseech thee, of my poor
Mite, receive this my humble Ac|knowledgment
of thy Bounty to me
poor Sinner, whereby I confess and
declare my self and all that I have, to
be at thy Command and Service, ac|cept
of me for Iesus Christ his sake.
When the Exhortation is read,
mind it well, and observe whether you
come so duely prepared as is therein said
you ought to be. Then say,
Search me, O God, and know my
heart; try me and know my thoughts,
and see if there be any wicked way in

me, and lead me in the way everlast|ing.
Who can understand his Errors?
Cleanse thou me from my secret
Faults.
When you are bid to draw near,
do so, both with Body and Soul, say|ing;
My Heart is ready, O God, my Heart
is ready; I will wash my hands in In|nocency,
and so will I compass thine
Altar, O God.
I come, O my God I come, for whom
have I in Heaven but thee, and there
is none upon Earth that I desire besides
thee. O hide not thy comfortable Pre|sence
from me.
Then humbly joyn in the Confession
of Sins, saying after the Minister, and
receive in the humblest Posture the Ab|solution
as from Christ himself interce|ding
for you at God's right hand and
blessing you. Draw Comfort from the
Sentences of Scripture read unto you,
and lift up your Hearts with joyful Prai|ses
unto God, as you are called upon to
do, heartily joyning in the following De|votions.

When the Minister consecrateth the
Elements, fix your Eye upon the whole
Action, and your Heart upon your cru|cified
Jesus, considering with what Pains
and Tortures on the Cross he finished
your Redemption.
When the Minister draweth near you
with the Bread, say;
Create in me a clean Heart, O God,
and renew a right Spirit within me.
When you take the Bread, say;
With all Humility and Thankful|ness
of heart I take this sacred Pledge
of thy Love, O dearest Saviour. Be it
according to thy Word, with thy cru|cified
Body feed my Soul to Life eter|nal.
Then eating the Bread, say;
O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one
God blessed for ever, I am wholly thine
and not my own; reign in me, rule
over me, O blessed Iesus, now and for
ever. By thee I live, through thee
let me grow in Grace and Goodness.
Keep me from hungring any more af|ter
Sin and Vanity. Lord, evermore
give me this Bread till thou bring me

to thy eternal Supper in thy Kingdom
of Glory.
Receiving the Cup, say,
I will receive the Cup of Salvation,
and call upon the Name of the
Lord.
Having drunk of it, say,
My Soul was a-thirst for the living
God; let thy Blood, O holy Lamb of
God, cleanse me and this whole Con|gregation
from all Sin. Let thy holy
Spirit be in us a Well of living Water
springing up into everlasting Life. I
have confessed my Sin, and thou art
faithful and just to forgive my Sin, and
to cleanse me from all Unrighteous|ness.
Take now, my blessed Lord, a
full and everlasting possession of thy
dear Purchase. As I believe we have
Redemption through thy Blood, even
the Forgiveness of Sins; so do I here
deny my self, and resolve by thy As|sistance
to follow thee even unto
Death. And, O thou God of Peace,
that brought'st again from the dead
our Lord Iesus Christ, that great Shep|herd
of the Sheep, through the

Blood of the everlasting Covenant,
feed, govern, and protect thy whole
Flock the Universal Church, make us
perfect in every good Work to do thy
Will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in thy Sight, through
Iesus Christ, to whom be Glory for
ever and ever. Amen.
During the time of the Distribu|tion,
if no Psalm be sung, (or, if a
Psalm be sung, then, during the Oblati|on,
or at any other vacant times) employ
your selves in such Meditations as these
following.
O how wonderful is the Love of
God! How doth the Lord triumph in
his Goodness, and rejoyce in his Mer|cy!
We that have a thousand times
over deserved to be weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of Teeth in
everlasting Fire, are here admitted to
feast and rejoyce at the Table of the
Lord.
O astonishing Love of the blessed
Iesus! O abominable Sins of us re|bellious
Wretches! Was thy holy Bo|dy,
my dearest Lord and God, thus

broken and torn, they precious Blood
thus shed and poured out for our sin|ful
Souls? And shall we not abhor
those cursed Sins of ours, and with all
due Hatred and Indignation cast them
off for ever? Shall we not renounce all
Kindness to our beastly Lusts, loath
our selves for our Iniquities, and give
our selves entirely to thy Service
(which is perfect Freedom) for ever|more?
O ravishing Love, that moved the
eternal Son of God to rescue us from
everlasting Torments, by the sharpest
Pains and Tortures of his spotless Bo|dy,
and the bitterest Agonies of his
purest Soul! That moved the blessed
and only Potentate, the King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, to condescend un|to
Sufferings, Shame, and Death, and
to be made a Curse for us, that we
might be made the Righteousness of
God in him?
Wast thou, O blessed Saviour, con|tent
for our sake to be despised and re|jected
of men, to become a Man of
Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief,

and have we so long hid, as it were,
our Faces from thee? Hast thou been
despised, and yet have not we esteem|ed
thee? Surely thou hast born ou
Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; thou
wast wounded for our Transgressions,
and bruised for our Iniquities; the
Chastisement of our Peace was upon
thee, and with thy Stripes we are
healed. All we, like Sheep, have
gone astray, we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord
hath laid on thee the Iniquity of us all.
Thou wast oppressed and afflicted,
yet did'st thou not open thy Mouth;
thou wast brought as a Lamb dumb to
the Slaughter; thou wast cut off out
of the Land of the Living; for the
Transgression of thy People wast thou
stricken.
O holy Iesus, I do most stedfastly
believe, that thou art the Lamb of
God that takest away the Sins of the
World; that thou hast in thine own
Body born our Sins upon the Tree;
and that in the Body of thy Flesh,
through Death, thou hast reconciled

us who were Enemies, to present us
holy and unblameable in God's sight.
Thou wast not ashamed to call us Bre|thren;
and because the Children are
Partakers of Flesh and Blood, thou 
thy self tookest part of the same,
and through Death hast destroy'd him
that had the power of Death, the
Devil.
We have not an High-priest which
cannot be touch'd with a feeling of
our Infirmities, but was in all Points
tempted as we are, yet without Sin.
Therefore may we come boldly unto
the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help
in time of need. Thou, O blessed Ie|sus,
being made perfect through Suf|ferings,
art become the Author of Sal|vation
unto all that obey thee.
O Lord, I poor Sinner fly for Re|fuge,
to lay hold on the Hope now
set before us. Thou art able to save
them to the uttermost that come unto
God by thee, seeing thou ever livest
to make Intercession for us. By thine
own Blood hast thou entered in once

into the holy place, having obtained
eternal Redemption, for us. Thou art
entered into Heaven it self now to ap|pear
in the Presence of God for us.
Thou art our Advocate with the Fa|ther,
the Propitiation for our Sins, and
we look for thee to appear the second
time without Sin unto Salvation.
O Lord, seeing thou hast given us
Boldness to enter into the holiest
by the Blood of Iesus, by a new and
living way which he hath consecra|ted
for us through the Vail, that is
to say, his Flesh: and having such an
High-priest over thine House, I here
draw near with a true Heart, in full
Assurance of Faith, having my Heart
sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
and resolving by thy Grace to hold fast
the Profession of my Faith without
wavering.
I do here, O Lord, in all Humility,
offer up my self to be a living Sacri|fice,
holy and acceptable unto thee
in vertue of the Sacrifice of thy dear
Son, desiring to glorifie thee with
my Body and Spirit which are thine.

Confirm, I beseech thee, now unto
my Soul, and to all here present, the
Covenant sealed in his Blood. Enable
us to continue stedfast therein for
ver.
Lord, make all that profess thy
Name zealous of good Works, unite
us in the same Faith and Love, and
let us keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace. Let us never for|sake
the assembling of our selves to|gether,
to celebrate the Memorial of
thy loving-Kindness, and shew thy
Death till thou come. Put thy Laws
into our Hearts, and write them in
our Minds, and enable us to cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in
the fear of God.
When the Distribution is ended,
joyn heartily in the Thansgiving, and
following Hymn of Praise.
Being return'd home, give hearty
Thanks for this Mercy afforded you;
pray for Grace to perform your
Vows, and return not too soon to
your common Business. Strive by

Meditation to keep a warm sense of
God's Goodness in your Heart, and
labour to strengthen your Resoluti|ons
of a Holy and Christian Life
Watch especially against the Sins you
have been lateliest guilty of, or  most inclined to, and sin no more
lest a worse thing come unto you.



CHAP. IX. The pretended Reasons for neglecting
this Sacrament briefly answered.
NO good man will seek an Excuse,
no wicked man can find one,
for not endeavouring to do his Duty;
and a Duty it is to do this in Remem|brance
of Christ. The Benefits are such
as cannot be slighted by a wise man,
the Necessity is such as cannot be dis|pensed
with by any man. Yet be|cause
men are too apt to deceive them|selves
out of their Duty and Happi|ness
at once by something that they
call Reason, and where they have no
good Excuse are ready to make a bad
one; in charity to their Souls, their
Vanity herein is to be shew'n them.
Obj. 1. We eat the Flesh and drink
the Blood of Christ spiritually by Faith
out of this Sacrament; what need there|fore
can there be of this Sacrament, see|ing
therein we are but to do the same?

Ans. This is all one as to say, We
do some part of our Duty, what need
is therefore of doing the rest? Or,
We believe in Christ, what need i
there to obey his Commandments?
It is enough to a Christian, that Christ
hath commanded it.
That Faith whereby we eat the
Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ spi|ritually,
implieth Obedience to the
Gospel of Christ; and it is an especial
Command of the Gospel to do this.
He then that neglects the doing of
this, neglects to obey the Gospel, and
therefore falsly pretends that he eats
and drinks spiritually the Flesh and
Blood of Christ. Whatever therefore
the Christian doth more in this Sacra|ment
than out of it, the willful Neg|lecter
of it is inexcusable, for he is no
Christian or true Believer.
Obj. 2. he that receiveth unworthily
receiveth Damnation to himself; there|fore
'tis safer to forbear.
Ans. So you may say, He that eat|eth
may, if he be not careful, eat
Poison, or choak himself, or surfeit

and die; and therefore 'tis safest to
forbear eating. Will you fast for this
reason?
Willful neglect is certain Damna|;
receiving is not so: Will you
prevent an uncertain danger of Death,
by killing your self?
If a man receive without Faith and
Repentance, he receiveth Damnation;
and so he doth if he do not believe
and repent, tho' he receive not this
Sacrament. What better is he then
for not receiving it? He perisheth ei|ther
way, receiving or not receiving
it.
A Communicant that being a peni|tent
Believer comes to the Lord's Ta|ble
without due Preparation and suta|ble
Affections, may receive thereby
Iudgment, (so the Word translated
Damnation may be englished) that is
some Chastisement, such as Weakness,
Sickness, or Death, 1 Cor. 11. 30. and
he is thus chastened, that he may not be
condemned, v. 32. But even this may
be prevented by judging our selves, or
duely examining our selves, v. 31. And

now which is safer, to judge our selves
and eat, or to neglect our Duty and
perish?
Obj. 3. But I am afraid I am unwor|thy,
and therefore dare not come to this
Sacrament.
Ans. In a strict sense, we are all
unworthy, even so much as to eat or
live, being Sinners, and deserving
Damnation.
In another sense, he is unworthy that
is ignorant, an Unbeliever, and wick|ed,
or no good Christian, and must not
come. But say,
Are you a sincere Christian, or a dis|sembling
Hypocrite? If the former,
prepare your self and come; if the lat|ter,
be ashamed of it and repent, for
otherwise you perish.
Obj. 4. I doubt of my Sincerity, and
he that doubteth is damned if he eateth,
Rom. 14. 23.
Ans. To do a thing, doubting that
it is an unlawful thing or a Sin, is that
which deserveth Damnation, accor|ding
to that Text. But you cannot
fear that the receiving of this Sacra|ment

is a Sin, it being a necessary Du|ty.
That which you doubt of is your
own Sincerity. If you be indeed un|sincere,
that is, a Hypocrite and a
Dissembler, you are not to receive it:
if you be sincere you may, there can
be no doubt of this. But you doubt
whether you be a sincere Christian. And
if this Doubt be so prevalent that you
rather judge you are not, I shall not
advise you to come to this Sacrament
till you be better satisfied of your Sin|cerity.
But then consider,
Will you contentedly rest in this
doubtful Condition? Can you be qui|et
in your Mind, till you find cause
to hope you are a Christian, and shall
be saved? If you find no cause to hope
this, why should you not forbear all
other Christian Duties as well as
this?
Why do you not lay open your con|dition
freely and impartially to your
spiritual Guide, and take his Judg|ment
of your Sincerity? If you use
not this or any other means of know|ing
your self, but rest contentedly un|der

your Doubts, and plead them as
an Excuse for not doing your Duty,
you are certainly no sincere Christian.
But if you are troubled that you
know your self no better, and are
above all things desirous to be a good
Christian, and endeavour by all means
to be so, and to know that you are so,
and give your self no rest, but mourn,
and pray, and examine your self, and
crave Advice, and set your self in ear|nest
about the Duties of Christianity,
these are good signs of Sincerity; and
you ought to receive this Sacrament,
and wait upon God for a farther Bles|sing.
Obj. 5. I fear I have not a saving
Faith, I have no Assurance of my Sal|vation.
Ans. Though such Assurance may
be had, yet I verily think, that the
far greater number of good Christians
want it, and are but working out their
Salvation with fear and trembling. To
labour after it is our Duty, to have it
is our great Comfort, but no Condi|tion
of Salvation.

Do you believe the Gospel, that he
that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved? that Iesus Christ is the Savi|our
of all them that, repenting of their
Sins, trust in his Merits, and live in
Obedience to his Government and
Laws?
Do you accordingly consent to be
saved by him upon these terms; and
striving against Sin, earnestly desire
and endeavour to live according to
his Gospel, and trust to him for Salva|tion?
This is saving Faith, whether
you have full Assurance or no, and
you are to receive this Sacrament for
the strengthning of your Faith.
Obj. 6. Faith worketh by Love, Gal.
and I fear I do not love God.
Ans. Are you convinced, that God
is the chief good, and ought to be lo|ved
above all things? And do you so
value him above all things?
Are you thereupon resolved to do
any thing, to part with any thing,
to suffer any thing, thereby to honour
him and enjoy his Love?

Do you thus practice, and can you
deny your self and your own Will to
do his? This is Love, that you keep
his Commandments. And though
you feel not such a passionate Lov 
you have for some other things, yet,
if you have this prizing and over-ruling
Love, that you do prefer his Will and
his Favour above other things, you
are to use this Sacrament for the con|firming
and farther inflaming your
Love.
Obj. 7. I fear I do not truly repent,
for I cannot weep for my Sins.
Ans. Can you hate them and avoid
them; and do you in Obedienee to
God, and of Love to him, shun all
Temptations, and watch against them?
If so, though your Eyes be dry, God
will not despise a broken Heart.
Obj. 8. But I feel Lusts and evil In|clinations
stirring in me.
Ans. So you shall whilst you live,
more or less. But do you not feed and
cherish them? Do not you delight
in them, nor obey and fulfill them?
Do you, on the contrary, check and

restrain them, and use all the means
of subduing and mortifying them? If
you find it thus, come to this Sacra|ment
with Comfort. Let not Sin
reign in you to fulfill the Lusts there|of,
and all will be well.
Obj. 9. I am not in charity with my
Neighbours, therefore I dare not come.
Ans. That is, You dare sin and pe|rish,
but you dare not leave off sin|ning
and do your Duty and be saved.
If you be not in charity, how dare
you pray for the Forgiveness of your
Sins as you forgive others? how dare
you sleep, lest you die out of Chari|ty?
Plead not Sin as an Excuse for
not doing your Duty, but leave your
Sin, and do it.
Obj. 10. But I am engaged in Law
Suits, and dare not come till they be
ended.
Ans. That is, You will have your
Right first, if you can get it, and
let God stay your leisure for his.
When you have got your Will of
your Neighbour you will do your Du|ty
to God.

But cannot you manage your Law Suits justly and charitably? Can you
not defend or recover your Right
without doing wrong or bearing ill
will to your Neighbour? Then do
you take a sad course, to damn 
own Soul to do your Neighbour an
ill-turn.
Do nothing but your Duty in go|ing
to Law, and you need not be kept
from your Duty in this Sacrament of
Christ.
Obj. 11. I have so much Business,
that I cannot prepare my self.
Ans. Is it honest and profitable Bu|siness
which you may do to the Glo|ry
of God? Then need it not hinder
you from doing this great Business of
your Soul.
Doth it afford you time to eat and
drink, to sleep, yea and perhaps give
and receive impertinent Visits? And
will it allow no time to prepare your
self for this Sacrament? See that you
make no more Business than is need|ful.

Examine your self daily, and stir
up your Affections to God, and renew
your Vows, and use only honest Bu|siness,
and the work of Preparation
will require no great time.
bj. 12. I receive it sometimes, but
why so often?
Ans. Where's the Zeal of the Pri|mitive
Christians, who communicated
every Lord's Day, or oftner?
What Reason can you give, why
this Sacrament should not be a part
of all our publick and more solemn
Worship, seeing it is a Duty where|by
we are so especially to own our
selves the Disciples of a Crucified Savi|our?
Have we not need often to stir up in
us the Remembrance of Christ, to
quicken and actuate our Graces? Are
they so lively and active in us?
Would not the frequent Celebrati|on
hereof keep in us a warm sense of
our Christian Duty, to live Godly,
Righteously, and Soberly?
Would it not keep in a constant rea|diness
to dye, and fit our Accounts for
Iudgment?

Can our unwillingness frequently
to communicate signifie any thing else,
but that we too coldly resent God's
Love to our Souls in Christ; and tha
we desire to have time enough be|twixt
Sacrament and Sacrament to 
get our Vows, and to enjoy our Sins,
and hope to make amends for all the
next time we receive?
Obj. 13. I see many that come to this
Sacrament little better for it, they live
no better Lives than they did before.
Ans. You see some that thrive not
by their Labour, nor grow strong by
their Meat, nor are cured by their
Physick. Will this move you to ne|glect
your Business, refuse to eat,
seek no Remedy when you are sick?
Must not you do your Duty because
others do it amiss?
Obj. 14. I have not found that Bene|fit
and Comfort by it formerly which should
encourage me to come to it again.
Ans. We are to do our Duty whe|ther
we get any thing by it or no.
If we reap not the Benefit, the fault
is neither in God, nor his Ordinance,

but in our selves. The Sun makes a li|ving
Plant grow, but drieth up a
dead one.
If we have done our Duty as we
ought, the Conscience of that should
comfort us very much.
If we hold on constantly in a Chri|stian
course of Life, we may presume
we have got good by this Sacrament,
and may get much more by receiving
it oftner.
Be more careful to do your Duty in
an acceptable manner, than too desi|rous
of sensible Joys and Comforts.
The Duty is ours to perform in its sea|son,
the Benefit is God's to give when
he pleaseth, and the Comfort may
be reserved to come in fully in Hea|ven.
Obj. 15. But I am guilty of back-sti|ding
into many Sins since the last Sacra|ment.
Ans. It is that which good men
have been guilty of, and for that
there is no less need of Humiliation
and Repentance, but there is more
room for Hope.

The more dangerously you have
fallen, the more care ought you to
take to rise again by Repentance, the
more need have you to renew you
Covenant, and to come for more
strength in your greater need.
Obj. 16. I shall but break my Vows
again, and incur the greater Damna|tion.
Answ. If thy Leg were broken,
would'st thou not set it for fear of
breaking it again? If thou art sick,
wilt thou not be cured for fear thou
should'st relapse and dye?
If indeed thou resolvest to return
to the Mire again, it is in vain for thee
to wash and be clean. But be in good
earnest to strive against thy Sin and
forsake it, and fear not, God's Grace is
sufficient for thee.



CHAP. X. The Stumbling-blocks cast in our way,
removed.
WE may well say here, as Christ
said in another Case, Some
there be who will neither enter into
the Church to receive this Sacrament
themselves, nor suffer those to enter
in that would, but are very busie in
laying such stumbling-blocks in their
way as they are not able to remove.
So that either they keep away from
this blessed Sacrament to their great
hurt, or struggle through their doubts
and scruples with much Galling and
Uneasiness, to their great disquiet. In
pity therefore to the weak, these also
ought to be removed.
1. Some have been made to think it
unlawful to receive the Sacrament where
it is administred with a prescribed form of
Words.
Not to prove here the Lawfulness
and Vsefulness too of set and prescribed

Forms of Prayers in the publick Wor|ship
of God, it will be sufficient, in
reference to this Sacrament, to consi|der
thus much.
1. That when our blessed Iesus
commanded this to be done in |membrance of him, he neither com|manded
nor forbad it to be done by a
set or prescribed Form: it is therefore
certainly left to the Discretion and Pi|ety
of the Church to consider which is
most expedient and conducing to Edi|fication,
a Form or no Form; and to
act accordingly. The thing must be
done, and with a prescribed Form or
without one, it must be done. Christ
hath not told us which way, and who
shall determine the matter but they
to whom he hath committed the
ordering of all such things in the
Church?
2. If in any part of the publick
Worship a prescribed Form be expedi|ent,
it must be in this. 'Tis the Feast
of Love, and a holy Communion, where|in
we declare our selves one Bread and
one Body; 'tis therefore in a great

measure even necessary, that before we
come together we should have before
our Eyes the things wherein we are
nanimously to joyn, the Words to which
we are to say, Amen: and not go at
nture to joyn in we know not
what, and commit our Thoughts and
Devotions there to the conduct of a
single man, that loves it may be to
hear himself talk, and to shew his
Wit and Eloquence in Words, (to say
the best of them) for the most part
unintelligible to the greater number of
Communicants.
Yea, seeing, to the great Grief of
all good Christians, the Devil and his
Instruments have ever been very busie
to deform this holy Ordinance, and to
turn this Sacrament of Union into a
bone of Contention; it well becometh
the Church to use all care, that nothing
be said or done in this Administrati|on,
but what is according to Truth
and Godliness. And certainly it would
be no good sign of such Care, to
leave every Minister to his own
Discretion, to use his own affected,

and perhaps erroneous, Way and
Words.
II. Others are made afraid to kneel in
receiving this Sacrament, because th
Apostles at the first Institution did not so 
and because the Papists doing so 
the Bread and Wine.
If the Apostles kneeled not, yet they
neither sate nor stood. And if they
used a Supper-gesture, it was on occa|sion
of the Passover whereat this Sacra|ment
was instituted. Christ hath com|manded
that this be done, that is, that
Bread and Wine be blessed and broken
and distributed, taken, eaten, and drank
in Remembrance of him; but he hath
not commanded any Gesture, nor ex|presly
forbidden any. This therefore
also must be left to the Prudence of
the Church, as all other Circumstan|ces
of this sacred Action, till it can be
shewn that the bare Example of the
Apostles did oblige us perpetually to
imitate it; which here cannot be
shewn: and therefore to say it did, is
to add to the Word of God, and to lay
a Snare before Mens Consciences; it

being hard, for most men at least, to
give a reason, why their Example in
this Circumstance of Gesture, should
ore oblige us than in others of Time,
Place, Number, c.
Kneeling is a Gesture of Humility,
and that better becometh vile Sinners
offering their Prayers and Praises at
the Throne of Grace in the Vertue of
the Sacrifice of Christ, than any Posture
of Familiarity, such as sitting especially
is. However, seeing, it is enjoyned,
were it less convenient, yet he hath
certainly no very great Love or Ap|petite
to this divine Food, who will
rather want it than receive it on his
Knees, and chooseth rather to disobey
Christ in not doing this at all, than
obey the Church in doing it thus,
when there is no Divine Law to the
contrary.
And if the Papists do kneel to wor|ship
the Elements, may not we there|fore
kneel to worship Christ? The
Church of England hath sufficiently de|clared
against worshipping the Ele|ments;
and if she knew you did

so, would cast you forth as Idola|ters.
III. But we must thus communicat
with Sinners in a mix'd Congregation
and we are forbidden so much as to eat
with such, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and commanded
to withdraw from every Brother that
walketh disorderly, 2 Thes. 3. 6. and to
come out from among them and be sepa|rate,
2 Cor. 6. 17.
You must come out from Heathens,
and be separate from Idolaters, such as
were those Unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6. 14,
15, 16. But none but baptized Persons
and Professors of Christianity, are ad|mitted
to the Lord's Table.
You must also withdraw your selves
from disorderly Walkers, as you are
commanded, 2 Thess. 3. 6. not famili|arly
to converse them, so as to partake
with them, or countenance them in
their Wickedness or Idleness; but set
a note of Disgrace upon them by
shunning their Company and Familia|rity,
to make them, if possible, ashamed
of themselves. Yet must we not look
upon them as Enemies, but admonish

them as Brethren, v. 14, 15. All this
plainly relates to our ordinary Conversa|tion
with such men, and nothing is
ere said about communicating in this
Sacrament.
e sure that you be none of those
whose Company is here forbidden to
Christians, such as are disorderly Walk|ers,
that obey not the just Orders of
their Pastors and Governours (v. 14.)
but are unruly and will not be go|verned
(1 Thes. 5. 14.) and such as
cause. Divisions and Offences contrary
to the Doctrine that they have learnt,
Rom. 16. 17.
In the same sense we must not eat,
that is, familiarly converse with wick|ed
Christians, 1 Cor. 5. 11. For that it
is ordinary Conversation that is there
meant seems plain, because 'tis such a
keeping Company with them, as the
Apostle allows them with Heathens and
Idolaters, v. 10. which cannot be at the
Lord's Table whither they are not ad|mitted,
but only Professors of Chri|stianity.

Though we are to withdraw from
such wicked and disorderly Persons,
so far as not to countenance them, but
endeavour to make them ashamed o
their Sins; yet must we
be careful to do this orderly,1 Thess. 4
and as becometh Christi|ans.1 Peter 4. 15.
And this you do not, if you stu|dy
not to be quiet and to do your own
Business, but delight to be busie-bodies
in other mens matters. If you suffer
for that, you have the just Reward of
your busie-boldness.
Qu. But must wicked men be admit|ted
to this Sacrament?
Ans. No, not if they be notorious,
and have not declared their Repentance.
They ought to be admonished, and if
stubborn, cast out of the Church by
those to whom it belongs to do it.
Leave that to your Governours, and do
you the Duty of private Christians.
Remember Charity think|eth
no evil,1 Cor 13. 5. 7. but believeth
all things; it judgeth not rashly, but
hath as good an Opinion as may be
had of all men. Be sure then that you

have sufficient ground for it when you
judge any one wicked.
Take heed also of spiritual Pride in
your self, and that your unreasonable
swelling with self-conceit cause not
 Brother to seem little and vile
in your Eyes.
See that you count not any man a
wicked man only because he is not of
your Opinion, or because he is not of
your Party, or dares not separate from
the Church as you do, or censure other
men as boldly as you do, or have as
high an Opinion of his own Godliness
as you have: it is no good sign of that
Purity which some pretend to, that
they scruple at a Form or Ceremony,
but not at being drunk, or being unjust
in not paying every man his due, or
reviling their Governours, or uncha|ritably
censuring the whole Church;
or, that they dare not come to the
Lord's Table with wicked men, but
dare go to the Ale-house with them.
See that you have discharged a good
Conscience towards your Brethren, be|fore
you abandon their Communion.

Have you friendly re|proved
and admonished
them privately?1 Thess. 5. 14. Talk not
to others of their Wickedness till you
have first told them of it.Matth. 18. 15. If this have
done no good upon them,2 Thess. 3. 15. have 
admonished them again before two or
three Witnesses? If this prevail not,
have you told the Minister and desi|red
his help to reform these Sinners?
If he cannot reclaim them, have you
endeavour'd to have them cast out of
the Church by Excommunication? If
you have not done this, where's your
Charity to your Brother? where's
your Obedience to God? Where's your
Zeal for the Church's Purity? You have
more cause to be afraid of your own
Sins, than of other mens: nay, you
become by this neglect, Partakers of
other mens Sins, which you pretend
to be the very thing you are so greatly
afraid of.
Obj. You say, perhaps, you have done
all this, and yet these Sinners are not ex|cluded,
but admitted.

If it be so, it is not well; yet it is
not your Fault that they are admit|ted;
but it is your Fault if you will
not do your Duty because other men
will not do theirs.
Obj. But I shall so profess Communion
with the wicked.
Ans. By the course you have taken
you have done what was your Duty,
to avoid their Communion. You come
not to communicate with the Wick|ed,
but with sincere Christians.
Obj. But by so doing I shall countenance
them, and seem to own them as good Chri|stians.
Ans. By what you have done to
amend them, and by what you may
still do in continuing to reprove them,
you prevent that danger.
There were very wicked Persons
in the Church of Corinth, such as the
Apostle orders to be cast out and deli|vered
to Sitan; yea at the Sacrament
there were Divisions and Factions, and
some were drunk. These things St.
Paul reproves them for; but you no
where hear him bid others abstain

from the Sacrament because of such
men, but he bids them examine them|selves
and eat.
IV. But you say; you dare not receive
this Sacrament at the hand of a wicked
Minister, and you take yours to 
such.
It is not well if he be such indeed;
and if he be openly such and not re|moved,
some others are to blame as
well as he. Have you admonished
him? Have you again admonish'd
him? If that would not do, have
you complained of him, and used all
the means in your power to have him
either reformed or turn'd out? If this
be not done, you have not done your
Duty either to him, or your own
Soul, or the Church of God. Com|plain
not then of his Wickedness, but
your own.
Have you used all these means in
vain to reform or remove him?
Then if you can conveniently you
may remove to some place where
you have a better. If you cannot,
you are to be content, and receive

the Food of your Soul from a dirty
hand, rather than want it. You
would not refuse the King's Pardon
though a Drunkard or a Swearer
brought it you. This Meat nourish|eth
not by vertue of the hand of him
that ministreth it unto you, but by the
Blessing of God that giveth it. Take
it as from the hand of Christ him|self,
and have Faith in him, and when
you have done what legally you can
to get a good Minister, you shall
fare no worse for a bad one in the
end.
Obj. But though I can find no great
Fault otherwise with the Minister, yet
this I like not, that he admits scandalous
Sinners to the Communion.
He is indeed to charge all such to
abstain from this Sacrament till they
declare their Repentance. He is not
to admit such, if he know them, till
they have declared their Repentance,
and made such Satisfaction as the
Church requireth. Do you certain|ly
know then that he doth other|wise;
and have you acquainted him

who they are, and satisfied him that
they are so indeed? Usually such men
keep most out of his way, and he is
least acquainted with them, and hath
at most but an uncertain Report of
their Vices; and they that bring him
this Report, refuse to prove the Truth
of it; and when he enquires of the
Persons themselves they deny it, and
he dare not deny them the Priviledges
of Christians, till he have better
grounds to go upon. Or if you are
sure the Minister was not ignorant of
their wicked Life, are you sure also,
that they have not, before they were
admitted, given him all the Satisfa|ction
he could in reason demand in
such a case?
You ought to be sure of these things
before you censure him so hardly.
And if you be sure he is guilty, com|plain
of him, after due Admonition,
and I am confident this Fault will be
amended. But if unfit Persons be ad|mitted
by him ignorantly, and you
know of it, and do not inform him

better, it is your selves on whom this
Guilt will lye.
The good Lord grant that we may
all more conscientiously do our
Duties in our several Stations,
that his Name may be glorified,
his Church may flourish in Truth
and Purity, and Peace and Love
may abound amongst Christians.



Some short Directions and
Prayers.
WHen you go to examine your Faith
by the help I have herein given
you, or some other, fall humbly before
God on your Knees, and heartily say;
O most glorious God, who madest
me that I might know thee, and
knowing thee might love thee, and
loving thee might be for ever happy
in thy Love; I poor Sinner do here
most humbly bewail and confess
my great, and alas, too willful Ig|norance
of thee: O! for his sake
whom thou hast sent to call us out
of Darkness into Light by his Go|spel,
even JESUS CHRIST, in
whom dwell all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge; enligh|ten
my dark Soul by thy Word and
holy Spirit, with the saving Know|ledge
of the Truth, and incline my
Heart firmly to believe it even to

the end. Remove from me all pre|judice
and blindness of Heart; let
not the God of this World any longer
darken the Eyes of my Understanding,
or delude my poor Soul to believe a
Lye, or possess me with a desire of
vain Knowledge which profiteth not
unto Godliness, but enable me daily
to grow in all Grace and the Know|ledge
of thee the only true God, and
Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent.
Help me at this time to discern my
Errors, and the Imperfections in my
Knowledge and Faith, and to correct
them. Strengthen me to hold fast
without wavering the form of sound
Words, which thou teachest and not
Man; that persevering stedfast in the
same unto the Death, I may receive
the end of my Faith, even the Sal|vation
of my Soul, through Iesus
Christ my blessed Lord and Saviour.
Amen.
At the end of every Question, consi|der
well; and if you find you so be|lieve,
say:

For ever blessed be God, who hath
enlighten'd my Soul with the Know|ledge
of this sacred Truth, and Faith
in him: O Lord, encrease this Know|ledge,
and confirm this Faith in me
unto the end.
If you doubt in any point, note it well,
and say;
O Lord, pardon thy Servant, I am
weak and blind; open mine Eyes,
what I know not teach thou me, by
thy holy Spirit guide me into all the
Truth, for Iesus Christ his sake.
Having noted all your Doubts, take a
fit opportunity to consult your Pastor for
better Instruction.
At the end of this Examination, thus
pray:
O most blessed God, if my Heart
deceive me not I firmly believe all that
I know of thy sacred Truth. Thou
know'st, O Lord, the scantness of my
Knowledge and weakness of my
Faith, I most heartily beseech thee to
pardon my Imperfections, to keep
me from Heresie and Error, and to
strengthen me daily in the true Faith

of our Lord Iesus Christ. Let me not
rest in an idle and dead Faith, but
make it lively and active in me, pu|rifying
my Heart from all Hypocrisie
and Uncleanness, kindling in me a
fervent Love to thee and to thy Laws,
working in me by Love an universal
Obedience to thy blessed Will, enabling
me to overcome the World, subdue
the Flesh with the Lusts thereof, to
quench all the fiery Darts of the De|vil,
to resist all his Temptations unto
Victory, to be conformed daily more
and more to the Image of Christ, to
be strong against all Sufferings and
the Terrors of Death, and finally to
lay hold on eternal Life, through thy
Mercy, and the Merits of my blessed
Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen.
When you are to examine your Re|pentance
and Obedience, pray to this
sense.
Most great and good Good, the
searcher of Hearts and trier of the
Reins, who art every where present,
and from whom no Darkness can hide
us; thou compassest my Path, and

my lying down, and art acquainted
with all my ways: there is not a word
in my Tongue, nor a thought in my
Heart, but thou know'st it altogether.
My heart, O God, is deceitful above
all things, and I cannot find it out,
neither understand the errors of my
ways, nor the sincerity of my Purpo|ses,
without the help of thy holy Spi|rit.
Help me, O my God, help me, I
beseech thee, to know my self and the
true frame and temper of my Soul;
shew thou me wherein I have offend|ed
thee in Thought, Word, or Deed;
grant me a true and a humbling sight
and sense of all my Sins; let not my
Ignorance blind me, nor self-love be|guile
me, nor the common practice of
the World delude me into a false Opi|nion
of my self and my own Righte|ousness:
but enable me, I humbly be|seech
thee, to find out all my Sins, to|gether
with all the Aggravations of
my Guilt; make me truly vile in
mine own Eyes, and heartily sorry
for all my Failings; enable me to hate
and forsake every evil way, and to

turn unto thee by an unfeigned Re|pentance,
and a sincere Obedience to
all thy holy and good Laws; that I
may have my fruit unto Holiness, and
the end everlasting Life, through Ie|sus
Christ my only Lord and Saviour.
Amen.
After every Question pause a while,
and impartially judge your self; and where
you think you have done any part of your
Duty, say;
Blessed be my good God through Ie|sus
Christ, who by his holy Spirit hath
enabled me either to will or to do any
good thing in his Sight. O Lord, I
have done all very weakly and imper|fectly,
and most humbly beg thy par|don.
If I have done any thing well,
not unto me, O Lord, not unto me,
thy very unprofitable Servant, but
unto thy Name, be the Glory, through
Iesus Christ my Lord.
Where you see your sin, lay it in ear|nest
to your Heart, and say;
O Lord, I have herein sinned most
grievously against Heaven and before
thee, and am not worthy to be called

thy Child: God be merciful to me poor
Sinner who deserve nothing but Hell
and Damnation: O grant me Repen|tance
unto Life, and enter not into
Judgment with thy Servant, but par|don
my Sin, and lead me in the ways
of thy Commandments to eternal life,
through Iesus Christ.
If you have offended or injured any
man, note it well, and take some sit time
to confess it to him, satisfie him, and beg
his Pardon.
If your Sin be publick and scandalous,
think not you have done enough till you
have publickly testified your Repentance,
as the Church shall require it of you.
When you are in any doubt, resort again
to the Minister, confess your Sin freely
to him, and crave his Iudgment and Di|rections.
After Examination, pray earnestly to
this effect:
O most holy and just God, who per|fectly
hatest all Iniquity, and will not
have Mercy on any impenitent Sin|ner,
how should so vile and polluted
a Wretch as I am dare so much as to

take thy holy Name into my defiled
Mouth. O Lord, I am a most grievous
and abominable Sinner, and do alto|gether
deserve thy fierce Wrath and
heavy Indignation. It is a very great
wonder of Mercy, that thou sufferest
me yet to live, and hast not long since
cast me into Hell, and given me the
Wages of Sin for which I have so long
labour'd. How many and foul are the
Sins which thou hast now enabled me
to discover in my self! even the least
of this black number is enough to con|demn
me to endless Torments; and
whither then would not such a multi|tude
of foulest Transgressions sink me,
if thy Mercies were not infinite, and
thy Patience truly wonderful! Yet
alas! how few are all these in compa|rison
of those which have escaped my
Observation, but cannot be hid from
thine all-seeing Eye? And if I appear
so vile in my own Eyes, how loath|some
and abominable a thing must I
needs be in thine? My Sins (O God)
are not a few but many, no small Of|fences,
but very heinous Transgressi|ons,

few of them rare with me, but
most of them very often repeated, long
continued in, and become even fami|liar,
customary, and habitual. Yea,
O Lord, with shame and confusion of
Face I confess, that I have had so lit|tle
regard to thy Will, that I have
even sinned, as I eat and drink, with
all greediness and delight. Though
thou hast never been wanting to me
in any help to enable me, or any Re|membrancer
to mind me, or any Mo|tive
to invite me, or any Bounty or
Promise to encourage me; yet have I
made a very bad use of all thy Good|ness:
and by that very Patience and
Forbearance which should have led me
to Repentance, I have encouraged my
self to sin the more freely, even with|out
fear, and I may justly fear, to the
great hardening of my Heart. Tho
I have lived long under the bright
Light of thy Gospel, and have thy
Word sounding in my Ears daily, and
have thy Ministers ready at hand to
instruct me; yet am I very ignorant,
and have even hated Knowledge and

despised Instruction, and cast thy
Words behind. Though I have had
many seasonable Monitors of my Du|ty,
and felt many motions of thy good
Spirit, and suffered many Checks from
my own Conscience; yet have I turn|ed
my Back upon thee, and done al|most
none of thy Commandments.
Nay, after the most solemn Engage|ments,
Covenants, and Vows, I have
treacherously revolted from thee, re|belled
against thee, and set at naught
all thy Goodness to me. I have a false
and treacherous Heart, which hath
never yet kept Faith with thee. I find,
to the great discomfort of my Soul,
that I have dissembled with thee, and
gone about to mock thee by feigned
Professions, counterseit Repentances,
and hypocritical Devotions. Even
now, O Lord, I feel not that deep
Humiliation, that piercing Grief, that
Anger, and Hatred, and Indignation,
against my Sins, and my self for che|rishing
them, that I ought to have:
neither do I find in my Heart, that
servent Love of thee, that true Zeal

for thy Honour, that hungring desire
of Righteousness and Holiness that
should be in me. And now, O my
God, what can I have to say for my
self after all this? Why should'st thou
not deal with me as I have justly de|served,
and reward me with Indig|nation
and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish? If thou should'st even now
instead of accepting my Confession,
throw me, in thy just Fury, into un|quenchable
Flames with the Devil and
his Angels, thou wert most just in so
doing, and even merciful in taking Ven|geance
of me so late, when I had so
often and long provoked thy Wrath
before. O Lord, I have nothing to
plead in my own Excuse, I have no|thing
to fly unto, but that Mercy of
my good God which I have so long
abused. O hide not thy Face away
from me, but humble my Soul yet
more for my Unworthiness; break
my Heart into true Contrition that
it may yet be an acceptable Sacrifice
unto thee; give me not over unto vile
Affections, nor a reprobate Mind;

break the dominion Sin hath got over
me, for the earnest desire of my Soul
is to be thy Servant, and only thine
for ever. O gracious God, we have an
Advocate at thy right hand, even Ie|sus
Christ the righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for our Sins; him thou
sentest into the World to be the Savi|our
of lost Sinners, and hast promised,
that no Man shall perish or be rejected
that cometh unto thee by him: for
his sake pardon me, for his sake have
Mercy upon me; by the bitter Death
and Passion of thy dearly beloved Son
in whom thou art well pleased, I be|seech
thee, O holy Father, to look
graciously upon me, and blot out all
my Transgressions, and restore unto
me the Joy of thy Salvation. Cleanse
and purifie my sinnful Soul in his
Blood, receive me graciously into the
number of thine adopted Children, rid
me and set me free from the power of
Sin, and slavery of my Lusts; let thy
holy Spirit rule for ever in my Heart,
and deliver me from the Law of Sin
and Death in my Members. O speak

Peace unto thy Servant, and let me yet
live to praise thy Name; let me not
return any more with the Dog to his
Vomit, nor with the Sow to her wal|lowing
in the Mire; but work in me a
perfect Hatred of all that thou hatest,
and a true Love to all that thou lovest.
Strengthen me by thy Grace to with|stand
all Temptations, and to perse|vere
and grow in Faith and Love, and
all Goodness, to deny all Ungodliness
and worldly Lusts, and to live hence|forward
righteously, soberly, and
godly in this present World; patient|ly
and comfortably looking for that
blessed Hope, and the glorious Ap|pearance
of the great God and our Sa|viour
Iesus Christ, who gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from
all Iniquity, and purifie unto himself
a peculiar People zealous of good
Works. In his blessed Name and per|fect
Prayer, I here commend unto thee
all the Desires and Needs of my poor
Soul, and of thy whole Church. Our
Father, c.


A Prayer before the blessed Sacrament.
O Most merciful God and Father
in Iesus Christ, who of thine in|finite
Love and Goodness to our poor
perishing Souls, hast provided for us
all things that be needful to us in our
polluted and miserable Condition,
whereinto we have brought our selves
by Sin and shew'st Mercy unto us
even when we would have no Mercy
on our selves: I am here, O Lord,
prostrate at thy Foot-stool, a vile
Wretch, that have again and again
deserved to be punished with everlast|ing
Destruction from thy presence.
And will the great God of Heaven and
Earth vouchsafe to look upon such a
Dog as I? Shall the so often offended,
dishonoured, provoked Majesty of the
glorious God, condescend even to in|vite
and beseech so traiterous a Rebel
as I have been, to accept of Pardon
and Salvation? And shall I yet despise
thy loving-kindness, O my gracious
God, and neglect so great Salvation as

this that thou daily tenderst unto us in
the Son of thy Love and our blessed
Saviour Iesus Christ? When we were
gone astray from thee the God of our
Life, and were going head-long to
Destruction, thou wert pleased to open
unto us a new and living way by the
Death of thy only begotten Son. When
we lay polluted in our Filth, and odi|ous
to thy pure Eyes, thou opened'st
for us, in his precious Blood, a Foun|tain
for Sin and for Uncleanness. Thou
hast not disdain'd to admit me poor
Sinner into thy holy Church and Fami|ly
by Baptism, and into a sacred Co|venant
of Grace and Peace with thy
self through the Blood of the blessed
Mediator. And even now after so ma|ny
careless and even willful Violations
of this holy Covenant, thy Mercy fol|lows
me with fresh Offers of Reconci|liation,
and thou hast invited me to a
Feast of Love in thy House, and at thy
own Table, and on the Body and
Blood of thine own dear Son and my
blessed Redeemer. O my most bounti|ful
God, how long have I plaid the

ed Prodigal, and pleased my self in
Sin and Vanity, and delighted in dis|obeying
thy Commandments? How
often have I set light by the Bread of
Life in the House of my Father, and
preferred the Trash of this World be|fore
it? How often have I boldly and
presumptuously, without due Prepa|ration,
approached unto thy holy Ta|ble?
And how often have I return'd
thence with the same unclean Heart
and unmortified Lusts which I carried
thither? When I consider this, I trem|ble
to think what Entertainment such
a monstrous Sinner as I have been,
might expect from thee. O let me not
any longer, through Impenitence and
Negligence, lose the Benefits of thy
rich Mercy in Iesus Christ. For his
sake pardon all my former Neglects,
Misbehaviours, and Breaches of Cove|nant
with thee, and grant me now,
good God I beseech thee, such a mea|sure
of thy Grace as may fit me for this
sacred Ordinance. Once more most bles|sed
God, I am preparing to come at thy
gracious Call, but what can I do with|out

thy Help? I am clogged with Sin
and Corruption, I have suffered my
Lusts to get the upper hand, and to
lead me Captive; O! shew thy
Strength in my weakness, pull down
every proud and unruly thing in me
that exalteth it self against thy holy
Spirit; strengthen me henceforward
for ever to do thy Will. Awaken and
stir up my dull Affections to love thee,
and praise thee for thy wonderful love
in redeeming us by the Sacrifice of thy
beloved Son. O Lord, I do now renew
most heartily my so often broken
Vows and Promises to be wholly
thine, O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
for evermore. Accept of me, O my
God, and let not my great Unworthi|ness
provoke thee to reject thy poor
Servant whose Soul panteth after thee.
Enable me, amongst those that keep
Holyday in thy House, worthily to
shew forth the Death of our blessed
Iesus, even as he hath commanded us,
in a joyful and truly thankful Remem|brance
of his inestimable Love, in an
absolute and entire Dedication of our

selves to his Service and Government,
in a total Reliance upon thy Mercy
through his Merits, in a cordial Love
to him our Head, to all his Members,
yea to all Mankind, and even our
Enemies for his sake. And do thou,
O merciful Father, for thy dear Son's
sake, herein seal unto our Souls the
Pardon of all our Sins, confirm and
strengthen us in all Grace and Good|ness,
and bring us by the constant and
conscientious use of this and all other
Instruments of Grace, to everlasting
Life, through Iesus Christ our Lord,
in whose holy Words I farther beg
whatever is needful for my self and
for thy whole Church. Our Father, c.


A Prayer after receiving this Sa|crament.
O Father of Mercies, and God of
all Comforts, I have this day
tasted and seen that thou art good,
and that thy Mercy endureth for ever.
It is well seen, O God, that thou de|lightest
not in the Death of a Sinner,

seeing thou vouchsafest so vile a Sin|ner
as I am to feast my hungry Soul at
thy Table, and to drink of the Rivers
of thy Pleasures. For ever blessed be
thy Goodness, and praised for ever|more
be thy Mercies to us poor Sin|ners
in the Lord Christ Iesus. O let the
deep sense of this thy wonderful Love
ever rest upon my Heart. Let the
spiritual Relish of this heavenly Feast
so delight my Soul, as to render all
Sin and Vanity unsavoury and loath|some
to it for ever. Let this great
Grace and Favour of admitting me
this day to renew my Covenant with
thee after so many Breakings of it,
oblige me to constant Thankfulness,
and continual Obedience, to the great|est
watchfulness over my Heart and
Circumspection in all my ways. And
as I have been shewing the Death of
Christ in this holy Sacrament in the
midst of the Congregation; so give
me Grace and Strength to shew it dai|ly
in a Christian Life and Conversati|on,
and in the continual mortifying
and crucifying of my sinful Affections

and Lusts. Enable me to resist and
vanquish all those Temptations to
Sin whereby I have been formerly
conquered. O holy Iesus, I have
given my Heart to thee this day,
take, I beseech thee, such a full Pos|session
of it by thy holy Spirit, that
neither the Devil, the World, nor
Sin, may ever again have any part
or interest in it, nor let me ever desire
to be any otherwise my own, than
that I may continue wholly thine,
at thy sole Command and Disposal.
O good God, pardon all the Infirmi|ties
and Failings whereof I have been
guilty in the performance of this great
Duty. And bless, I beseech thee,
this sacred Ordinance to thy whole
Church, so that Truth, and Holiness,
and Christian Love, may ever
flourish and abound therein. As
we have one Faith, one Baptism,
one Lord, one Hope, and profess
our selves one Body by partaking
this one Bread; so grant us to hold
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond

of Peace, till we come to the Church
triumphant in Heaven, through
him who loved us, and hath wash'd
us in his Blood, even IESUS
CHRIST, our only Lord and Sa|viour.
Amen.
FINIS.






Books printed for and sold
by, John Baker at the
Three Pidgeons in Saint
Paul's Church-yard.
THE right Foundation of
Quietness, Obedience, and
Concord: by Clement Elis.
Lately published by Dr. Parker,
Arch-deacon of Canterbury; An
Account of ChurchGovern|ment,
for the first six hundred
Years.
Religion and Loyalty; or, a
Demonstration of the Christian
Church, within it self. octavo. in
two Volumes.
The Service-Book, in folio, in
, fit for Churches and Chap|ls.

Duport in Psalmos. quarto. Gr. Lat.idem
in Homerum. 4^o.idem
4^o. Graece separatim.
An earnest Invitation to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
12^o. by Ioseph Glanvil.
A Sermon before the Artillery-Company,
by Dr. Calamy, lately
published.
FINIS.




