



Navigation Spiritualiz'd:
OR, A
NEW COMPASS
FOR
SEAMEN
Consisting of XXXII Points
Of Pleasant OBSERVATIONS, Profitable APPLICATIONS, and Serious REFLECTIONS:
All concluded with so many Spiritual Poems. Whereunto is now Added,

I. A Sober Consideration of the Sin of Drunkenness.
II. The Harlot's Face in the Scripture-Glass.
III. The Art of Preserving the Fruit of the Lips.
IV. The Resurrection of Buried Mercies and Promises.
V. The Sea-man's Catechism.
 Being an Essay toward their much ded Re|formation
from the Horrible and Destable Sins of
Drunkenness, Swearing, Vncleanness. Forgetfulness of
Mercies, Violation of Promises, and Atheistical Con|tempt
of Death. Fit to be seriously Recommended to their Profane Re|lations,
whether Sea-men or Others, by all such as
Unfeignedly desire their Eternal Welfare.
And they said, Come, let us cast Lots, that we may know for
whose [cause] this evil is come upon us, Jonah 1. 7.
Knowing therefore the terrours of the LORD, we perswade
Men, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
By Iohn Flavel, Minister of the Gospel. The Fourth Edition.
London, Printed for M. Fabian in Mercers
Chappel at the lower end of Cheapside, 1698.








What good might Seaman get if once they were
But heavenly ? if they could but steer
Th Christs course, the Soul might then en|joy
Sweet Peace, they might like Seas or-flow with Joy.


Were God our All, how would our Comforts double
Upon us! thus the Seas of all our trouble
Would be divinely sweet Men should endeavour
To see God now, and be with him for ever.







To All
Masters, Marriners and Seamen:
Especially such as belong to the Borrough of Clifton,
Dartmouth and Hardnes, in the County of Devon,
Sirs,
I Find it Story'd of Anacharsis, that when one Ask'd
him, Whether the Living or the Dead were more?
He returned this Answer, You must first tell me
(saith he) in which Number I must place Sea-men; In|timating
thereby, that Sea-men are, as it were, a Third
sort of Persons, to be Number'd neither with the Living
nor the Dead; their Lives hanging continually in suspence
before them. And it was anciently accounted the most de|sperate
Imployment, and they little better than lost Men
that us'd the Seas. Through all my Life (saith Ari|stotle)
Three things do especially repent me: First,
That ever I reveal'd a Secret to a Woman. Second|ly,
That ever I remain'd one day without a Will.
Thirdly, That ever I went to any place by Sea, whi|ther
I might have gone by Land. Nothing (saith a|nother)
is more miserable, than to see a Virtuous and
Worthy Person upon the Sea. And although Custom,
and the great Improvement of the Art of Navigation,
have made it less formidable now, yet are you no further
from death than you are from the waters, which is but a
remove of two or three inches. Now you that border so
nigh upon the confines of death and eternity every mo|ment,
may well be supposed to be Men of singular Piety
and Seriousness: For nothing more composes the Heart to
such a frame, than the lively apprehensions of Eternity do:
and none have greater external advantages for that, than

you have. But alas! for the generality, What sort 
Men are more ungodly, and stupidly insensible of eterna
concernments? Living, for the most part, as if they had
made a Covenant with death, and with hell were at agree|ment.
It was an ancient saying, Qui nescit orare, dis|cat
navigare, He that knows not how to Pray, let him go
to Sea. But we may say now, (alas, that we may say so in
times of greater light) He that would learn to be proane, to
drink, and swear, and dishonour God, let him go to Sea.
As for Prayer, it is a rare thing among Sea-men, they
count that a needless-business: they see the prophane and
vile deliver'd as well as others; and therefore, What
profit is there if they Pray unto him? Mal. 3. 4. As I
remember, I have read of a profane Souldier, who was
heard swearing, though he stood in a place of great dan|ger;
and when one that stood by him warned him, saying,
Fellow-souldier, do not Swear, the Bullets flie; he
answer'd, They that swear come off as well as they
that pray Soon after a shot hit him and down he fell. Pla|to
diligently admonisht all Men to avoid the Sea; For
(saith he) it is the School-master of all Vice and
Dishonesty. Sirs! it is a very sad consideration to me,
that you who float upon the great deeps, in whose bottom so
many Thousand poor miserable Creatures lie, whose sins
have sunk them down, not only into the bottom of the Sea,
but of Hell also, whither divine vengeance hath pursu'd
them: That you (I say) who daily float, and hover
over them, and have the roaring waves and billows that
swallow'd them up, gaping for you as the next prey, should
be no more affected with these things. Oh what a Terri|ble
Voice doth God utter in the Stroms! It breaks the
Cedars, shakes the Wilderness, makes the Hinds to
Calve, Psal. 29. 5. And can it not shake your hearts
This Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty, but his Voice in
the Word is more efficacious and powerful, Heb. 4. 12. to
convince and rip up the heart. This Word is exalted

above all his Name, Psal. 138. 3. and if it cannot awa|ken
you, it is no wonder you remain secure and dead, when
the Lord utters his Voice in the most dreadful storms and
tempests. But if neither the Voice of God uttered in his
dreadful Works, or in his glorious Gospel, can effectually
awaken and rouze, there is an Euroclidon, a fearful storm
coming, which will so awaken your souls, as that they shall
never sleep any more, Psal. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he
shall reign Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horri|ble
Tempest: This is the portion of their Cup. You
that have been at Sea in the most Violent storms, never
felt such a storm as this, and the Lord grant you never
may; no Calm shall follow this Storm. There are some
among you, that, I am perswaded, do truly fear that God
in whose hand their Life and Breath is; Men that fear
an Oath, and are an honour to their Profession; who drive
a Trade for Heaven, and are diligent to secure the happi|ness
of their Immortal souls, in the Insurance-Office above:
but for the generality, alas! they mind none of these
things. How many of you are coasting to and fro, from
one Country to another? but never think of that Heavenly
Country above, nor how you may get the Merchandize
thereof, which is better than the Gold of Ophir. How
oft do you tremble to see the foaming V,Vaves dance about
you, and wash over you? yet consider not how terrible it
will be to have all the waves and billows of God's wrath to
go over your souls, and that for ever. How glad are you,
after you have been long toss'd upon the Ocean, to descry
Land? And how yare and eagerly do you look out for it?
who yet never had your hearts warmed with the considera|tion
of that Ioy which shall be among the Saints, when they
arrive at the Heavenly Strand, and set foot upon the
shore of Glory.
O Sirs! I beg of you, if you have any regard to those
precious immortal Souls of yours, which are also imbarqued
for Eternity, whither all winds blow them, and will

quickly he at their Port of Heaven or Hell, that you will
seriously mind these things, and learn to steer your course
to Heaven, and improve all Winds (I mean opportuni|ties
and means) to waft you thither.
Here you venture life and liberty, run through many
Difficulties and Dangers, and all to compass a perishing
Treasure; yet how often do you return disappointed in
your Designs? or if not, yet it is but a fading short-liv'd
Inheritance, which like the flowing Tide, for a little
while, covers the shore, and then returns, and leaves it
naked and dry again: And are not Everlasting Treasures
worth venturing for? Good Souls, be wise for Eternity:
I here present you with the Fruit of a few spare Hours,
redeemed for your sakes, from my other Studies and Im|ployments,
which I have put into a new Dress and Mode.
I have endeavoured to cloath Spiritual Matters in your
own Dialect and Phrases, that they might be the more
intelligible to you; and added some pious Poems, with
which the several Chapters are concluded, trying by all
means to assault your several Affections, and as the
Apostle speaks, to catch you with guile. I can say no|thing
of it; I know it cannot be without its manifold im|perfections,
since I am conscious of so many in my self:
Only this I will adventure to say of it, That how defective
or empty soever it be in other respects, yet it is stuffed
and filled with much true love to, and earnest desires
after the salvation and prosperity of your Souls. And
for the other defects that attend it, I have only two things
to offer, in way of excuse: It is the first Essay that I
ever made in this kind, wherein I had no President:
And it was hastned, for your sakes, too soon out of my
hands, that it might be ready to wait upon you, when
you undertake your next Voyage; so that I could not
revise and polish it. Nor indeed was I sollicitous about
the stile; I consider, I writ not for Critical and Learned
Persons: my design is not to please your Fancies any

further, than I might thereby get advantage to profit
your Souls. I will not once question your welcome Re|ception
of it: If God shall bless these Meditations to the
Conversion of any among you, you will be the Gainers,
and my heart shall rejoyce, even mine. How comfort|ably
should we shake hand with you, when you go abroad,
were we perswaded your Souls were interested in Christ,
and secured from perishing, in the New Convenant?
What life would it put into our Prayers for you, when
you are abroad, to consider that Iesus Christ is interceed|ing
for you in Heaven, whilst we are your Remembrancers
here on Earth? How quiet would our hearts be, when
you are abroad in Storms; did we know you had a special
Interest in him whom Winds and Seas obey? To conclude,
what Ioy would it be to your Godly Relations, to see you
return new Creatures? Doubtless more than if you came
home laden with the Riches of both Indies.
Come, Sirs! set the heavenly Jerusalem upon the Point
of your New Compass; make all the Sail you can for
it; and the Lord give you a prosperous Gale, and a safe
Arrival in that Land of Rest.
So prays
Your most Affectionate Friend to serve
you, in Soul-Concernments.
IOHN FLAVEL.


IMPRIMATUR,

Geo. Stradling, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat.
D. Gilb. Archiepisc. Cant. a. Sac. Domest.

Ex Aed. Lamb.
Dec. 14. 1663.



To every Sea-man Sailing Hea|venward.
Ingenious Sea-man,
THE Art of Navigation, by which Islands
especially are enriched, and preserved in
safety from Forensical Invasions; and the
wonderful Works of God in the great Deep, and
Foreign Nations are most delightfully and fully be|held,
c. is an Art of exquisite excellency, ingen|uity,
rarity, and mirability: But the Art of Spiritual
Navigation is the Art of Arts. It is a gallant thing
to be able to carry a Ship richly laden round the
World: but it is much more gallant to carry a Soul
(that rich loading, a Pearl of more worth than all
the Merchandise of the world) in a body (that is
liable to leaks and bruises as any Ship is) through
the Sea of this World (which is as unstable as water,
and hath the same brinish taste and salt gust which
the waters of the Sea have) safe to Heaven (the
best Haven) so as to avoid splitting upon any Soul|sinking
Rocks, or striking upon any Soul-drowning
Sands. The Art of Natural Navigation is a very
great mystery; but the Art of Spiritual Navigation
is by much a greater mystory. Humane wisdom may
teach us to carry a Ship to the Indies; but the Wis|dom
only that is from above can teach us to steer
our course aright to the Haven of Happiness. This
Art is purely of Divine Revelation. The truth is,
Divinity (the Doctrine of living to God) is no|thing
else, but the Art of Soul-Navigation, revealed
from Heaven. A meer man can carry a Ship to any

desired Port in all the World, but no meer man can
carry a Soul to Heaven. He must be a Saint, he must
be a Divine (so all Saints are) that can be a Pilot
to carry a Soul to the fair Haven in Emanuel's land.
The Art of Natural Navigation is wonderfully im|proved
since the coming of Christ, before which time
(if there be truth in History) the use of the Load|stone
was never known in the world; and before the
vertue of that was revealed unto the Mariner, it is
unspeakable with what uncertain wandrings Sea-men
floated here and there, rather than sailed the right
and direct way. Sure I am, the Art of Spiritual
Navigation is wonderfully improved since the com|ing
of Christ: it oweth its clearest and fullest dis|covery
to the coming of Christ. This Art of Arts
is now perfectly revealed in the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament; but the Rulers thereof
are dispers'd up and down therein. The collecting
and methodizing of the same, cannot but be a work
very useful unto Souls: Though when all is done,
there is an absolute necessity of the teachings of the
Spirit, and of the anointing that is from above, to
make Souls Artists in sailing Heavenward. The In|genious
Author of the Christians Compass, or the Mar|riners
Companion, makes three Parts of this Art (as
the School-men of Divinity,) viz. Speculative,
Practical, and Affectionate. The principal things
necessary to be known by a Spiritual Sea-man, in
order to the steering rightly and safely to the Port
of Happiness, he reduceth to four Heads, answerable
to the four general Points of the Compass; making
God our North; Christ our East; Holiness our South;
and Death our West Points. Concerning God, we
must know, 1. That he is, Heb. 11. 6. and that
there is but one God, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. 2. That this
God is that Supreme Good, in the enjoyment of

whom all true happiness lies, Psal. 4. 6, 7. Mat. 5.
8.18. 20. 3. That (Life eternal lying in God,
and he being incomprehensible and unconceivable
in Essence, as being a Spirit) our best way to eye
him is in his Attributes, Exod. 34. 5, 6, 7. and
works, Rom. 1. 20. and especially in his Son, 2 Cor.
4. 6. 4. That as God is a Spirit, so our chiefest,
yea only way of knowing, enjoying, serving, and
walking with him, is in the Spirit likewise, Ioh. 4.
24. Concerning Christ, we must know, 1. That
he is the true Sun which ariseth upon the World,
by which all are enlightned, Iohn 1. 9. Mal. 3. 2.
Luke 1. 78, 79. 2. That God alone is in him, re|conciling
himself to the World, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 1 Cor.
1. 30. Iohn 14. 6. 3. That Jesus Christ is only
made ours by the union and in-dwelling of himself
in us through the spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. and 6. 17.
Ioh. 16. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 12. 3. 13. 4. That the way of
the spirits uniting us to Christ, is by an act of Power
on his part, and by an act of Faith on our parts, Iohn
3. 16. last 5. 29. Eph. 3. 17. Concerning Holiness,
we must know, 1. That whoever is in Christ is a
new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 2. Holi|ness
is the Souls highest lustre, Exod. 15. 11. when
we come to perfection in Holiness, then is our Sun
at the height in us. 3. Holiness, is Christ filling
the Soul; Christ our Sun is at highest in our hearts,
when they are most holy. 4. This Holiness is that
which is directly opposite to sin: sin eclipses holi|ness,
and holiness scatters sin, Heb. 7. 26. Phil. 2.
15. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Concerning Death, we must know,
1. Death is certain: the Sun of our Life will set in
Death: when our days come about to this Western|point,
it will be night, Heb. 9. 27. Psal. 49. 7, 9.
2. If we die in our sins out of Christ, we are undone
for ever, Iob 8. 24. Phil. 1. 21. 3. It is our be|nighting

to die, but it's not our annihilating, 1 Cor.
15. Rev. 20. 12. 4. After Death comes Judgment;
all that die shall arise to be judged, either for life
or death the second time, Heb. 9. 27. Mat. 25. Heb.
6. 2. These four heads, and the particulars under
them are as necessary to be known in Spiritual Na|vigation,
as the four Points of the Compass are in
Natural Navigation. The things which we ought
to do, in order to our arrival to our Happiness, our
Author makes as many as there be Points in the
Compass. And for an help to memory, we may
begin every particular with initial known Letters
on the Points of the Compass. 1. N. Never stir
or steer any course, but by ight from God, Psal.
119. 105. Isa. 8. 10. 2. N. and by E. Never Enter
upon any Design, but such as tends towards Christ,
Act. 10. 43. 3. N. N. E. Note Nothing Enviously,
which thrives without God, Psal. 73. 12, 13. 4.
N. E. and by N. Never Enterprize Not-warrantable
courses, to procure any the most prized or conceited
advantages, 1. Tim. 6. 9, 10. 5. N. N. E. Now
Entertain the sacred Commands of God, if hereafter
thou expect the soveraign consolations of God, Psal.
119. 48. 6. N.E. and by E. Never Esteem Egypt's
Treasures so much, as for them to forsake the People
of God, Heb. 11. 26. 7. E. N. E. Err not, E|specially
in soul-affairs, Ia. 1. 16. 1 Tim. 1. 19, 20.
2 Tim. 2. 18. 8. E. and by N. Eschew Nothing but
sin, 1 Pet. 3. 11. Iob 1. 7, 8-31. 34. 9. E. Establish
thy heart with grace, Heb. 13. 9. 10. E. and by
S. Eye Sanctity in every action, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Zech.
14. 29. 11. E. S. E. Ever Strive Earnestly to live
under, and to improve the means of Grace. 12.
S.E. and by E. Suffer Every Evil of punishment of
sorrow, rather than leave the ways of Christ and
Grace. 13. S.E. Sigh Earnestly for more enjoy|ments

of Christ. 14. S.E. and by S. Seek Ever|more
some Evidences of Christ in you the hope of
glory. 15. S.S.E. Still Set Eternity before you,
in regard of enjoying Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. 24. 16.
S. and by E. Settle't Ever in your soul, as a principle
which you will never depart from, that holiness and
true happiness are in Christ and by Christ. 17. S.
Set thy self always as before the Lord, Psal. 16. 8.
Acts 2. 25. 18. S and by W. See Weakness hast|ning
thee to death, even when thou art at the highest
pitch or point. 19. S. S. W. See Sin Which is the
sting of Death, as taken away by Christ, 1 Cor. 15.
55, 56. 20. S.W. and by S. Store up Wisely Some
provisions every day for your dying day. 21. S.W.
Set Worldly things under your feet, before death
come to look you in the face. 22. S.W. and by W.
Still Weigh and Watch with loins girded and lamps
trimmed, Luk. 12. 35, 36, 37. 23. W. S. W.
Weigh Soul-Works, and all in the ballance of the
Sanctuary. 24. W. and by S. Walk in Sweet com|munion
with Christ here, and so thou maist die in
peace, Luk. 2. 29. 25. W. Whatsoever thy con|dition
be in this world, eye God as the disposer of
it, and therein be contented, Phil. 4. 11. 26. W.
and by N. Walk Not according to the course of the
most, but after the example of the best. 27. W.N.
W. Weigh Not What men speak or think of thee,
so God approve thee, 2 Chro. 10. 18. Rom. 2. 28, 29.
28. N. W. and by W. Never Wink at, but Watch
against small sins, nor neglect little duties, Eph. 5. 15.
29. N.W. Never Wish rashly for death, nor love
life too inordinately, Iob 3. 4. 30. N. W. and by
N. Now Work Nimbly ere night come, Ioh. 12. 35,
36. Eceles. 9. 10. 31. N. N. W. Name Nothing
When thou pleadest with God for thy Soul, but
Christ and Free-grace, Dan. 9. 17. 32. N. and by

W. Now Welcome Christ, if at death thou wilt be
welcomed by Christ. A tender, quick, enlivened,
and enlightened Conscience, is the only Point upon
which we must erect these Practical Rules of our
Christian Compass, Heb. 13. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our
Memory, that is the Box in which this Compass must
be kept, in which these Rules must be treasured, that
we may be as ready and expert in them, as the Mar|riner
is in his Sea-compass. So much for the spe|culative
and practical parts of the Art of Soul-Spi|ritual-Navigation.
The Affectionate part doth
principally lie in the secret motions or movings of
the Soul towards God, in the Affections which are
raised and warmed, and especially appear active in
Meditation: Meditation being as it were the Lim|beck
or Still in which the Affections heat and melt,
and as it were drop sweet spiritual Waters. The
affectionate Author of the Christians Compass doth
indeed, in the third and last part of his Undertaking,
hint at several Meditations which the spiritual Sea|man
is to be acquainted with, unto which thou hast
an excellent Supplement in this New Compass for Sea|men.
This Collection is prefixt, that at once thou
mayest view all the Compasses (both the Speculative,
Practical, and Affectionate) by which thou must
steer Heaven-ward. What further shall be added
by way of Pree, is not to commend this New
Compass, which indeed (2 Cor. 3. 1.) needs no
, Letters of Commendation, or any
Panegyrick to usher it into any honest heart: but to
stir up all, especially Sea-men, to make conscience of
using such choice helps for the promoting the sancti|fication
and salvation of their Souls, for the making
of them as dexterous in the Art of Spiritual Navi|gation,
as any of them are in the Art of Natural
Navigation, Consider therefore.
1. What rich Merchandize thy Soul is. Christ
assures us, one Soul is more worth than all the world.
The Lord Iesus doth as it were put the whole world
in one scale, and one soul in the other, and the world
is found too light, Mat. 16. 26. Shouldst thou by
skill in Natural Navigation carry safe all the trea|sures
of the Indies into thine own Port, yea, gain the
whole world, and for want of skill in spiritual Na|vigation
lose thy soul, thou wouldst be the greatest
loser in the world. So far wilt thou be from profit|ing
by any of thy Sea-voyages. There is a plain
 in those words of Christ, What is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
More is meant, than is spoken.
2. What a leaking Vessel thy
body is in which this unspeakable
inconceivable rich Treasure,Erasmi Chiliad, p. 299. thy
soul, is embarked! O the many diseases and di|stempers
in the humors and passions,The smallest Pore is a Leak wide enough to let in Death, and sink thy Vessel.
that thy body is subject to! It is
above 2000 years ago, that there
have been rekoned up 300 Names
of Diseases; and there be many
under one name, and many name|less,
which pose the Physicians not
only how to cure them, but how to call them. And
for the affections and passions of the Mind, the di|stempers
of them are no less deadly to some, than
the diseases of the body. But besides these internal
causes, there are many external causes of Leaks in
this Vessel, asIn Nubia, quae est Aethiopia, venenum est cuus grani uni|as decima pars ominem, vel unum granum decem homines, Dan, Senert. Hypom. Phys. Cap. 2. p. 47. poisonous malignities, wrathful

hostilities, and casual mishaps; very small matters
may be of great moment to the sinking of this
Vessel. The least Gnat in the Air may choak one,
as it did Adrian, a Pope of Rome; a little hair in
Milk may strangle one, as it did a Counsellor in
Rome; a little stone of a Raisin may stop ones breath,
as it did the Poetical Poet Anacreon. Thus you
see what a leaking Vessel you sail in. Now the
more leaky any ship is, the more need there is of
skill to steer wisely.
3. Consider what a dangerous Sea the World is,
in which thy Soul is to sail in the leaking ship of
thy body. As there are not more changes in the
Sea, than are in the World, the world being only
constant in inconstancy, The fashion of this world
passeth away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. so there are not more
dangers in the Sea for ships, than there are in the
world for souls. In this world Souls meet with
Rocks and Sands, Syrens and Pyrates. Worldly
Temptations, worldly Lusts, and worldly Company
cause many to drown themselves in perdition, 1 Tim.
6. 9. The very things of this world endanger our
Souls. By worldly Objects we soon grow worldly.
It is hard to touch Pitch, and not be defiled. The
lusts of this world stain our glory, and the men of
tis world pollute all they converse with. A man
that keeps company with the men of this world,
is like him that walketh in the Sun, tanned insensi|bly.
Thus you have hinted the dangerousness of
the Sea wherein you are to sail. Now, the more
dangerous the Sea is, the more requisite it is the
Sailer be an Artist.
4. Consider, what if through want of skill in the
heavenly Art of spiritual Navigation, thou shouldst
not steer thy Crse aright! I will instance only
in two consequents thereof. 1. Thou wilt never

arrive at the Haven of Happiness. 2. Thou shalt
be drowned in the Ocean of God's wrath. As true
as the Word of God is true; as sure as the Heavens
are over thy head, and the Earth under thy feet;
as sure as thou yet livest and breathest in this Air:
so true and certain it is, thou shalt never enter into
Heaven, but sink into the depth of the bottomless
pit. Am I not herein a Messenger of the saddest
Tidings that ever yet thy Ears did hear? Possibly
now thou makest a light matter of these things, be|cause
thou dost not know what it is to miss of Hea|ven,
and what it is for ever to lie under the wrath
of God: but hereafter thou wilt know fully, what
it is to have thy Soul lost eternally, so lost, as that
God's mercies, and all the good there is in Christ,
shall never save it; and as God hath set and ordered
things, can never save it. Hereafter thou wilt be
perfectly sensible of the good that thou mightest have
had, and of the evil that shall be upon thee (this
is God's peculiar Prerogative, to make a Creature
as sensible of Misery as he pleaseth,) then thou wilt
have other thoughts of these things than now thou
hast.Ignis Gehenne lucebit miseris, ut vieant unde doleant. Insid. de sum. bon. l. 1. Then the thoughts of thy mind
shall be busied about thy lost Con|dition,
both as to the pain of loss,
and the pain of sense; so that thou
shalt not be able to take any ease any
moment: then, that thy torments
may be increased, they acknowledge, the truth of
thy apprehensions, yea. the strength of them, shall
be encreased; thou shalt have true and deep appre|hensions
of the greatness of that good that thou
shalt miss of, and of that evil which thou shalt pro|cure
unto thy self; and then thou shalt not be able
to choose, but to apply all thy loss, all thy misery
to thy self, which will force thee to roar out, O my

loss! O my misery! O my unconceivable unre|coverable
loss and misery! Yea, for the increasing
of thy torments, thy Affections and Memory shall
be enlarged. O that, to prevent that lose and mi|sery,
these things may now be known and laid to
heart! O that a blind Understanding, a stupid Judg|ment,
a bribed Conscience, a hard Heart, a bad
Memory, may no longer make Heaven and Hell to
seem but trifles to thee! Thou wilt then easily be
perswaded to make it thy main business here, to be|come
an Artist in Spiritual Navigation. But to shut
up this Preface, I shall briefly acquaint Sea-men, why
they should, of all others, be Men of singular Piety
and Heavenliness, and therefore more than ordi|narily
study the heavenly Art of Spiritual Naviga|tion.
O that Sea-men would therefore consider,
1: How nigh they border upon the Confines of
Death and Eternity every moment. There is but a
step, but an inch or two between them and their
Graves continually. The next Gust may over-set
them; the next Wave may swallow them up. In
one place lies lurking dangerous Rocks, in another
perilous Sands, and every-where stormy Winds,
ready to destroy them. Well may
the Sea-men cry out,Terror ubique tremor, timor une  undi| terrari. Ovi. Ego crastinum
non habui: I have not had a Morrow
in my hands these many Years. Should
not they then be extraordinary serious
and heavenly continually? Certainly (as the
Reverend Author of this New Compass well observes)
nothing more composeth the heart to such a frame,
than the lively apprehensions of Eternity do; and
none have greater external advantages for that,
than Sea-men have.
2. Consider (Sea-men) what ex|traordinary
help you have by the
Book of the Creatures;Mundi creatio est Scriptur a Dei, Clemens. Vni|versus mundus est Dus explicatus. the whole
Creation is God's Voice, it is God's
excellent Hand-writing, or the Sacred
Scriptures of the Most High, to teach
us much of God, and what reasons we have to be|wail
our Rebellion against God, and to make con|science
of obeying God only, naturally and con|tinually.
The Heavens, the Earth, the Waters, are
the three great Leaves of this Book of God, and all
the Creatures are so many Lines in those Leaves.
All that learn not to fear and serve God by the
help of this Book, will be left inexcusable, Rom. 1.
20. How inexcusable then will ignorant and un|godly
Sea-men be? Sea-men should, in this respect,
be the best Scholars in the Lord's School, seeing
they do more, than others, see the Works of the
Lord, and his Wonders in the great Deep, Psal.
107. 24.
3. Consider how often you are nearer Heaven
than any People in the World. They mount up to
heaven, Psal. 107. 26. It has been said of an un|godly
Minister, that contradicted his Preaching in
his Life and Conversation, That it was pity he should
e're come out of the Pulpit, because he was there
as near Heaven as ever he would be. Shall it be
said of you, upon the same account, That 'tis piy
you should come down from the high-towring
Waves of the Sea? Should not Sea-men, that in
stormy Weather have their feet (as it were) upon
the Battlements of Heaven, look down upon all
earthly Happiness in this World but as base, wa|terish,
and worthless? The great Cities of Campania
seem but small Cottages to them that stand on the
lpes. Should not Sea-men, that so oft mount up to

Heaven, make it their main business here, once at
last to get into Heaven? What (Sea-men) shall you
only go to Heaven against your Wills? When Sea|men
mount up to Heaven in a storm, the Psalmist
tells us, That their souls are melted because of trouble.
O that you were continually as unwilling to go to
Hell, as you are in a storm to go to Heaven!
4. And lastly, Consider what engagements lie up|on
you to be singularly holy, from your singular de|liverances
and salvations. They that go down to
the Sea in Ships, are sometimes in the Valley of the
shadow of Death, by reason of the springing of
perilous Leaks; and yet miraculously delivered,
either by some wonderful stopping of the Leak, or
by God's sending some Ship within their sight, when
they have been far out of sight of any Land; or by
his bringing their near-perishing Ship safe to shore.
Sometimes they have been in very great danger of
being taken by Pirates, yet wonderfully preserved,
either by God's calming of the Winds in that part
of the Sea where the Pirates have sail'd, or by giving
the poor pursued Ship a strong gale of Wind to run
away from their Pursuers; or by sinking the Pirates,
c. Sometimes their Ships have been cast away,
and yet they themselves wonderfully got safe to shore
upon Planks, Yards, Masts, c. I might be endless
in enumerating their Deliverances from Drowning,
from Burning, from Slavery, c. (Sure Sea-men)
your extraordinary Salvations lay more than ordinary
engagement upon you, to praise, love, fear, obey, and
trust in your Saviour and Deliverer. I have read,
that the enthralled Greeks were so affected with their
Liberty, procured by Flaminius the Roman General,
that their shrill Acclamations of , A
Saviour, a Saviour, made the very Birds fall down
from the Heavens astonished. O how should Sea|men

be affected with their Sea-Deliverances! Many
that have been deliver'd from Turkish Slavery, have
vowed to be Servants to their Redeemers all the days
of their Lives. Ah, Sirs, will not you be more than
ordinarily God's Servants all the days of your Lives,
seeing you have been so oft, so wonderfully rdeem|ed
from Death it self by him? Verily, do what you
can, you will die in God's Debt. As for me, God for|bid,
that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray
for you, 1 Sam. 12. 23, 24. That by the perusal of
this short and sweet Treatise, wherein the jucicious
and ingenious Author hath well mixed utile dulci,
profit and pleasure, you may learn the good and
right way, even to fear the Lord, and serve him in
truth with all your hearts, considering how great
things he hath done for you: This is the hearty
Prayer of
Your Cordial Friend, earnestly desirous of a prosperous
Voyage for your precious and immortal Souls, T.M.


The AUTHOR to the READER.
WHen Dewy-cheek'd Aurora doth display
Her Curtains, to let in the New-born Day,
Her heavenly Face looks Red, as if it were
Dy'd with a modest Blush, 'twixt Shame and Fear.
Sol makes her blush, suspecting that he will
Scorch some too much, and others leave to chill,
With such a Blush, my little New-born Book
Goes out of hand, suspecting some may look
Vpon it with Contempt, while others raise
So mean a Peice too high, by flattering Praise.
Its Beauty cannot make its Father dote;
'Tis a poor Babe, clad in a Sea-green Coat.
Its gone from me too young, and now is run
To Sea, among the Tribe of Zebulun.
Go, Little Book, thou many Friends wilt find
Among that Tribe, who will be very kind;
And many of them Care of Thee will take,
Both for thy own, and for thy Father's sake.
Heav'n save it from the dang'rous Storms and Gusts.
That will be rais'd against it by Mens Lusts.
Guilt makes Men angry, Anger is a Storm;
But Sacred Truth's thy shelter, fear no harm.
On Times, or Persous, no Reflection's found;
Though with Reflections few Books more abound.
Go, Little Book, I have much more to say,
But Sea-men call for thee, thou must away.
Yet e're you have it, grant me One Request;
Pray do not keep it Prisoner in your Chest.


BOOKS Lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bi|ble
and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside
MR. Flavel's Fountain of Life open'd, or a Dis|play
of Christ in his Essential and Mediatori|al
Glory, in 42 Sermons, Quarto.
His Treatise of the Soul of Man, Quarto.
Divine Conduct, or Mystery of Providence.
Burgesses Golden Snuffers, a Sermon Preach'd to
the Society for Reformation of Manners.
Sylvester's Reformation Sermon.
How's Reformation Sermon.
Singing of Psalms Vindicated from the Charge of
Novelty, in Answer to Dr. Russel, Mr. Marlow, c.
Bury's Looking-Glass for the Unmarry'd.
Discourses upon the Rich Man and Lazarus, by Mr.
Timothy Cruso.


BOOKS Printed for and Sold by M. Fabian in Mercers
Chappel at the lower end of Cheapside. Viz.
HYmens Praeludia or Loves Master-piece, being
that so much admired Romance, called Cleo|pata.
Gouges Word to Saints and Sinners.
Christian directions.
The Protestant School or a Spelling-book, by Moses
Lane School-master, being the most copious extant.
The Pastoral Letters of the Incomparable Iurieu,
directed to the Protestants in France groaning under
the Babylonish Tyranny translated: Wherein the
Sophistical arguments and unexpressible Cruelties
made use of by the Papists for making Converts; are
laid open and expos'd to just abhorrence. Unto
which is added a brief account of the Hungarian Per|secution.
The History of Scotland from the year 1423 to 1542
containing the Lives and Reigns of Iames the 1 2 3
4 and 5 with several memorials of State during the
Reigns of Iames the 6 and Charles the 1. Illustrated
with their Effiges in Copper Plates, by W. Drummond
of Hauthornden With a Prefatory Introduction
taken out of the Records of that Nation by Mr. Hall
of Grays Inn. The 2 Edition with a brief account of
the Authors Life.
Collyers Compendions Discourses.
Self denyal.
Bampfields reply to Dr. Wallis.
Gosnold of Baptism.
Post with a Pacquet of Letters.
School for Princes.
Spiritual guide to disentangled Souls, by P. Molino.
Learnings Foundation firmly laid in a short method
of teaching to read English, more exact and easie than
ever was yet publish'd by any: comprehending all
things necessary for the perfect and speedy attaining
the same: Whereby any one of discretion may be
brought to read the Bible truly in the space of a
Month tho' he never knew a Letter before, the truth
whereof hath been confirm'd by manifold experience,
by George Robertson School-master.





A
New Compass for Sea-Men:
OR,
Navigation Spiritualiz'd.

CHAP. I.

The Launching of a Ship plainly sets forth
Our double State, by First and Second Birth.


OBSERVATION.
NO sooner is a Ship built, launched, rigged,
victualled, and manned, but she is present|ly
sent out into the boisterous Ocean,
where she is never at rest, but continually
fluctuating, tossing and labouring, until she be either
overwhelmed and wrecked in the Sea, or through
Age, knocks and bruises, grows leaky and unservice|able;
and so is haled up, and ript abroad.


APPLICATION.
No sooner come we into the World as Men, or as
Christians, by a natural, or supernatural Birth; but
thus we are tost upon a Sea of Troubles, Job 5. 7. Yet
Man is born to trouble, as the sparks flie upwards. The
spark no sooner comes out of the fire, but it flies up
naturally; it needs not any external force, help, or
guidance, but ascends from a principle in it self: So
naturally, so easily, doth trouble rise out of sin. There
is radically all the misery, anguish, and trouble in the
World, in our corrupt Natures. As the spark lies

close hid in the coals, so doth misery in sin: Every
sin draws a rod after it. And these sorrows and trou|bles
fall not only on the Body, in those breaches,
flaws, deformities, pains, aches, diseases to which it
is subject, which are but the groans of dying Nature,
and its crumbling, by degrees, into dust again; but
on all our Imployments and Callings also, Gen. 3. 17,
18, 19. These are full of pain, trouble, and disap|pointment.
Hag. 1. 6. We earn Wages, and put it
into a Bag with holes, and disquiet our selves in vain;
all our Relations full of trouble. The Apostle speak|ing
to those that Marry, saith, 1 Cor. 7. 28. Such shall have trouble in the flesh. Upon which words one
glosseth thus: Flesh and Trouble are Marry'd
together, whether we Marry or no: But they that
are Marry'd, Marry with, and Match
into new troubles:See Mr. Whate|lie's Care-Cloth All Relations
have their burdens, as well as their
comforts. It were endless to enume|rate
the sorrows of this kind; and yet the troubles
of the Body, are but the body of our troubles: The
spirit of the Curse falls upon the spiritual and no|blest
part of Man. The Soul and Body, like to E|zekiel's
Roll, are written full with sorrows, both
within and without. So that we make the same re|port
of our lives, when we come to die, that old Ia|cob
made before Pharaoh, Gen. 47. 9. Few and evil
have the days of the years of our lives been. For what
hath Man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his
heart, wherein he hath laboured under the Sun? For all his
days are sorrows, and his travel grief, yea, his heart ta|keth
no rest in the night: This is also vanity, Eccles. 2
22, 23.
Neither doth our New Birth free us from trou|bles,
though then they be sanctify'd, sweetned, and
turned into blessings to us. We put not off the Hu|mane,

when we put on the Divine Nature; nor are
we then freed from the sense, though we be deliver'd
from the sting and curse of them. Grace doth not
presently pluck out all those Arrows that sin hath
shot into the sides of Nature, 2 Cor. 7. 5. When we
were come into Macedonia, our Flesh had no rest, but we
were troubled on every side: without were fightings, and
within were fears, Rev. 7. 14. These are they that come
out of great tribulations. The first cry of the New|born
Christian (says one) gives Hell an alarm, and
awakens the rage, both of Devils and Men against
him. Hence Paul and Barnabas acquainted those new
Converts, Act. 14. 22. That through much tribulation,
they must enter into the Kingdom of God: And we find
the state of the Church, in this World, set out (Isa.
54. 11.) by the similitude of a distressed Ship at
Sea: O thou afflicted [and tossed] with Tempests, and
not comforted. [Tossed] as Iona's Ship was; for the
same word is there used, Ionah 1. 11. 13. as a Vessel
at Sea, stormed, and violently driven without Rud|der,
Mast, Sail, or Tacklings. Nor are we to expect
freedom from those Troubles, until harboured in
Heaven, see 2 Thess. 1. 7. O what large Catalogues
of Experiences do the Saints carry to Heaven with
them, of their various Exercises, Dangers, Trials,
and marvellous Preservations and Deliverances out
of all! And yet all these Troubles without, are no|thing
to those within them; from Temptations, Cor|ruptions,
Desertions, by Passion and Compassion: Be|sides
their own, there comes daily upon them the
Troubles of others; many Rivulets fall into this
Channel and Brim, yea often overflow the Banks, Psal.
34. 19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous.


REFLECTION.
Hence should the graceless heart thus reflect up|on
it self. O my Soul! into what a Sea of troubles

art thou lanched forth! And what a sad case thou
art in! Full of Trouble and full of Sin, and these do
mutually produce each other. And that which is the
most dreadful Consideration of all, is, That I cannot
see the end of them. As for the Saints, they suffer
in the World as well as I; but it is but for a While,
1 Pet. 5. 10. and then they shall suffer no more,
2 Thes. 1. 7. But all tears shall be wiped away from their
eyes, Rev. 7. 17. But my Troubles look with a long
Visage: Ah! they are but the beginning of sorrows,
but a parboiling before I be roasted in the flames of
God's eternal wrath. If I continue as I am, I shall
but deceive my self, if I conclude I shall be happy in
the other World, because I have met with so much
sorrow in this: For I read, Iude 7. that the Inhabi|tants
of Sodom and Gomorrha, though consumed to
ashes, with all their Estates and Relations, (a sorer
Temporal Judgment than ever yet befel me) do, not|withstanding
that, continue still in everlasting Chains,
under Darkness, in which they are reserved unto the Iudg|ment
of the Great Day. The Troubles of the Saints
are sanctified to them, but mine are fruits of the
Curse. They have spiritual Consolations to ballance
them, which flow into their Souls in the same height
and degree, as Troubles do upon their Bodies, 2 Cor. 1. 5.
But I am a stranger to their Comforts, and
intermeddle not with their Ioys, Prov. 14. 10. If their
hearts be surcharged with Trouble, they have a God
to go to; and when they have open'd their Cause
before him, they are eased, return with comfort, and
their Countenance is no more sad, 1 Sam. 1. 18. When
their Belly is as Bottles full of new Wine, they can
give it vent by pouring out of their Souls into their
Father's Bosome: But I have no interest in, nor ac|quaintance
with this God; nor can I pray unto him
in the Spirit. My griefs are shut up like fire in my

bosome, which preys upon my spirit. This is my
orrow, and I alone must bear it. O my Soul, look
round about thee! What a miserable case art thou
n? Rest no longer satisfied in it, but look out for
a Christ also. What though I be a vile, unworthy
wretch? yet he promiseth to love freely, Hos. 14. 4.
and invites such as are heavy laden to him, Mat.
11. 28.
Hence also should the gracious Soul reflect sweetly
upon it self after this manner: And is the World
so full of trouble? O my Soul, what cause hast thou
to stand admiring at the indulgence and goodness of
God to thee! Thou hast hitherto had a smooth
assage comparatively to what others have had.
How hath Divine Wisdom ordered my Condition,
and cast my Lot? Have I been chastised with Whips?
others with Scorpions: Have I had no peace with|out:
Some have neither had peace without nor
within, but terrours round about: Or have I felt
trouble in my flesh and spirit at once? Yet have they
not been extream, either for time or measure, And
hath the World been a Sodom, an Aegypt to thee?
Why then dost thou thus linger in it, and hanker
after it? Why do I not long to be gone, and sigh
more heartily for Deliverance? Why are the thoughts
of my Lord's coming no sweeter to me, and the day
of my full deliverance no more panted for? And
why am I no more careful to maintain peace with|in,
since there is so much trouble without? Is not
this it that puts weight into all outward troubles,
and makes them sinking, that they fall upon me when
my spirit is dark or wounded?


THE POEM.
My Soul, art thou besieged
with troubles round about?
If thou be wise, take this Advice,
to keep these troubles out.
Wise Men will keep their Conscience as their eyes;
For in their Conscience their best Treasure lies.
See you be tender of your inward peace;
That shipwrackt, then your Mirth and Ioy must ceas.
If God from you your outward Comforts rend,
You'll find what need you have of such a Friend.
If this be not by sin destroy'd and lost,
You need not fear, your Peace will quit your cost.
If youl'd know How to sweeten any grief,
Though ne'r so great, or to procure relief
Against th' afflictions, which like deadly Darts.
Most fatal are to Men of carnal hearts,
Reject not that, which Conscience bids you chusc,
And chuse not you, what Conscience saith, Refuse.
If sin you must, or Misery under lie,
Resolve to bear, and chuse the Misery.



CHAP. II.

In the vast Ocean Spiritual Eyes desry
God's boundless Mercy, and Eternity.


OBSERVATION.
THE Ocean is of a vast extent and depth, though
supposedly measurable, yet not to be sounded
by Man. It compasseth about the Whole Earth,
which in the account of Geographers, is Twenty one
thousand and six hundred Miles in compass; yet the
Ocean invirons it on every side, Psal. 104. 25. and
Iob 11. 9. Suitable to which is that of the Poet.
Tum freta diffudit, rapidisque tumescere ventis
Iussit  ambitae circumdare littora terrae.
Ovid
He spread the Seas, which then he did command,
To swell with Winds, and compass round the Land.

And for its Depth, who can discover it? The Sea
in Scripture is called, The Deep, Job 38. 30. The
Great Deep, Gen. 7. 11. The gathering together of
the Waters into one place, Gen. 1. 9. If the vastest
Mountain were cast into it, it would appear no
more than the head of a Pin in a Tun of Water.


APPLICATION.
This in a lively manner shaddows forth the in|finite
and incomprehensible Mercy of our God;
whose Mercy is said to be over all his works, Psal.
145. 9. In how many sweet Notions is the Mercy
of God represented to us in the Scripture. He is
said to be Plenteous, Psal. 4. 5. Abundant, 1 Pet. 1.
3. Rich, Eph. 2. 4. in mercy; then, that his Mercies
are unsearchable, Ephes. 3. 8. High as the Heaven
above the Earth, Psal. 10. 4. Which are so high and
vast, that the whole Earth is but a small point to
them: yea, they are not only compared to the
Heavens, but to come home to the Metaphor, to the
Depths of the Sea, Mic. 7. 19. which can swallow
up Mountains as well as Mole-hills; and in this Sea
God hath drowned sins of a dreadful height and
aggravation, even Scarlet, Crimson (i. e.) deep dyed
with many intensive aggravations, Isa. 1. 18. In
this Sea was the sin of Manasseh drowned; and of
what magnitude that was, may be seen, 2 Chron. 33.
3. Yea, in this Ocean of Mercy, did the Lord drown
and cover the sins of Paul, though a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, Injurious, 1 Tim. 1. 13. None, saith
Augustine, more fierce than Paul among the Persecutors;
and therefore none greater among sinners: to which
himself willingly subscribes, 1 Tim. 1. 1 yet pardon|ed.
How hath Mercy rode in triumph, and been
glorified upon the vilest of Men! How hath it stop
the slanderous mouth of Men and Devils! It hath
yearned upon Fornicators, Idolters, Adulterers,

Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners;
to such hath the Scepter of Mercy been stretched
forth, upon their unfeigned repentance and sub|mission,
1 Cor. 6. 9. What doth the Spirit of God
aim at, in such a large accumulation of Names of
Mercy? But to convince poor sinners of the abundant
fulness and riches of it, if they will but submit to
the terms on which it is tender'd to them.
In the vastness of the Ocean, we have also a lively
Emblem of Eternity. Who can comprehend or
measure the Ocean, but God? And who can com|prehend
Eternity, but he that is said to inhabit it?
Isa. 57. 15. Though shallow Rivers may be drained
and dried up, yet the Ocean cannot. And though
these transitory Days, Months, and Years will at
last expire and determine; yet Eternity shall not.
O! it is a long World! and amazing Matter! What
is Eternity, but a constant permanency of Persons
and Things, in one and the same State and Condition
for ever; putting them beyond all possibility of
change? The Heathens were wont to shadow it by
a Cricle, or a Snake twisted round. It will be to all
of us, either a perpetual Day or Night, which will
not be measured by Watches, Hours, Minutes. And
as it cannot be measured, so neither can it ever be
diminished. When thousands of years are gone,
there is not a minute less to come. Gerhard and
Drexelius do both illustrate it by this known simili|tude:
Suppose a Bird were to come once in a thou|sand
years; to some vast Mountain of Sand, and
carry away in her Bill one Sand in a thousand years;
O what a vast time would it be, e're that immortal
Bird, after that rate, had recovered the Mountain!
and yet in time this might be done. For there
would be still some diminution; but in Eternity
there can be none. There be three things in Time,

which are not competent to Eternity: In Time
there is a Succession, one Generation, Year, and Day
passeth, and another comes; but Eternity is a fixed
[now.] In Time there is a Diminution and wasting;
the more is past, the less to come: But it is not so
in Eternity. In time there is an Alteration of
condition and states: A Man may be poor to day,
and rich to morrow; sickly and diseased this week,
and well the next; now in contempt, and anon in
honour: But no change passes upon us in Eternity.
As the Tree falls at Death and Judgment, so it lies
for ever. If in Heaven, there thou art a Pillar, and
shalt go forth no more, Rev. 3. 12. If in Hell, no
Redemption thence, but the smoak of their torments
ascendeth for ever and ever, Rev. 19. 3.


REFLECTION.
And is the Mercy of God, like the great Deeps,
an Ocean, that none can fathom? What unspeakable
Comfort is this to me? may the pardoned Soul say.
Did Israel sing a Song, when the Lord had over|whelm'd
their corporal Enemies in the Seas? And
shall not I break forth into his Praises, who hath
drowned all my sins in the depth of Mercy? O my
Soul, bless thou the Lord, and let his high praises
ever be in thy mouth. Mayst not thou say, that he
hath gone to as high an extent and degree of Mercy,
in pardoning thee, as ever he did in any? Oh my
God, who is like unto thee! that pardonest Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin. What mercy, but the Mercy
of a God, could cover such abominations as mine!
But O! what terrible Reflections will Conscience
ake from hence, upon all the Despisers of Mercy,
when the sinners eyes come to be opened too late
for Mercy, to do them good! We have heard in|eed,
that the King of Heaven was a merciful King,
ut we would make no address to Him, whilst that

Scepter was stretched out. We heard of Balm in
Gilead, and a Physician there, that was able and
willing to cure all our wounds, but would not com|mit
our seives to him. We read that the Arms of
Christ were open to embrance and receive us, but we
would not. O unparallel'd folly! O Soul-destroy|ing
madness? Now the Womb of Mercy is shut up,
and shall bring forth no more Mercies to me for
ever. Now the Gates of Grace are shut, and no
cries can open them.
Mercy acted its part, and is gone off the Stage;
and now Justice enters the Scene and will be glorifi|ed
for ever upon me. How often did I hear the
Bowels of Compassion sounding in the Gospel for
me? But my hard and impenitent heart could not
relent; and now, if it could, it is too late. I am
now past out of the Ocean of Mercy, into the Ocean
of Eternity, where I am fixed in the midst of end|less
Misery, and shall never hear the Voice of Mercy
more.
O dreadful Eternity! Oh Soul-confounding Word 
An Ocean indeed, to which this Ocean is but as a
drop; for in thee no Soul shall see either Bank or
Bottom. If I lie but one Night under strong pains
of body, how tedious doth that Night seem! And
how do I tell the Clock, and wish for day! In the
World I might have had Life, and would not; And
now, how fain would I have Death, but cannot 
How quick were my sins in execution? And how
long is their punishment in duration? O, how shall
I dwell with everlasting Burnings? Oh that God
would but vouchsafe one treaty more with me! Bu
alas, all tenders and treaties are now at an end with
me. On Earth peace, Luke 2. 13. but none in Hell
O my Soul! consider these things: come, let us
debate this matter seriously, before we launch o
into this Ocean.



THE POEM.
Who from some high-rais'd Tower views the ground,
His heart doth tremble, and his head doth round:
Even so my Soul, whilst it doth view and think
On this Eternity, upon whose brink
It borders, stands amazed, and doth cry,
O boundless! bottomless Eternity!
The Scourge of Hell, whose very Lash doth rend
The damned Souls in twain: What! never end?
The more thereon they ponder, think and pore,
The more, poor wretches, still they howl and roar.
Ah! though more years in torments we should lie,
Than Sands are on the Shore, or in the Skie
Are twinkling Stars: yet this gives some relief,
The hope of ending. Ah! but here's the grief!
A thousand Years in Torments past and gone,
Ten Thousand more afresh are coming on;
And when these Thousands all their course have run,
The end's no more than when it first begun.
Come then, my Soul, let us discourse together
This weighty Point, and tell me plainly whether
You for these short-liv'd Ioys, that come and go,
Will plunge your self and me in endless woe.
Resolve the Question quickly, do not dream
More Time away. Lo, in an hasty stream
We swiftly pass, and shortly we shall be
Ingulphed both in this Eternity.



CHAP. III.

Within these smooth-fac'd Seas strange Creatures crawl;
But in Man's Heart, far stranger than them all.


OBSERVATION.
IT was an unadvised saying of Plato, Mare nil
memorabile producit: The Sea produceth nothing
memorable. But surely there is much of the Wis|dom,

Power, and Goodness of God manifested in
those Inhabitants of the Watery Region: Notwith|standing
the Seas azure and smiling face, Strange
Creatures are bred in its Womb. O Lord (saith
David) how manifold are thy works? In wisdom hast
thou made them all; the Earth is full of thy riches. So
is this great and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great Beasts, Psalm 104.
24, 25. And we read, Lam. 4. 3. of Sea-Monsters,
which draw out their Breasts to their young. Pliny and
Purchas tell incredible stories about them. About
the Tropick of Capricorn, our Sea-men meet with
flying Fishes, that have Wings like a Rere-mouse, but
of a Silver-colour; they fly in flocks like Stares.
There are Creatures of very strange Forms and
Properties; some resembling a Cow, called by the
Spaniards, Manates, by some supposed to be the Sea|monster
spoken of by Ieremy. In the Rivers of
Guiana, Purchas saith, there are Fishes that have four
Eyes, bearing two above and two beneath the Water
when they swim: Some resembling a Toad, and
very poisonous. How strange both in shape and
property is the Sword-fish and Thrasher, that fight
with the Whale? Even our own Seas produce Crea|tures
of strange shapes, but the commonness takes
off the wonder.


APPLICATION.
Thus doth the heart of Man naturally swarm and
abound with strange and monstrous lusts and a|bominations,
Rom. 1. 29, 30, 31, Being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousness, fuil of envy, murder, debate, deceit, ma|lignity,
whisperers, back-bitrs, haters of God, despiteful,
proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to
Parents, without understanding, covenant-breakers, with|out
natural affection, implacable, unmerciful. O what

a swarm is here! and yet there are multitudes more,
in the depths of the heart! And it is no wonder, con|sidering
that with this Nature, we received the spawn
of the blackest and vilest abominations. This original
lust is productive to them all, Iam. 1. 14. 15. Which lust,
though it be in every Man numerically, different from
that of others, yet it is one and the same speciffically, for
sort and kind, in all the Children of Adam: even as the
reasonable Soul, though every Man hath his own Soul,
viz a Soul individually distinct from another Man's, yet
is it the same for kind in all men. So that whatever
abominations are in the hearts and lives of the vilest
Sodomites, and most profligate Wretches under Heaven;
there is the same matter in thy heart out of which
they were shaped and formed. In the depths of the
heart they are conceived, and thence they crawl out of
the eyes, hands, lips, and all the members, Mat. 15.
18. 19. Those things (saith Christ) which proceed out
of the mouth, come forth from the heart, and defile a man.
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adul|teries,
fornications, thefts, false-witness, blasphemies: Even
such Monsters, as would make a gracious heart trem|ble
to behold. What are my Lusts, (saith Fuller's Med|one)
but so many Toads spitting of Venome, tations, p 11.
and spawning of Poison; croaking in my Iudgment, creep|ing
in my Will, and crawling into my Affecttions? The
Apostle in 1 Cor. 5. 1. tells us of a sin, Not to be nam|ed;
so monstrous, that Nature it self startles at it: E|ven
such Monsters are generated in the depths of the
heart. Whence comes evils? was a Question that
much puzled the Philosphers of old. Now here you
may see whence they come, and when they are be|gotten.


REFLECTION.
And are there such strange abominations in the
heart of Man? Then how is he degenerated from his

Perfection and Glory! His streams were once as clear
as Chrystal, and the Fountain of them pure, there
was no unclean Creature moving in them What
a stately Fabrick was the Soul at first! And what ho|ly
Inhabitants possessed the several rooms thereof!
But now (as God speaks of Idumea) Isai. 34. 11. The
line of confusion is stretched out upon it, and the stones of
emptiness. The Cormorant and Bittern posses it; the Owl
and the Raven dwell in it. Yea, as Isai. 13. 21. 22. The
wild beasts of the desert lie there; is is full of doleful crea|tures,
the Satyrs dance in it, and Dragons cry in those
sometimes pleasant places. O sad change! how sadly
may we look back towards our first state! and take
up the words of Iob, O that I were as in months past,
as in the days of my youth; when the Almighty was yet
with me, when I put on righteousness, and it cloathed me;
when my glory was fresh in me, Job 29. 2, 4. 5.
Again, think, O my Soul, what a miserable condi|tion
the Unregenerate abide in Thus swarmed and
over-run with hellish Lusts, nder the dominion and
vassalage of divers Lusts, Tit. 3. 3. What a tumultuous
Sea is such a Soul! How do these Lusts rage within
them! how do they contest and scuffle for the Throne!
and usually take it by turns. For as all Diseases are
contrary to health, yet some contrary to each other,
so are Lusts. Hence poor Creatures are hurried on to
different kinds of servitude, according to the Na|ture
of that imperious Lust that is in the Throne; and
like the Lunatick, Mat. 17. are sometimes cast into
the VVater, and somtimes into the Fire. Well might
the Prophet say, The wicked is like a troubled Sea that
cannot rest. Isai. 57. 20. They have no peace now in the
serv ice of sin, and less they shall have hereafter,
when they receive the wages of sin. There is no peaec
to the wicked, saith my God. they indeed cry Peace, peace;
but my God doth not say so. The last issue and result

of this is Eternal Death; no sooner is it delivered of
its deceitfull pleasures, but presently it falls in travel
again, and brings forth death, Iam. 1, 15.
Once more: And is the Heart such a Sea, abound|ing
with monstrous abominations? then stand aston|ished,
O my Soul, at that Free-grace which hath deli|vered
thee from so sad a Condition! O fall down, and
kiss the feet of Mercy that moved so freely and sea|sonably
to thy rescue! Let my heart be enlarged a|bundantly
here. Lord, what am I, that I should be
taken, and others left? Reflect, O my Soul, upon the
Conceptions and Births of Lusts, in the days of Va|nity,
which thou now blushest to own. O what black
imaginations, hellish desires, vile affections, are lodg|ed
there! Who made me to differ? Or, how came I
to be thus wounderfully separated? Surely, it is by
thy Free-grace, and nothing else, that I am what I
am: And by that Grace I have escaped (to mine own
astonishment) the corruption that is in the World
through Lust. O that ever the holy God should set
his eyes on such an one; or cast a look of love to|wards
me, in whom were Legions of unclean Lusts
and Abominations!


THE POEM.
My Soul's the Sea, wherein from day to day,
Sins like Leviathans do sport and play.
Great Master-Lusts, with all the lesser fry,
Therein increase. and strangely multiply.
Yet strange it is not, sin so fast should breed,
Since with this Nature I receiv'd the Seed
And Spawn of every Species, which was shed
Into its Caverns first, then nourished
By its own native warmth; which like the Sun,
Hath quickned them, and now abroad they come,
And like the Frogs of Aegypt creep and crawl
Into the closest Rooms within my Soul.
My Fancy swarms, for there they frisk and play,
In Dreams by Night, and foolish Toys by day.
My Iudgment's clouded by them, and my Will
Perverted, every corner they do fill.
As Locusts seize on all that's fresh and green,
Vncloath the beauteous Spring, and make it seem
Like drooping Autumn; so my Soul, that first
As Eden seem'd, now's like a Ground that's curst.
Lord purge my Streams, and kill those Lusts that lie
Within them; if they do not, I must die.



CHAP. IV.

Seas purge themselves, and cast their filth ashore
But Graceless Souls retain, and suck in more.


OBSERVATION.
SEas are in a continual motion and agitation; they
have their Flux and Reflux, by which they are
kept from putrefaction: like a Fountain it cleanses it
self, Isai. 57. 20. It cannot rest, but cast up mire and dirt;
whereas Lakes and ponds, whose Waters are standing,
and dead, corrupt and stink. And it is observ'd by Sea|men
hat in the Southern parts of the World, where
the Sea in more calm and setled, it is more corrupt and
unfit for use; so is the Sea of Sodom called, The Dead Sea,


APPLICATION.
Thus do regnerate Souls purify themselves, and
work out corruption that defiles them, they cannot
suffer it to settle there, 1 Iob 3. 3. He purifieth himself,
even as he is pure. Keepeth himself, that the wicked one
toucheth him not, 1 Iohn 5. 18. scil. Tacta qualitativo, with
a Qualitative Touch, as the Load-stone toucheth

Iron, leaving an Impression of its Nature behind it.
They are Doves delighting in cleanness, Isai. 33. 15.
He dispiseth the gain of opression, he shaketh his hands
from holding of bribes, stoppeth his ears from hearing blood,
and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil. See how all Sen|ses
and Members are guarded against sin: But it is
quite contrary with the wicked; there no principle
of Holiness in them, to oppose or expel corruption. It
lies in their hearts as Mud in a Lake or Well, which
settles and corrupts more and more. Hence Ezec.
47. 11. their Hearts are compared to myrie or marish
places, which cannot be healed, but are given to Salt:
The meaning is, that the purest streams of the Gos|pel.
which cleanse others, make them worse than be|fore,
as abundance of Rain will a myrie place. The
reason is, because it meets with an obstacle in their
souls; so that it cannot run through them and be glo|risied,
as it doth in gracious Souls. All the means and
endeavours used to cleanse them, are in vain; all the
grace of God they receive in vain: They hold fast de|ceit,
they refuse to let it go, Jer. 8. 5. Sin is not in them
as floating Weeds upon the Sea, which it strives to
expel and purge out, but as Spots in the Leopard's Skin,
Ier. 13. 21. or Letters fashioned and engraven in the
very substance of Marble or Brass, with a pen of Iron,
and point of a Diamond, Ier. 17. 1, Or as Ivy in an
old Wall, that hath gotten rooting into its very in|trails.
VVickedness is sweet in their mouths, they roul it
under their tongues, Job 20. 12. No threats nor pro|mises
can divorcethem from it.


REFLECTION.
Lord! this is the very frame of my heart, may the
graceless Soul say: My corruptions quietly settle in me,
my heart labours not against it: I am a stranger to
that conflict which is daily maintained in all the Fa|culties
of the regenerate Soul. Glorified Souls have

no such conflict, because Grace in them stands alone,
and is perfectly triumphant over all its opposites;
and graceless Souls can have no such conflict, because
in them corruption stands alone, and hath no other
principle to make opposition to it. And this is my
case, O Lord: I am full of vain hopes indeed, but
had I a living and wellgrounded hope to dwell for
ever with so holy a God, I could not but be daily
purifying my self. But O! what will the end of
this be? I have cause to tremble at that last and dread|fullest
Curse in the Book of God, Rev. 22. 11. Let him that
is filthy be filthy still. Is it not as much as if God should
say, Let them alone, I will spend no more rods up|on
them, no more means shall be used about them;
but I will reckon with them for all together in ano|ther
World; O my Soul! what a dismal reckoning
will that be! Ponder with thy self in the mean while,
those terrible and awaking Texts, that if possible, this
fatal issue may be prevented. See Isai. 1. 5. Hos. 4. 14. Jer. 6. 29, 30, Heb. 6. 8.


THE POEM.
My Heart's no Fountain, but a standing Lake
Of putrid Waters; if therin I rake,
By serious search, O! what a noysome smell,
Like Exhalations rising out of Hell;
The stinking Waters pump'd up from the Hole,
Are as perfumes to Sea-men: but my Soul
Vpon the same account that they are glad,
(Its long continuance there) is therefore sad.
The Scripture saith, No Soul God's face shall see
Till from such filthy Lusts it cleansed be.
Yet though unclean, it may that way be rid,
As Hercules the Augean Stable did.
Lord turn into my Soul that cleansing Bloud,
Which from my Saviour's side flow'd us a Flood.
Flow, sacred, brim my Banks; and flow
Till you have made my Soul as white as Snow.



CHAP. V.

Sea-men fore-see a Danger, and prepare:
Yet few of greater Dangers are aware.


OBSERVATION
HOW watchfull and quick sighted are Sea-men,
to prevent Dangers? If the Wind die away,
and then fresh up Sourtherly; or if they see the Sky
hezy, they provide for a Storm: If by the Prospec|tive-Glass
they ken a Pirate at the greatest distance,
they clear the Gun-room, prepare for fight, and bear
up, if able to deal with him; if not, they keep close
by the Wind, make all the Sail they can, and bear a|way.
If they suppose themselves by their reckoning
near Land, how often do they sound? And if upon
a Coast with which they are unacquainted, how care|ful
are they to get a Pilot that knows and is acquaint|ed
with it?


APPLICATION
Thus watchful and suspicions ought we to be in
Spiritual Concernmets. We should study, and be
acquainted with Satan's Wiles and Policy: The A|postle
takes it for granted, that Christians are not
ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11. The Serpent's eye
(as one saith) would do well in the Dove's head: The
Devil is a cunning Pirate, he puts out false Colours,
and ordinarily comes up to the Christan in the disguise
of a friend.
O the manifold depths and stratagems of Satan, to
destroy Souls! Though he have no Wisdom to do
himself good, yet policy enough to do us mischiefe.
He lies in ambush behind our lawful comforts and

imployments: Yet for the most of men, how supine
and careless are they, suspecting no danger; Their
Souls, like Laish, dwell carelesly; their Senses unguard|ed.
O what an easie prize and conquest doth the
Devil make of them!
Indeed, if it were with us, as with Adam in innocen|cy,
or as it was with Christ in the days of his flesh
(who by reason of that overflowing fulness of Grace
that dwelt in him, the purity of his Person, and the
Hypostatical Union, was secured from the danger of
all temptations) the case then were otherwise; but
we have a Traytor within, Jam. 1. 14, 15. as well as
a Tempter without 1 Pet. 5. 8. Our adversary the De|vil
goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. And like the Beasts of the Forest, poor Souls,
lie down before him, and become his prey, All the
lagacity, wit, policy and foresight of some Men, is
summoned in to serve their Bodies, and secure their
fleshly enjoyments.


REFLECTION.
Lord! how doth the care, wisdom, and vigilancy
of Men in temporal and external things, condemn my
carelesness in the deep and dear concernments of my
precious Soul! What care and labour is there to se|cure
a perishing life, liberty, or treasure! When was
I thus sollicitous for my Soul, though its value be in|estimable,
and its dangers far greater? Self-preserva|tion
is one of the deepest Principles in Nature. There
is not the poorest Worm or Flie, but will shun danger
if it can: Yet I am so far from shunning those dang|ers
to which my Soul lies continually exposed, that
I often run it upon temptations, and voluntarily ex|pose
it to its enemies. I see, Lord, how watchful,
Jealous and laborious thy People are, what Prayers,
Tears, and Groans, searching of Heart, Mortificati|on
of Lusts, guarding of Senses: and all accounted too

little by them. Have not I a Soul to save or lose
eternally, as well as they? Yet I cannot deny one flesh|ly
lust, nor withstand one temptation. O, how am
I convinced, and condemned; not only by others care
and vigilancy, but my own too, in lesser and lower
matters!


THE POEM.
I am the Ship, whose Bills of Lading come
To more than Mans or Angels art can sum.
Rich fraught with Mercies, on the Ocean, now
I float, the dangerous Ocean I do plow.
Storms rise, Rocks threaten, and in every Creek
Pirates and Pickeroons their Prizes seek.
My Soul should watch, look out, and use its Glass,
Prevent Surprizals timely; but alas!
Temptations give it chase, it's grappled sure,
And boared whilst it thinks it self secure.
It sleeps like Jonah, in the dreadful'st storm,
Although its case be dangerous and forlorn.
Lord, rouze my drowsie Soul, lest it should knock
And split it self upon some dangerous Rock.
If it of Faith and Conscience shipwrack make,
I am undone for ever: Soul, awake!
Till thou arrive in Heaven, watch and fear;
Thou mayst not say till then, the Coast is clear.



CHAP. VI.

How small a matter turns a Ship about?
Yet we against our Conscience stand it out.


OBSERVATION
IT is just matter of admiration, to see so great a
body as a Ship is, and when under Sail too, before
a fresh and strong Wind, by which it is carried, as
the Clouds, with marvellous force and speed, yet to be

commanded with ease, by so small a thing as the Helm
is. The Scripture takes notice of it as a matter wor|thy
our consideration, Jam. 3. 4 Behold also the ships,
which though they be great, and driven of fierce winds;
yet they are turned about with a small Helm, whithersoe|ver
the Governour listeth. Yea, Aristo|tle
himself,Ariftot. secund. , c. 5. that Eagle ey'd Philo|sopher,
could not give a reason of
it, but looked upon it as a very
marvellous and wounderful thing.


APPLICATION.
To the same use and office has God design'd Con|science
in Man, which being rectified and regulated by
the Word and Spirit of God, is to steer and order
his whole Conversation. Conscience is as the Oracle
of God, the Judge and Determiner of our Actions,
whether they be good or evil? and it lays the strong|est
obligatons upon the creature to obey its dictates,
that is imaginable: For it binds under the reason and
consideration of the most Absolute and Soveraign
Will of the great God. So that as often as Conscience
from the Word convinceth us of any sin or duty, it
lays such a bond upon us to obey it, as no power un|der
Heaven can relax, or dispense with. Angels can|not
do it, much less Man; for that would be to exalt
themselves above God. Now therefore it is an high
and dreadful way of sinning, to oppose and rebel a|gainst
Conscience, when it convinces of sin or duty.
Conscience sometimes reasons it out with Men, and
shews them the necessity of changing their way and
course; arguing it from the clearest and most allow|ed
Maxims of right Reason, as well as from the in|disputable
Soveraignty of God.
As for instance: It convinceth their very Reason,
that things of Eternal Duration, are infinitely to be
preferred to all momentary and perishing things,

Rom. 8. 18. Heb. 11. 26. And it is our duty to chuse them,
and make all secular and temporary concernments
to stand aside, and give place to them. Yet though
Men be convinced of this, their stubborn Will stands
out and will not yield up it self to the conviction.
Further, It argues from this acknowledged truth,
That all the delights and pleasures it this World, are
but a miserable portion, and that it is the highest fol|ly
to adventure an immortal soul for them, Luke 9.
25. Alas, what remembrance is there of them in
Hell? They are as the waters that pass away. What
have they left of all their mirth and jollity, but a tor|menting
sting? It convinceth them clearly also that
in matters of deep concernment, it is an high point
of wisdom, to apprehend and improve the right sea|sons
and opportunities of them Prov. 10. 5. He that
gathers in summer is a wise Son. Eccles. 8. 5. A wise
man's heart discerns both time and judgment. There is
a season to every purpose, Eccles. 3. 1. viz. A nick of
time, an happy juncture; when if a Man strikes in, he
doth his work effectually, and with much facility.
Such Seasons Conscience convinceth the Soul of, and
often whispers thus in its ear: Now, Soul, strike in
close with this motion of the Spirit, and be happy
for ever; thou maist never have such a gale for Hea|ven
any more. Now, though these be allowed Ma|xims
of Reason, and Conscience inforce them strong|ly
on the soul, yet cannot it prevail; the prou'd stub|born
Will rebels, and will not be guided by it. See
Ephes. 2. 3. Iob 34. 37. Isai. 46. 12. Ezek. 2. 4. Ier. 44. 16.


REFLECTION.
Ah Lord! such an heart have I had before thee;
thus obstinate, thus rebellious, so uncomptrolable by
Conscience. Many a time hath Conscience thus whis|pered
in mine ear; many a time hath it stood in my

way, as the Angel did in Balaams, or the Cherubims that
kept the way of the Tree of Life, with flaming swords
turning every way. Thus hath it stood to oppose me
in the way of my Lusts. How often hath it calmly
debated the Case with me alone? And how sweetly
hath it expostulated with me? How clearly hath it
convinced of sin, danger, duty, with strong demon|stration?
How terrible hath it menaced my soul, and
set the point of the threating at my very breast?
And yet my head-strong affections will not be re|manded
by it. I have obeyed the voice of every lust
and temptation. Tit. 3. 3. But Conscience hath lost
its Authority with me Ah Lord! what a sad condi|tion
am I in, both in respect of sin and misery? My
sin receives dreadful aggravations; for rebellion and
presumption are hereby added to it. I have violated
the strongest bonds that ever were laid upon a Crea|ture.
If my Conscience had not thus convinced and
warned, the sin had not been so great and crimson|coloured,
Iam. 4. 17. Ah! this is to sin with an high
hand, Numb. 15. 30. to come near to the great and
unpardonable trasgression, Psal. 19. 13. O how
dreadful a way of sinning is this, with opened eyes!
And as my sin is thus out of measure sinful so my
punishment will be out of measure dreadful, if I persist
in this rebellion. Lord, thou hast said, Such shall be
beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 48. Yea, Lord,
and if ever my Conscience, which by rebellion is now
grown silent, should be in judgment awakened in this
life, Oh what an Hell should I have within me! how
would it thunder and roar upon me, and surround
me with terrors!
Thy word assures me, that no length of time can
wear out of its memory what I have done, Gen. 42.
21. No violence or force can suppress it, Mat. 27. 4.
No greatness of power can stifle it; it will take the

mightiest Monarchy by the throat, Exod. 10. 16. Dan.
5. 6. No musick, pleasures, or delights, can charm
it Iob. 20. 22. O Conscience! thou art the sweet|est
friend, or the dreadfullest enemy in the World;
Thy Consolations are incomparably sweet, and thy
terrours insupportable. Ah let me stand it out no
longer against Conscience; the very Ship in which I
sail, is a confutation of my madness, that rush gree|dily
into sin against both Reason and Conscience, and
will not be commanded by it; Surely, O my Soul,
this will be bitterness in the end.


THE POEM.
A Ship of greatest burden will obey
The Rudder; he that sits at Helm may sway
And guide its motion: If the Pilot please,
The Ship bears up against both Wind and Seas,
My Soul's the Ship, Affections are its Sails,
Conscience the Rudder. Ah! but Lord what ails
My naughty heart, to shuffie in and out,
When its convictions bid it tack about?
Temptations blow a counter-blast, and drive
The Vessel where they please, though Conscience strive.
And by its strong perswasions, it would force
My stubborn Will to steer another course.
Lord, if I run this course, thy Word doth tell
How quickly I must needs arrive at Hell.
Then rectifie my Conscience, change my Will;
Fan in thy pleasant Gales, my God, and fill
All my affections; and let nothing carry
My Soul from its due course or make it vary;
hen if the Pilots work thou wouldst perform,
 should bear bravely up against a storm.




CHAP. VII.

Through many fears and dangers Sea-men run
But all's forgotten when they do return.


OBSERVATION
WE have an elegant and lively description of
their fears and dangers, Psal. 107. 25, 26, 27. He
commandeth and raiseth the stormy Winds, which listeth
up the Waves thereof: They mount up to Heaven, they go
down again to the depths; their soul is melted because of
trouble; they reel to and fro, they stagger like a drunken
; they are at their wits end. Or, as it is in the He|brew,
All Wisdom is swallowed up. Suitable to which
is that of the Poet.

Rector in incerto est, nec quid fugiative petotive
Invenit, ambiguis ars stupet ipsa malis.

Ovid.

The Pilot knows not what to chuse or flee,
Art stands amaz'd in ambiguity.

O what strange and miraculous Deliverances have
many Sea-men had? How often have they yielded
themselves for dead Men, and verily thought the
next Sea would have swallowed them up? How earn|estly
then do they cry for Mercy? And like the Cym|brians,
can pray in a storm, though they regarded i
not at other times, Psal. 107. 28. Iona 1. 5, 6.


APPLICATION.
These dreadful storms do at once discover to u
the mighty Power of God in raising them, and th
abundant Goodness of God in preserving poor Crea|tures
in them.
1. The Power of God is graciously manifested i

raising them: The Wind is one of the Lord's Won|ders
Psal. 107. 24, 25. They that go down to the Sea,
see the works of the Lord, and his [wonders] in the deep;
for he commandeth and raiseth the stormy winds. Yea,
Verse 18. God appropriates it as a peculiar work of
his; He causeth [His wind to hlow.] Hence, He is
said in Scripture, to bring them forth of his treasury,
Psal. 137. 7. There they are locked up and reserv|ed,
not a gust can break forth, till he command and
call for it to go and excute his pleasure: Yea, He is
said to hold them in his fist, Prov. 30. 4. What is more
uncapable of holding than the Wind; yet God holds
it, Although it be a strong and terrible creature, He
controuls and rules it. Yea, the Scripture sets forth who
God, As riding upon the wings of the wind, Psal. 18. 10. It
is a borrowed speech from the manner of Men, when
they would shew their pomp and greatness, ride up|on
some stately Horse or Chario: so the Lord to mani|fest
the greatness of his Power, rides upon the Wings of
the wind, and will be admired in so terrible a creature.
And no less of his glorious Power appears in re|manding
them, than in raising them. The Heathens
scribe this power to their god Aeolus; but we know
this is the Royalty and sole Prerogative of the true
God, who made Heaven and Earth; it is He that
makes the storm a clam, Psal, 107. 29. And it is He
that shifts and changes them from Point to Point as
He pleaseth; for he hath appointed them their Cir|uits,
Eccles. 1. 6. The winds goeth towards the South,
nd turneth about unto the North; it whirleth about conti|nually,
and returneth again according to its Circuits.
2. And as we should adore his Power in the winds, 
ought we to admire his Goodness in preserving
Men in the height of all their fury and violence. O
what a marvellous work of God is here! That Men
ould be kept in a poor weak Vessel, upon the wild

and stormy Ocean, where the Wind hath its full
stroke upon them, and they are driven before it as a
wreck upon the Seas; yet, I say, that God should
preserve you there, is a work of infinite goodness and
power. That those Winds which do rend the very
Earth, Mountains, and Rocks, 1 Kings 29. 11. Breaks
the Cedars, yea, the Cedars of Lebanon, shakes the
VVilderness and makes the Hinds, to calve: which Na|turalists
say, bring forth with greatest difficulty, Psal.
29. 5, 8, 9. Surely your preservation in such Temp|ests,
is an astonishing work of Mercy. O how dread|ful
is this Creature, the Winds, sometimes to you?
And how doth it make your hearts shake within you?
If but a Plank spring, or a Bolt give way, you are all
lost. Sometimes the Lord for the magnifying of the
riches of his goodness upon you, drives you to such
exigencies, that, as Paul speaks in a like case, Acts
17. 20. All hopes of being saved is taken away: Nothing
but Death before your eyes. The Lord commands
a Wind out of his Treasury, bids it go and lift up
the terrible Waves; look you in upon the shore, and
drive you upon the Rocks, so that no Art can save
you; and then sends you a piece of Wreck, or some
other means to land you safe: And all this to give
you an experiment of his goodness and pity, that
you may learn to fear that God, in whose hand your
Soul and Breath is.
And it may be for present, your hearts are much
affected: Conscience works strongly, it smites you
for sins formerly committed, such cannsels of Minis|ters
or Relations slighted. Now, saith Conscience,
God is come in this storm to reckon with thee for
these things. But alas, all this is but a morning-dew;
no sooner is that storm without allayed, but all is quiet
within too. How little of the goodness of God a|bides
kindly and effectually upon the heart?



REFLECTION.
How often hath this glorious power and goodness
of God passed before me in dreadful storms and temp|ests
at Sea? He hath uttered his Voice in those stor|my
Winds, and spoken in a terrible manner by them;
yet how little have I been affected with it? The Lord
hath his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm, Nah. 1.
3. To some he hath walked in ways of Judgment
and Wrath, sending them down in a moment to Hell;
but to me in a way of forbearance and mercy. Ah,
how often have I been upon the very brink of Eterni|ty?
Had not God shifted or allaid the Wind, in a
moment, I had gone down into Hell. What work|ings
of Conscience were at present upon me? And
what terrible apprehensions had I then of my eternal
condition? What Vows did I make in that distress?
and how earnestly did I then beg for Mercy? But
Lord, though thy Vows are upon me, yet have I been
the same; yea, added to, and filled up the measure of
my sins. Neither the bonds of Mercy thou hast laid
upon me, nor the sacred and solemn Vows I have laid
upon my self, could restrain me from those ways of
iniquity, which then appeared so dreadful to me.
Ah Lord, what an heart have I? What love, pity,
and goodness have I sinned against? If God had but
respited Judgment so long what a mercy were it!
Sure I am, the damned would account it so; but to
give me such a space to repent, Ah what an invalu|able
Mercy is this! And do I thus requite the Lord,
Deut. 32. 6. and pervert and abuse his goodness thus?
Surely, O my Soul, if this be the fruit of all thy pre|servations,
they are rather reservations to some fur|ther
and sorer judgment. How dreadfully will Jus|tice
at last avenge the Quarrel of abused Mercy? Iosh.
24. 20. How grievously did God take it from the
Israelites, that they provoked him at the Sea, even at

the Red Sea? Psal. 106. 7. where God had wrought
there deliverance in such a miraculous way. Even
thus have I sinned after the similitude of there trans|gressions;
not onely against the Laws of God, but
against the Love of God. In the last storm he
shot off his VVarning-piece; in the next, he may dis|charge
his Murdering-piece against my Soul and body.
O my Soul! hath he given thee such deliverances as
these, and darest thou again break his Commandments;
Ezra 9. 13, 14. O let me pay the Vows that my lips
have uttered in my distress, lest the Lord recover his
glory from me in a way of Judgment.


THE POEM.
The Ship that now sails trim before a Wind,
E're the desired Port it gains, may find
A tedious passage: Gentle Gales a-while,
Do fill its Sails, the flattering Seas do smile,
The Face of Heaven is bright, on every side
The wanton Porpice tumbles on the Tide.
Into their Cahbins now the Sea-men go,
And then turn out again, with, What chear ho?
All on a sudden darkned are the Skies,
The Lamp of Heaven abscur'd, the Winds do rise;
Waves sell like Mountains: Now their Courage flags,
The Masts are crackt, the Canvas torn to rags.
The Vessel works for life; anon one cries,
The Main mast's gone by th' Board: another plies
The ump, until a third do strike them blank
With, Sirs, prepare for Death, w' have sprung a Plank.
Now to their Knees they go, and on this wise
They beg for Mercy with their loudest Cries:
Lord, save us but this once, and thou shalt see
What Persons for the future we will he:
Our former im's mis-spent, but with a Vow
VVe will engage, if thou wilt save us now;
To mend what is amiss. The gracious Lord,
Inclin'd to pity, takes them at their word;
The VVinds into their Treasures he doth call,
Rebukes the stormy Sea, and brins them all
To their desired Haven: once ashore,
And then their Vows are ne'r remembred more.
Thus Souls are shipwrackt, tho the Bodies live,
Vnless in time thou true Repentance give.



CHAP. VIII.

The Navigator shifts his Sails, to take
All VVinds, but that which for his Soul doth make.


OBSERVATION.
THE Mariner wants no Skill and wisdom to
improve several Winds, and make them ser|viceable
to his eud; A bare side-wind, by his skill in
shifting and managing the Sails, will serve his turn:
He will not lose the advantage of one breath or gale
that may be useful to him, I have many times won|der'd
to see two Ships failing in a direct counter|motion,
by one and the same wind. Their skill and
wisdom herein is admirable.


APPLICATION.
Thus prudent and skilful are Men in secular and
lower matters, and yet how ignorant and unskilful in
the great and everlasting affairs of their Souls! All
their Invention, Judgment, Wit, and Memory seem
to be prest for the service of the flesh. They can
learn an Art quickly, and arrive to a great deal of
exactness in it; but in soul-matters, no knowledge at
all. They can understand the Aequator, Meridian,
and Horizon: By the first they can tell the Latitude
of any place, South or North, measuring it by the

degrees in the Meridian; by the second, they can tell
you the Longitude of a place, East and West, from
the Meridian, measuring it by the degrees of the
Aequator: And by the third, they can discern the
divers risings and settings of the Stars. And so in
other Arts and Sciences, we find men endowed with
rare abilities, and singular sagacity. Some have
piercing Apprehensions, solid Judgments, stupendi|ous
Memories, rare Invention, and excellent elocuti|on:
But put them upon any spiritual pernatural mat|ter,
and the weakest Christian, even a babe in Christ,
shall excel them therein, and give a far better account
of Regeneration, the Work of Grace, the Life of
Faith than these can. 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many wise
men after the flesh, c. But God hath chosen the oolish
things of this world, c.


REFLECTION.
How inexcusable then art thou, O my Soul! and
how mute and confounded must thou needs stand be|fore
the bar of God, in that great day? Thou hadst
a Talent of natural parts committed to thee, but
which way have they been improved? I had an Un|derstanding
indeed, but it was not sanctified; a Me|mory,
but it was like a Sieve, that let go the
Corn, and retain'd nothing but Husks and Chaff; Wit
and Invention, but alas none to do my self good.
Ah! how will these rise in judgment against me, and
stop my mouth! What account shall I give for them
in that day?
Again: Are men (otherwise prudent and skill|ful)
such sots and fools in spiritual things? Then let
the poor weak Christian, whose natural parts are
blunt and dull, admire the riches of God's Free grace
to him. O what an astonishing consideration is this!
That God should pass by Men of the profoundest Na|tural
parts, and chuse me, even poor me, whose Na|tural

Faculties and Endowments, compared with
theirs, are but as Led to Gold! Thus under the Law
he past by the Lion and Eagle, and chose the Lamb
and Dove. O, how should it make me to advance
Grace, as Christ doth upon the same account, Matth.
11. 25. I thank thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and revealed them to babes. And let it ever be an
humbling consideration to me; For who made me
to differ? Is not this one principal thing God aims
at, in calling such as I am; that boasting may be ex|cluded,
and himself alone exalted?


THE POEM.
One thing doth very much affect my mind,
To see the Sea-man husband every Wind;
With exc'llent Art he shifts the Sails and knows
How to improve the barest VVind that blows.
If a direct or fore-right gale he want,
A side-wind serves his turn, tho' ne'r so scant,
And will not this one day in judgment rise
Against your Soul? Ah! can you be so wise
In smaller matters; what, and yet not know
How to improve fresh gales of Grace that blow?
Fast mor'd in sin your wind-bound Souls can lie,
And let these precious gales rise, blow, and die.
Sometimes on your Affections you may feel
Such gracious breathings: Ab, but hearts of steel,
They move you not, nor cause you to relent,
Though able, like Elijah's VVind, to rent
The Rocks asunder: If you do not prize
Those breathings, other VVinds will shortly rise,
And from another quarter; those once gone,
Then next look out for an Euroclydon.
A dreadful storm: how soon no Man can tell;
But when it comes, 'twill blow such Souls to Hell.




CHAP. IX.

If Sea-men lose a gale, there they may lie:
The Soul, when once becalm'd, in sin may die.


OBSERVATION.
SEa-men are very watchful to take their oppor|tunity
of Wind and Tide; and it much concerns
them so to be: The neglect of a few hours, some|times
loses them their passage, and proves a great
detriment to them. They know the Wind is an un|certain
variable thing; they must take it when they
may; they are unwilling to lose one flow, or breath,
that may be serviceable to them. If a prosperous
Gale offer, and they not ready, it repents them to
lose it, as much as it would repent us to see a Vessel
of good Wine or Beer tapt and run waste.


APPLICATION.
There are also seasons and gales of Grace for our
Souls; golden opportunities of Salvation afforded to
men, the neglect of which proves the loss and ruine
of Souls. God hath given unto men a day of Visita|tion,
which he hath limited, Heb. 4. 7. and keeps an
exact account of every Year, Month, and Day, that we
have enjoyed it, Luke 13. 7. Ier. 25. 3. Luke 19. 42.
The longest date of it can be but the time of this Life:
This is our day to work in, Iob 9. 4. and upon this
small wyre, the weight of Eternity hangs. But some|times
the season of Grace is ended, before the night
of Death comes; the accepted time is gone, men fre|quently
out-live it, Luke 19. 44. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Or, if
the outward means of Salvation be continued, yet
the Spirit many times withdraws from those means,
and ceases any more to strive with Men; and then
the Blessing, Power and Efficacy is gone from them,

and instead thereof a Curse seizeth the Soul, Heb. 6.
7, 8. and Ier. 6. 29.
Therefore it is a matter of high importance to our
Souls, to apprehend these seasons. How pathetically
doth Christ bewail Ierusalem, upon this account?
Luke 19. 42. O that thou hadst known, at least in this
thy day, the things of thy peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes. If a company of Sea-men be set a-shore
upon some remote, uninhabited Island, with this ad|vice,
to be a-board again exactly at such an hour,
else they must be left behind: How doth it concern
them to be punctual in their time? The lives of those
men depend upon a quarter of an hour. Many a
Soul hath perished eternally (the Gospel leaving
them behind in their sins) because they knew not the
time of their Visitation.


REFLECTION.
What golden Seasons for Salvation hast thou en|joyed,
O my Soul? What Halcyon-days of Gospel-light
and Grace hast thou had? How have the precious
Gales of Grace blown to no purpose upon thee! and
the Spirit waited and striven with thee in vain? The
Kingdom of Heaven (being opened in the Gospel-dis|pensations)
hath suffered violence. Multitudes have
been pressing into it in my days, and I my self have
sometimes been almost perswaded, and not far from
the Kingdom of God: I have gone as far as conviction
of sin and misery; yea, I have been carried by the
power of the Gospel, to resolve and purpose to turn
to God, and become a new Creature; but sin hath
been too subtil and deceitful for me: I see, my resolu|tions
were but as an early Cloud, or Morning-Dew;
and now my heart is cold and dead again, setled upon
its Lees. Ah! I have cause to fear and tremble, lest
God hath left me under that Curse, Rev. 20. 11. Let
him that is filthy, be filthy still. I fear I am become as

that myrie place, Ezek. 47. 11 that shall not be heal|ed
by the streams of the Gospel, but given to salt, and
cursed into perpetual barrenness. Ah Lord, wilt
thou leave me so! and shall thy Spirit strive no more
with me? Then it had been good for me that I had
never been born. Ah, if I have trifled out this
Season, and irrecoverably lost it, then I may take up
that lamentation, Ier. 8. 20. and say, My Harvest is
past, my Summer is ended, and I am not saved.
Every Creature knows its time, even the Turtle,
Crane, and Swallow, know the time of their coming,
Ier. 8. 7. How brutish am I, that have not known
the time of my Visitation! O thou that art the Lord
of Life and Time, command one gracious Season more
for me, and make it effectual to me, before I go hence,
and be seen no more!


THE POEM.
A fresh and whisking Gale presents to day,
But now the Ship's not ready; Winds must stay,
And wait the Sea-mens leisure. Well, to morrow
They will put out; but then, unto their sorrow,
That Wind is spent, and by that means they gain
Perchance a Month's Repentance, if not twain.
At last another offers, now they're gone;
But e're they gain their Port, the Market's done.
For every work and purpose under Heaven,
A proper time and season God hath given.
The Fowls of Heaven, Swallow, Turtle, Crane,
Do apprehend it, and put us to shame.
Man hath his season too: but that mis-spent,
There's time enough his folly to repent.
Eternity's before him, but therein
No more such golden hours as these have been.
When these are past away, then you shall find
That Proverb true, Occasion's bald behind.
Delays are dangerous; see that you discern
Your proper seasons. O that you would learn
This Wisdom from those Fools that comes too late
With fruitless cries, when Christ has shut the gate.



CHAP. X.

By Navigation one place stores another;
And by Communion we must help each other.


OBSERVATION.
THE most wise God hath so dispenced his Boun|ty
to the several Nations of the World, that
one standing in need of anothers Commodities, there
might be a sociable Commerce and Traffick main|taintain'd
amongst them all, and all combining in a
common League, may, by the help of Navigation, ex|hibit
mutual succours to each other. The Staple-Commodities
proper to each Country, I find thus
expressed by the Poet, Bart. Coll.

Hence come our Sugars from Canary Isles,
From Candy Currans, Muskadels, and Oyls;
From the Moluccoes, Spices; Balsamum
From Aegypt; Odours from Arabia come;
From India Gums, rich Drugs and Ivory;
From Syria Mummy; Black, Red Ebony
From burning Chus; from Peru, Pearl and Gold;
From Russia Furs, to keep the Rich from Cold.
From Florence Silks; from Spain Fruit, Saffron, Sacks;
From Denmark Amber, Cordage, Firs, and Flax;
From Holland Hops; orse from the Banks of Rhine;
From England VVool: all Lands, as God distributes,
To the VVorld's Treasure pay their sundry Tributes.




APPLICATION.
Thus hath God distributed the more rich and
precious Gifts and Graces of his Spirit among his
People: Some excelling in one Grace, some in ano|ther,
though every Grace, in some degree, be in them
all; even as in Nature, though there be all the Fa|culties
in all, yet some Faculties are in some more
lively and vigorous than in others; some have a
more vigorous eye others a more ready ear, others
a more voluable tongue; so it's in Spirituals. Abra|ham
excell'd in Faith, ob in Patience, Iohn in Love.
These were their peculiar excellencies. All the
elect Vessels are not of one quantity; yet even
those that excel others in some particular Grace,
come short in other respects of those they so excel|led
in the former, and may be much improv'd by
converse with such as in some respects are much
below them. The solid, wise, and judicious Chri|stian
may want that liveliness of affections, and ten|derness
of heart, that appears in the weak; and one
that excels in gifts and utterance, may learn Humi|lity
from the very Babes in Christ.
And one principal Reason of this different distri|bution,
is to maintain fellowship among them all,
1 Cor. 12. 21. The Head cannot say to the Feet I
have no need of you. As in a Family, where there is
much business to be done, even the little Children
bear a part, according to their strength, Jer. 7. 18.
The children gather wood, the fathers kindle the fire, the
women knead the dough. So in the Family of Christ,
the weakest Christian is serviceable to the strong.
There be precious Treasures in these Earthen Ves|sels,
for which we should trade by mutual communi|on.
The preciousness of the Treasure, should draw
out our desires and endeavours after it; and the con|sideration
of the brittleness of those Vessels in which

they are kept, should cause us to be the more expe|ditious
in our trading with them, and make the
quicker Returns: For when those Vessels (I mean
the Bodies of the Saints) are broken by Death,
there is no more to be gotten out of them. That
Treasure of Grace which made them such profita|ble,
pleasant. and desirable companions on Earth,
then Ascends with them into Heaven, where every
Grace receives its adolescence and perfection: And
then, though they be Ten thousand times more ex|cellent
and delightful than ever they were on Earth,
yet we can have no more communion with them, till
we come to Glory our selves. Now therefore it be|hoves
us to be enriching our selves by communicati|on
of what God hath dropt into us, and improve|ment
of them; as one well Notes.
We should do by Saints,Mr. Gurnal. as we use to
do by some choice Book lent us for
a few days, we should fix in our Memories, or tran|scribe
all the choice. Notions we meet with in it, that
they may be our own when the Book is called for,
and we can have it no longer by us.


REFLECTION.
Lord, How short do I come of my Duty in com|municating
to, or receiving good by others! My
Soul is either empty and barren, or if there be a|ny
Treasure in it, yet it is but as a Treasure locked
up in some Chest, whose Key is lost, when it should
be open'd for the use of others. Ah Lord! I have
sinned greatly, not only by vain words, but sinful
silence. I have been of little use in the World.
How little also have I gotten by communion with
others? Some, it may be, that are of my own size, or
judgment, or that I am otherwise obliged to, I can
delight to converse with: But O, where is that
largeness of heart, and general delight I should have

to, and in all thy People? How many of my old dear
Acquaintance are now in Heaven, whose Tongues
were as Choice silver, while they were here, Prov. 10.
20. And, blessed Souls, how communicative were
they of what thou gavest them? O what an improve|ment
had I made of my Talent this way, had I been
diligent! Lord pardon my neglect of those sweet and
blessed advantages. O let all my delight be in thy
Saints, who are the excellent of the earth. Let me ne|ver
go out of their company, without an heart more
warmed, quickned, and enlarged, than when I came
amongst them.


THE POEM.
To several Nations God doth so distribute
His bounty, that each one must pay a tribute
Vnto each other. Europe cannot vaunt,
And say, Of Africa I have no want.
America and Asia need not strive,
Which of it self can best subsist and live.
Each Countries want, in something, doth maintain
Commerce betwixt them all. Such is the aim
And end of God, who doth dispense and give
More Grace to some, their Brethren to relieve.
This makes the Sun Ten thousand times more bright,
Because it is diffusive of its Light,
Its Beams are gilded gloriously; but then
This property doth gild them o're agen.
Should Sun, Moon, Stars, impropriate all their light,
What dismal darkness would the World benight?
On this account Men hate the Vermine brood,
Because they take in much, but do no good.
What harm, if I at yours my Candle light?
Except thereby I make your Room more bright.
He that, by Pumping, sucks and draws the Spring,
New streams, and sweeter, to that Well doth bring.
Grace is a Treasure in an Earthen Pot;
When Death hath dasht it, no more can be got
Out of that Vessel: Then while it is whole,
Get out the Treasure to enrich your Soul.



CHAP. XI.

The Rocks abide, though Seas against them rage;
So shall the Church, which is God's Heritage.


OBTERVATION.
THE Rocks, though scituate in the boisterous
and tempestuous Ocean, yet abide firm and im|movable
from Age to Age: The impetuous Waves
dash against them with great violence, but cannot re|move
them out of their place. And although some|times
they wash over them, and make them to dis|appear,
yet there they remain fixt and impregnable.


APPLICATION.
This is a lively Emblem of the condition of the
Church, amidst all dangers and oppositions where|with
it is encountred and assaulted in this World.
These Metaphorical Waves roar and beat with violence
against it, but with as little success as the Sea against
the Rocks, Matth. 16. 18. Vpon this Rock will I build
my Church, and the [gates] of Hell shall not prevail a|gainst
it. The Gates of Hell, are the power and
policy of Hell; for it is conceived to be an allusive
speech to the Gates of the Iews wherein their Am|munition
for War was lodged, which also were the
Seats of Judicature, there sate the Judges: but yet,
these Gates of Hell shall not prevail. Nay, this Rock
is not only invincible in the midst of their violence,
but also breaks all that dash against it, Zech 12. 3.
In that day I will make Jerusalem a burthensome stone
for all people: all that burden themselves with it, shall be
cut in pieces, though all the people of the Earth be gather|ed

together against it. An Allusion to one that assays
to roul some great stone against the Hill, which at
last returns upon him, and crushes him to pieces.
And the reason why it is thus firm and impregna|ble,
is not from it self; for alas; so considered, it is
weak, and obnoxious to ruine; but from the almighty
Power of God, which guards and preserves it day and
night, Psal. 46. 5, 6. God is in the midst of her, she
shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right
early. Vatab. Dum espieit mane. When the mor|ning
appears. Which notes (saith Calvin) God's
assiduous and constant help and succour, which is ex|tended
in all dangers, as constantly as the Sun arises.
And this assiduous succour to his people, and their
great security thereby, is set forth in the Scriptures
by a pleasant variety of Metaphors and Emblems,
Zech. 2. 5. I (saith the Lord) will be a VVall of Fire
round about it. Some think this phrase alludes to the
Cherubims, that kept the way of the Tree of Life
with flaming swords: Others, to the fiery Chariots
round about Datham, where Elisha was: but most
think it to be an allusion to an ancient custom of
Travellers in the Desarts; who to prevent the assaults
of wilde Beasts in the night, made a Circular fire round
about them, which was as a Wall to them. Thus
will God be to his people, a wall of fire, which none
can scale. So Exod. 3. 3, 4, 5. We have an excellent
Emblem of the Churches low and dangerous con|dition,
and admirable preservation. You have here,
both a Marvel and a Mystery: The Marvel was to
see a bush all on fire, and yet not consumed. The
Mystery is this: the Bush represented the sad con|dition
of the Church in Egypt; the Fire flaming up|on
it, the grievous Afflictions, troubles, and bondage
it was in there; the remaining of the Bush uncon|sumed,
the strange and admirable preservation of the

Church in those troubles. It lived there as the three
noble Iews, untouched in the midst of a burning fiery
Furnace: And the Angel of the Lord in a flame of
fire in the midst of the Bush, was nothing else but the
Lord Iesus Christ, powerfully and graciously present
with his people, amidst all their dangers and suffer|ings.
The Lord is exceeding tender over them, and
jealous for them, as that Expression imports, Zech. 2.
8. He that touches you, toucheth the apple of mine eye.
He that strikes at them, strikes at the Face of God;
and at the most excellent part of the Face, the Eye;
and at the most tender and precious part of the Eye,
the Apple of the Eye. And yet (as a Learned Mo|dern
observes) this people of whom he uses this ten|der
and dear expression, were none of the best of
Israel neither; but the residue that staid behind in
Babilon, when their Brethren were gone to rebild
the Temple; and yet over these, is he as tender, as a
man is over his eye.


REFLECTION.
And is the security of the Church so great! and its
preservation o admirable, amidst all Storms and
Tempests! Then why art thou so prone and subject
to despond, O my Soul, in the day of Sions trouble?
Sensible thou wast, and oughtest to be; but no rea|son
to hang down the head through discouragement,
much less to forsake Sion in her distress, for fear of
being ruined with her.
What David spake to Abiathar, 1 Sam. 22. 23.
that may Sion speak to all her Sons and Daughters in
all their distresses: Though he that seeketh thy life,
seeketh mine also; yet with me shalt thou be in safeguard.
God hath intail'd great Salvation and Deliverances
upon Sion; and blessed are all her Friends and
Favourers; the Rock of ages is its defence. Fear
not therefore, O my Soul, though the Hills be re|moved

out of their place, and cast into the midst of
the Sea. O let my Faith triumph, and my Heart re|joyce
upon this ground of comfort. I see the same
Rocks now, and in the same place and condition they
were many years ago. Though they have endured
many storms, yet there they abide; and so shall Sion,
when the proud waves have spent their fury and rage
against it.


THE POEM.
Mesopotamia, stuate in the Seas,
May represent the Church, or if you please,
A Rock, o're which the Waves do wash and swill,
May figure it; chuse either, which you will.
Winds strive upon those Seas, and make a noise,
The lofty Waves sometimes lift up their voice,
And swelling high, successively do beat
VVith violence against it, then retreat.
They break themselves, but it abides their shock;
And when their Rage is spent there stands the Rock.
Then they are out, that do affirm and vote,
Peace, Pomp, and Splendour is the Churches Note.
And they deserve no less reproof, that are
In Zion's Troubles ready to despair.
This Rock amidst far stronger Rocks doth lie,
VVhich are its fence, so deep, so thick, so high,
They cann't be batterr'd, scal'd, or undermin'd:
And these, environ'd by them, daily find
Their Bread ascertain'd; VVaters too secur'd
Then shout and sing, ye that are thus Immur'd.



CHAP. XII.

VVhat Dangers run they for a little gains,
VVho, for their Souls, would ne'r take half the pains!


OBSERVATION.
HOw exceeding solicitous and adventurous are
Sea-men for a small portion of the World?

How prodigal of strength and life for it? They
will run to the ends of the Earth, engage in a Thou|sand
dangers, upon the hopes and probability of get|ting
a small Estate. Per mare per terras, per mille
pericula currunt. Hopes of gain makes them willing
to adventure their liberty, yea, their life; and en|courages
them to endure Heat, Cold, and Hunger,
and a Thousand streights and difficulties, to which
they are frequently exposed.


APPLICATION.
How hot and eager are Mens affections after the
World? And how remiss and cold towards things
eternal? They are careful, and troubled about ma|ny
things, but seldom mind the great and necessary
matters, Luke 10. 40. They can rise early, go to
bed late, eat the bread of carefulness: But when
did they so deny themselves for their poor Souls?
Their heads are full of designs and projects to get or
advance an Estate: VVe will go into such a City, conti|nue
there a year, and Buy and Sell, and get gain, Jam. 4.
13. This is the , the Master-design, which
engrosseth all their time, studies and contrivances.
The Will hath past a Decree for it, the Heart and
Affections are fully let out to it, They will be rich,
1 Tim. 6. 9. This Decree of the Will, the Spirit of
God takes deep notice of it; and indeed it is the
clearest and fullest discovery of a Man's portion and
condition: For, look what is highest in the estima|tion,
first and last in the thoughts, and upon which
we spend our time and strength with delight; cer|tainly,
that is our Treasure, Mat. 6. 20, 21. The
Heads and Hearts of Saints are full of solicitous
cares and fears about their Spiritual Condition: The
great design they drive on, to which all other things
are but [,] things on the by, is to make
sure their Calling and Election. This is the [Pon|dus,]

the weight and byass of their Spirit: if their
hearts stray and wander after any other thing, this
reduces them again.


REFLECTION.
Lord, this hath been my manner from my Youth,
may the Carnal minded Man say; I have been la|bouring
for the Meat that perisheth; disquieting my
self in vain, full of designs and projects for the
World, and unwearied in my endeavours to com|pass
an earthly treasure; yet therein I have either
been checkt and disappointed by Providence; or if
I have obtained, yet I am no sooner come to enjoy
that Content and Comfort I promised my self in
it, but I am ready to leave it all, to be stript out of it
by Death, and in that day all my thoughts perish.
But in the mean time What have I done for my
Soul? When did I ever break a Night's sleep, or
deny and pinch my self for it? Ah fool that I am!
to nourish and pamper a vile Body, which must short|ly
lie under the Clods, and become a loathsome Car|kass;
and, in the mean time, neglect and undo my
poor Soul, which partakes of the Nature of Angels,
and must live for ever. I have kept others Vine|yards,
but mine own Vineyard I have not kept: I
have been a perpetual drudge and slave to the World;
in a worse condition hath my Soul been, than others
that are Condemned to the Mines. Lord change
my Treasure, and change my Heart: O let it suf|fice
that I have been thus long labouring on the
fire, for very vanity. Now gather up my heart and af|fections
in thy self, and let my great design now be,
to secure a special interest in thy Blessed Self, that I
may once say, To me to live is Christ.


THE POEM.
The Face of Man imprest and stampt on Gold,
VVith Crown and Royal Scepters we behold.
No wonder that an humane Face it gains,
Since Head, Heart, Soul, and Body it obtains.
Nor is it strange a Scepter it should have,
That to its Yoke the World doth so enslave.
Charm'd with its chinking Note, away they go
Like Eagles to the Carcass, ride and row.
Through worlds of hazards foolish creatures run
That into its embraces they may come.
Poor Indians in the Mines my heart condoles,
But seldom turns aside to pity Souls,
Which are the slaves indeed, that toyl and spend
Themselves upon its service. Surely, Friend,
They are but Sextons to prepare and make
Thy Grave within those Mines, whence they do take
And dig their Ore. Ah! many Souls, I fear,
Whose Bodies live, yet lie entombed there.
Is Gold so tempting to you? Lo, Christ stands,
VVith length of days, and riches in his hands.
Gold in the fire tried he freely proffers;
But few regard or take those Golden Offers.



CHAP. XIII.

Millions of Creatures in the Seas are fed:
Why then are Saints in doubt of daily bread?


OBSERVATION.
THere are multitudes of Living Creatures in the
Sea. The Psalmist saith, There are in it
things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts,
Psal. 104. 25. And we read, Gen. 1. 20. that when
God blessed the Waters he said, Let the Waters
bring forth abundantly, both Fish and Fowl, that
move in it, and fly about it. Yet all those multitudes
of Fish and Fowl, both in Sea and Land, are cared
and provided for, Psal. 145. 15, 16. Thou givest them

their meat in due season; thou openest thy hand, and
satisfiest the desire of every living thing.


APPLICATION.
If God take care for the Fishes of the Sea, and the
Fowls of the Air, much more will he care and pro|vide
for those that fear him. When the poor and needy
seeketh water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth
for thirst; I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel
will not forsake them, Isai. 41. 17. Take no thought for
your life (saith the Lord) what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink; or for the body, what ye shall put on: Which
he backs with an Argument from God's Providence
over the Creatures, and enforceth it with a [much
rather) upon them, Matth. 6. 25, 31. God would
have his people be without carefulness (i. e.) anxious
care, 1 Cor. 7. 32. And to cast their care upon him,
for he careth for them, 1 Pet. 5. 7. There be two
main Arguments suggested in the Gospel, to quiet
and satisfie the hearts of Saints in this particular:
The one is, that the Gift of Jesus Christ amounts to
more than all these things come to; yea, in bestow|ing
him, he has given that which virtually and
eminently comprehends all these inferiour mercies in
it, Rom. 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but de|livered
him up for us all? how, shall he not with him
freely give us all things? And 1 Cor. 3. 22. All things
are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Ano|ther
Argument is, That God gives these Temporal
Things to those he never gave his Christ unto, and
therefore there is no great matter in them: Yea, to
those, which in a little while, are to be thrust into
Hell, Psal. 17. 14. Now, if God cloath and feed his
enemies, if (to allude to that, Luke 12. 28.)
he cloath this Grass, which to day is in its pride
and glory in the Field, and to morrow is cast into
the Oven, into Hell. How much more will he cloath
and provide for you that are Saints?
This God that feeds all the Creatures, is your
Father, and a Father that never dies; and therefore
you shall not be as exposed Orphans, that are the
Children of such a Father. For he hath said, I will
never leave you, nor forsake you, Heb. 13. 3. I have
read of a good woman, that in all wants and distresses,
was wont to encourage herself with that word, 2
Sam. 22. 47. The Lord liveth. But one time being
in a deep distress, and forgetting that consolation,
one of her little Children came to her, and said,
Mother, Why weep ye so? What, is God dead now?
Which words from a Child, shamed her out of her
unbelieving fears, and quickly brought her Spirit to
rest. O Saint, whilst God lives, thou canst not want
what is good for thee.
How sweet a Life might Christians live, could they
but bring their hearts to a full subjection to the dis|posing
Will of God! to be content not only with
what he commands and approves, but also with what
he allots and appoints. It was a sweet Reply, that
a gracious Woman once made upon her Death-bed,
to a Friend that asked her, VVhether she were more
willing to live or die? She answer'd, I am pleas'd with
what God pleaseth. Yea, said her Friend, but if God
should refer it to you, which would you chuse? Truly,
(saith she) if God should refer it to me, I would refer
it to him again. Ah blest Life, when the Will is
swallow'd up in the Will of God, and the heart at
rest in his care and love, and pleased with all his ap|pointments!


REFLECTION.
I remember my fault this day, may many a gracious
Soul say. Ah how faithless and distrustful have I
been notwithstanding the great security God hath
given to my Faith, both in his Word and Works!
O my Soul, thou hast greatly sinned therein, and

dishonoured thy Father! I have been worse to my
Father, than my Children are to me. They trouble
not their thoughts with what they shall eat or drink,
or put on, but trust to my care and provision for
that: Yet I cannot trust my Father, though I have
ten thousand times more reason so to do, than they
have to trust me, Mat. 7. 21. Surely, unless I were
jealous of my Father's affection, I could not be so
dubious of his provision for me. Ah, I should rather
wonder that I have so much, than repine that I have
no more. I should rather have been troubled that I
have done no more for God, than that I have received
no more from God. I have not proclaimed it to the
World by my Conversation, that I have found a
sufficiency in him alone, as the Saints have done, Hab.
3. 17, 18. How have I debased the Faithfulness and
All-sufficiency of God, and magnified these earthly
trifles, by my anxiety about them? Had I had more
Faith, a light Purse would not have made such an
heavy heart. Lord, how often hast thou convinced
me of this folly, and put me to the blush, when thou
hast confuted my unbelief; so that I have resolved
never to distrust thee more, and yet new exigencies
renew this corruption? How contradictory also hath
my heart and my prayers been? I pray for them con|ditionally,
and with submission to thy Will; I dare
not say to thee, I must have them; yet this hath been
the language of my heart and life. O convince me
of this folly!


THE POEM.
Variety of curious Fish are caught
Out of the Sea, and to our Tables brought;
VVe pick the choicest bits, and then we say,
VVe are sufficed; come, now take away.
The Table's voided, you have done; but fain
I would perswade to have it brought again.
The sweetest bit of all remains behind
VVhich through your want of skill, you could not find.
A bit for Faith, have you not found it? Then
I have made but half a meal; come taste agen,
Hast thou considered (O my Soul) that hand
Which feeds those multitudes in Sea and Land?
A double mercy in it thou shouldest see;
It fed them first, and then with them fed thee.
Food in the Waters we should think were scant
For such a multitude, yet none do want.
VVhat numerous flocks of Birds above me fly?
VVhen saw I one, through want fall down and die?
They gather what his hand to them doth bring,
Though but a VVorm, and at that Feast can sing.
How full a Table doth my Father keep?
Blush then, my naughty heart, repent and weep;
How faithless and distrustful hast thou been,
Although his care and love thou oft hast seen?
Thus in a single dish you have a feast,
Your first and second course, the last the best.



CHAP. XIV.

Sea-waters drained through the earth, are sweet;
So are th' afflictions which God's People meet.


OBSERVATION.
THE Waters of the Sea in themselves, are
brackish and unpleasant, yet being exhaled by
the Sun, and condensed into Clouds, they fall down
into pleasant Showers; or if drained through the
Earth, their property is thereby altered; and that
which was so salt in the Sea, becomes exceeding sweet
and pleasant in the Springs. This we find by constant
experience, the sweetest crystal Spring came from the
Sea, Eccles. 1. 7.



APPLICATION.
Afflictions in themselves are evil, Amos 2. 6. Very
bitter and unpleasant, See Heb. 12. 11. Yet not
morally and intrinsically evil, as sin is; for if so, the
holy God would never own it for his own act, as he
doth, Mic. 3. 2. but always disclaimeth sin, Iam. 1.
3. Besides, if it were so evil, it could in no case, or
respect, be the object of our election and desire; as in
some cases it ought to be, Heb. 11. 25. But it is evil,
as it is the fruit of sin, and grievous unto sense, Heb.
14. 11. But though it be thus brackish and unplea|sant
in itself, yet passing through Christ, and the
Covenant, it loses that ungrateful property, and be|comes
pleasant in the fruits and effects thereof unto
believers, Heb. 12. 11.
Yea, such are the blessed fruits thereof, that they
are to account it all joy, when they fall into divers
afflictions, Iam. 1. 2. David could bless God, that
he was afflicted; and many a Saint hath done the
like. A good woman once compared her afflictions
to her children: For (saith she) they put me in pain
in bearing them; yet as I know not which child, so neither
which affliction I conld be without.
Sometimes the Lord sanctifies affliction to discover
the corruption that is in the heart, Deut. 8. 2. It is
a furnace to shew the dross. Ah! when a sharp
Affliction comes, then the pride, impatiency, and un|belief
of the heart appears. Matura vexata prodit
seipsam. When the Water is stirred, then the mud
and filthy sediment that lay at the bottom rises.
Little (saith the afflicted Soul) did I think, there
had been in me that pride, self-love, distrust of God,
carnal fear, and unbelief, as I now find. O where
is my Patience, my Faith, my Glory in tribulation?
I could not have imagined the sight of Death would
have so appalled me, the loss of outward things so

have pierced me. Now what a blessed thing is this,
to have the heart thus discovered?
Again: Sanctified Afflictions discover the empti|ness
and vanity of the Creature. Now the Lord
hath stained its pride, and vailed its tempting splen|dour,
by this or that affliction; and the Soul sees
what an empty, shallow, deceitful thing it is. The
World (as one hath truly observed) is then only
great in our eyes, when we are full of sense and self:
But now Affliction makes us more spiritual, and then
it is nothing. It drives them nearer to God makes
them see the necessity of the Life of Faith, with
multitudes of other benefits.
But yet these sweet fruits of Affliction do not na|turally,
and of their own accord, spring from it:
No, we may as well look for Grapes from Thorns, or
Figs from Thistles, as for such Fruits from Affliction,
till Christ's sanctifying Hand and Art have past upon
them.
The reason why they become thus sweet and plea|sant
(as I noted before) is, because they run now
into another channel; Jesus Christ hath removed
them from Mount Ebal to Gerezim; they are no more
the effects of vindictive Wrath, but
paternal Chastisement.Correction, In|struction,. page. 182. And (as Mr. Case
well notes) A teaching affliction
is to the Saints, the result of all the Of|fices
of Iesus Christ. As a King, he chastens; as a Pro|phet,
he teacheth, viz. by chastening; and as a Priest,
he hath purchased this grace of the Father, that the dry
Rod might blossom, and bear fruit. Behold then, a
sanctified affliction is a Cup, whereinto Jesus Christ
hath wrung and prest the juyce and virtue of all his
Mediatory Offices. Surely, that must be a Cup of
generous, Royal Wine, like that in the Supper, a
Cup of Blessing to the people of God.



REFLECTION.
Hence may the unsanctified Soul draw matter of
fear and trouble, even from its unsanctified troubles.
And thus it may reflect upon it self; O my Soul,
what good hast thou gotten by all, or any of thy
afflictions? God's Rod hath been dumb to thee, or
thou deaf to it. I have not learned one holy In|struction
from it: My troubles have left me the same,
or worse than they found me; my Heart was proud,
earthly, and vain before, and so it remains still:
They have not purged out, but onely given vent to
the pride, murmur, and atheism of my heart. I have
been in my afflictions, as that wicked Ahaz was in
his, 2 Chron. 28. 22. Who in the midst of his distress,
yet trespassed more and more against the Lord. When
I have been in storms at Sea, or troubles at home, my
Soul within me hath been as a raging Sea, casting up
mire and dirt. Surely this Rod is not the Rod of
God's Children. I have proved but dross in the
Furnace, and I fear the Lord will put me away as
dross, as he threatens to do by the wicked, Psal. 119.
119.
Hence also should gracious Souls draw much en|couragement
and comfort amidst all their troubles.
O these are the fruits of Gods fatherly love to me!
Why should I fear in the day of evil? or tremble any
more at affliction? though they seem as a Serpent
at a distance, yet are they a Rod in hand. O blessed be
that skilful and gracious hand, that makes the Rod,
the dry Rod to blossome, and bear such precious
fruit.
Lord! what a mystery of love lies in this dispen|sation!
That sin which first brought afflictions into
the world, is now it self carried out of the world by
affliction, Rom. 5. 12. Isa. 7. 9. O what can
frustrate my Salvation, when those very things that

eem most to oppose it, are mad subservient to it;
nd contrary to their own nature do promote and
urther it?


THE POEM.
Tis strange to hear what different censures fall
Vpon the same affliction; some do call
Their troubles sweet, some bitter; others meet
Them both mid-way, and call them bitter-sweet.
But here's the question still, I fain would see,
Why sweet to him, and bitter unto me?
Thou drink'st them Dregs and all, but others find
Their troubles sweet, because to them refin'd,
And sanctifi'd; which difference is best,
By such apt Siilies as these exprest.
From Salt and Brackish Seas Fumes rise and fly
Which into Clouds condens'd, obscure the skie,
Their property there alter'd in few hours
Those brackish fumes fall down in pleasant showers:
Or as the dregs of Wine and Beer distill'd
By Limbeck, with ingredients, doth yield
A Cordial water, though the Lees were bitter,
From whence the Chymist did extract such liquor.
Then marvel not that one can kiss that Rod,
Which makes another to blaspheme his God.
O get your troubles sweet'ned and refin'd
Or else they'll leave bitter effects behind.
Saints troubles are a Cord, let down by love,
To pully up their hearts to things above.



CHAP. XV.

The Seas within their bounds the Lord contains;
He also Men and Devils holds in Chains.


OBSERVATION.
IT is a wonderful work of God, to limit and bound
such a vast and furious Creature, as the Sea;

which according to the judgment of many Learned
Men, is higher than the Earth; and that it hath a
propension to overflow it, is evident, both from its
nature and motion; were it not, that the great God
had laid his Law upon it. And this is a work where|in
the Lord glories, and will be admired, Psal. 104.
9. Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over,
that they turn not again to cover the Earth. Which it's
clear they would do, were they not thus limitted.
So Job 38. 8. 10. 11. Who shut up the Seas with doors,
when it breake forth, as if it had issued out of the VVomb?
I brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,
and said Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further; and
here shall thy proud VVaves be staid.


APPLICATION.
And no less is the glorious Power and Mercy of
God discovered in bridling the rage and fury of Satan
and his Instruments, that they break not in upon the
Inheritance of the Lord, and destroy it. Surely, the
wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath
thou shalt restrain, Psal. 76. 10. By which it is more
than hinted, that there is a World of Rage and
Malice in the hearts of wicked men, which fain would,
but cannot vent itself, because the Lord restrains, or
as the Hebrew, Girds it up. Satan is the envious
one, and his rage is great against the people of God,
Rev. 12. 12. But God holds him and all his In|struments
in a Chain of Providence; and it is well
for God's People, that it is so.
They are limited as the Sea, and so the Lord in a
providential way speaks to them, Hitherto shall you
go, and no further. Sometimes he ties them up so
short, that they cannot touch his people, though they
have the greatest opportunities and advantages, Psal.
105. 12, 13, 14, 15. VVhen they were but a few men
in number, yea, very few, and strangers in it; when they

went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to
another people: He suffered no man to do them wrong;
yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not
mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And
sometimes he permits them to touch and trouble his
People, but then sets bounds and limits to them,
beyond which they must not pass. That is a pregnant
Text to this purpose, Revel. 2. 10. Behold, the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried,
and ye shall have trihulation ten days.
Here are four remarkable limitations upon Satan
and his Agents, in reference to the People of God:
A limitation as to the Persons, not all, but some:
A limitation of the Punishment, a Prison, not a Grave,
not Hell: A limitation upon them as to the end;
for trial, not ruine: And lastly, as to the Duration;
not as long as they please, but ten days.


REFLECTION.
O my Soul, what Marrow and Fatness, Comfort,
and Consolation, maist thou suck from the Breast of
this Truth, in the darkest day of trouble? Thou
seest how the flowing Sea drives to over-whelm the
Earth. Who has arrested it in its course, and stopt
its violence! Who has confin'd it to its place?
Certainly none other but the Lord. When I see it
threaten the shore with its proud, furious, and in|sulting
Waves, I wonder it doth not swallow up all:
but I see it no sooner touch the Sands, which God
hath made its bounds, but it retires, and as it were
with a kind of submission, respects those limits which
God hath set it.
Thus the fiercest Element is represt by the feeblest
things; Thou seest also, how full of wrath and fury
wicked men are, how they rage like the troubled

Sea, and threaten to over-whelm
See the Turks Letter to the Emperour of Germany, lately published by Authority. thee, and all the Lord's Inheritance:
and then the floods of ungodly men
make thee afraid, yet are they re|strained
by an invisible gracious hand,
that they cannot execute their pur|pose,
nor perform their enterprize.
How full of Devils and devillized Men, is this lower
World? Yet in the midst of them all hast thou hither|to
been preserved. O my Soul, admire and adore
that glorious power of God, by which thou art kept
unto Salvation. Is not the preservation of a Saint
in the midst of such hosts of enemies, as great a
Miracle, though not so sensible, as the preservation
of those three Noble Iews in the midst of the fiery
Furnace, or Daniel in the Den of Lions? For there
is as strong a propension in Satan, and wicked men,
to destroy the Saints; as in the fire to burn, or a
Lion to devour. O then let me chearfully address
my self to the faithful discharge of my duty, and stand
no longer in a slavish fear of creatures, who can have
no power against me, but what is given them from
above, Iohn 19. 11. And no more shall be given
than shall turn to the glory of God, Psal. 76. 10. and
the advantage of my Soul, Rom. 8. 28.


THE POEM.
This World's a Forrest, where from day to day,
Bears, Wolves, and Lions range and seek their prey,
Amidst them all poor harmless Lambs are fed,
And by their very Dens in safety led.
They roar upon us, but are held in Chains:
Our Shepherd is their Keeper, he maintains
Our Lot. Why then should we so trembling stand?
We meet them, true, but in their Keeper's hand.
He that to ranging Seas such Bounds hath put,
The mouths of ravenous Beasts can also shut.
Sleep in the Woods, poor Lambs your selves repose
Vpon his Care, whose Eyes do never close.
If unbelief in you don't loose their chain,
Fear not their strugling, that's but all in vain.
If God can check the VVaves by smallest Sand,
A Twined Thread may hold these in his hand.
Shun Sin, keep close to Christ; for other evils
You need not fear, tho' compast round with Devils.



CHAP. XVI.

To Sea without a Compass none dare go;
Our Course without the VVord is even so.


OBSERVATION.
OF how great use and necessity is the Compass
to Sea-men? Though they can coast a little
way by the Shoar, yet they dare not venture far in|to
the Ocean without it. Its their Guide, and directs
and shapes their Course for them: And if by the
violence of Wind and Weather they be driven beside
their due Course, yet by the help of this, they are
reduced and brought to Rights again. It is wonder|ful
to consider, how by the help of this Guide they
can run in a direct Line many hundred Leagues, and
at last fall right with the smallest Island; which is
in the Ocean, comparatively, but as the head of a
small Pin upon a Table.


APPLICATION.
What the Compass, and all other Mathematical
Instruments are to the Navigator, that and much
more is the Word of God to us in our course to
Heaven. This is our Compass to steer our course
by, and it is truly touched; he that orders his con|versation
by it, shall safely arrive in Heaven at las.

Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule,
Peace be on them, and mercy.
This Word is as necessary to us in our way to
Glory, as a Lamp or Lanthorn is in a dark night,
Psal. 119. 105. This is a light shining in a dark
place, till the day dawn, and the day-star arise in
our hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. If any that profess to know
it, and own it as a Rule, miss Heaven at last; let
them not blame the Word for misguiding them,
but their own negligent and deceitful hearts, that
shuffle in and out, and shape not their course and
conversation according to its prescriptions.
What blame can you lay upon the Compass, if you
steer not exactly by it? How many are there, that
neglecting this Rule, will coast it to Heaven by their
own Reason? No wonder such fall short and perish
in the way. This is a faithful Guide, and brings all
that follow it to a blessed end, Thou shalt guide me
with thy counsel, and afterwards receive me to glory, Psal.
73. 24. The whole hundredth and nineteenth Psalm
is spent in commendation of its transcendent excel|lency
and usefulness. Luther profest, that he prized
it so highly, that he would not take the whole
World in exchange for one Leaf of it. Lay but
this Rule before you, and walk accurately by it, and
you cannot be out of your way to Heaven, Psal. 119.
30. I have chosen the way of truth, (or the true way;)
thy Iudgments have I laid before me. Some indeed
have opened their detracting blasphemous mouths
against it; as Iulian, that cursed Apostate, who
feared not to say, There was as good matter in
Phocillides as in Solomon, in Pindarus his Odes, as in
David's Psalms.
And the Papists generally slight it, making it a
lame imperfect Rule; yea, making their own Tra|dtions
the Touchstone of Doctrines, and Foundation

of Faith. Montanus tells us, that although the
Apostle would have Sermons and Service celebrated
in a known Tongue, yet the Church, for very good
cause, hath otherwise order'd it. Gilford called it,
The Mother of Heresies. Boner's Chaplain judged
it worthy to be burnt as a strange Doctrine. They
set up their Inventions above it, and frequently come
in with a Non obstante against Christ's Institutions.
And thus do they make it void, or, as the word
 signifies, Matth. 15. 6. unlord it, and
take away its authority as a Rule. But those that
have thus slighted it, and followed the by-paths unto
which their corrupt Hearts have led them, they take
not hold of the paths of Life, and are now in the
depths of Hell. All other Lights, to which men
pretend, in the neglect of this, are but false fires,
that will lead Men into the Pits and Bogs of De|struction
at last.


REFLECTION.
And is thy Word a Compass, to direct my course
to Glory. O where am I then like to arrive at last,
that in all my course have neglected it, and steered
according to the counsel of my own heart! Lord,
I have not made thy Word the Man of my counsel,
but consulted with flesh and blood; I have not en|quired
at this Oracle, nor studied it, and made it the
guide of my way; but walked after the sight of my
eyes, and the lust of my heart. Whither Lord, can
I come at last, but to Hell, after this rate and reckon|ing?
Some have slighted thy Word professedly, and
I have slighted it practically. I have a poor Soul
embarqued for Eternity, it is now floating on a
dangerous Ocean, Rocks and Sands on every side,
and I go a drift before every Wind of Temptation,
and know not where I am. Ah Lord, convince me
of the danger of this condition. O convince me of

my Ignorance in thy Word, and the fatal consequence
and issue thereof. Lord, let me now resolve to
study, prize, and obey it; hide it in my heart, that
I may not sin against it. Open my understanding,
that I may understand the Scriptures: Open my
heart to entertain it in love. O thou that hast been
so gracious to give a perfect Rule, give me also a
perfect heart to walk by that Rule to glory!


THE POEM.
This VVorld's a Sea, wherein a numerous Fleet
Of Ships are under sail. Here you shall meet
Of every Rate and Size; Frigats, Galleons,
The nimble Ketches, and small Pickeroons:
Some bound to this Port, some where VVinds and VVeather
VVill drive them, they are bound they know not whither.
Some steer away for Heaven, some for Hell;
To which some steer, themselves can hardly tell.
The Winds do shape their course, which though it blow
From any Point, before it they must go.
They are directed by the VVind and Tide,
That have no Compass to direct and guide:
For want of this, must run themselves a-ground,
Brave Ships are cast away, poor Souls are drown'd.
Thy VVord our Compass is, to guide our way
To Glory; it reduces such as stray.
Lord, let thy VVord dwell richly in my heart,
And make me skilful in this heavenly Art,
O let me understand and be so wise,
To know upon what Point my Country lies.
And having se my Course directly thither,
Great God preserve me in the foulest Weather.
By Reason some will coast it: but I fear
Such Coasters never will drop Anchor there.
Thy Word is truly toucht, and still directs
A proper Course, which my base heart neglects.
Lord, touch mine Iron heart, and make it stand
Pointing to thee, its Loadstone. To that Land
Of Rest above, let every Tempest drive
My Soul, where it would rather be than live.



CHAP. XVII.

Look as the Sea by turns doth ebb and flow
So their Estates, that use it, come and go.


OBSRRVATION.
THE Sea hath its alternate Course and Motion,
its Ebbings and Flowings: No sooner is it
High-water, but it begins to Ebbe again, and leave
the Shoar naked and dry, which but a little before it
covered and over-flowed. And as its Tides, so also
its Waves are the Emblem of Inconstancy, still roul|ing
and tumbling, this way and that, never fixt and
quiet. Instabilis unda: As fickle as a VVave, is com|mon
to a Proverb. See Iam. 1. 6. He that wavereth
is like a Wave of the Sea, driven with Winds, and tossed.
So Isai. 57. 20. It cannot rest.


APPLICATION.
Thus mutable and inconstant are all outward
things, there is no depending on them: Nothing of
any substance, or any solid consistence in them, 1
Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this world passeth away. It
is an high point of folly to depend upon such vanities,
Prov. 23. 5. Why wilt thou set, (or, as it is in the
Hebrew) cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is not?
For riches certainly make themselves wings, and fly away,
as an Eagle towards Heaven. In flying to us (saith
Augustine) they have Alas vix quidem passerinas,
scarce a Sparrow's wings; but in flying from us,
wings as an Eagle. And those Wings they are said
to make to themselves, (i. e.) The cause of its
transitoriness is in itself; the Creature is subjected

to Vanity by sin: they are sweet flowers, but wither|ed
presently, Iam. 1. 10. As the flower of the grass,
so shall the rich man fade away. The man is like the
stalk or grass, his riches are the flower of the grass;
his glory and outward beauty, the stalk is soon
withered, but the flower much sooner. This is
either withered upon, or blown off from it, while
the stalk abides. Many a man out-lives his estate
and honour, and stands in the world as a bare dry
stalk in the field, whose flower, beauty, and bravery
is gone: One puff of wind blows it away, one
churlish easterly blast shrivels it up, 1 Pet. 4. 24.
How mad a thing is it then, for any man to be
lifted up in pride, upon such a vanity as this is; to
build so lofty and over-jetting Roof upon such a
feeble, tottering Foundation? We have seen Mea|dows
full of such curios flowers, mown down and
withered, men of great Estates impoverished sudden|ly:
And when, like a Meadow that is mown, they
have begun to recover themselves again (as the
phrase is) the Lord hath sent Grashoppers in the be|ginning
of the shooting-up of the latter growth,, Amos
7. 1. Just as the Grashoppers and other Creatures
devour the second tender Herbage, as soon as the
Field begins to recover its verdure: So men, after
they have been denuded and blasted by Providence,
they begin after a while to flourish again, but then
comes some new affliction, and blasts all. None have
more frequent experience of this, than you that are
Merchants and Sea-men, whose estates are floating:
and yet such as have had the highest security in the
eye of Reason, have notwithstanding experienc'd
the vanity of these things. Henry the Fourth, a
potent Prince, was reduced to such a low ebb, that
he petitioned for a Prehends place in the Church of
Spire. Gallimer, King of the Vandals, was brought

so low, that he sent to his Friend for a spunge, a Loaf
of Bread and an Harp: a Spunge to dry up his tears,
a Loaf of bread to maintain his life, and an Harp to
solace himself in his misery. The story of Bellisarius
is very affecting: He was a man famous in his time,
General of an Army, yet having his eyes put out,
and striped of all earthly comforts, was led about,
crying, Date abolum Bellisario, Give one penny to
poor Ballisarius. Instances in History of this kinde are
infinite. Men of the greatest estates and honours,
have nevertheless become the very Ludibria Fortunae,
as one speaks, The very scorn of Fortune.
Yea, and not onely wicked men, that have gotten
their Estates by rapine and oppression, have lived to
see them thus scattered by Providence: But some|times
godly Men have had their Estates, how justly
soever acquired, thus scattered by Providence also.
Who ever had an estate better gotten, better bot|tomed
or better managed, than Iob? yet all was o|verthrown
and swept away in a moment: though in
mercy to him, as the issue demonstrated.
Oh then! what a vanity is it to set the heart and
let out the affections on them! You can never de|pend
too much upon God, nor too little upon the
creature, 1 Tim. 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high-minded and trust in un|certain
riches.


REFLECTION.
Are all earthly things thus transitory and vain?
Then what a reproach and shame is it to me, that the
men of this world should be more industrious and eager
in the prosecution of such vanities, then I am to enrich
my Soul with solid and everlasting Treasure? O that
ever a sensual lust should be more operative in them
then the love of God in me! O my Soul, thou dost
not lay out thy strength and earnestness for Heaven,

with any proportion to what they do for the World.
I have indeed higher Motives, and a surer Reward
than they: But as I have an advantage above them
herein, so have they an advantage above me in the
strength and intireness of the principle by which they
are acted. What they do for the World, they
do it with all their might; they have no contrary
principle to oppose them; their thoughts, strength,
and affection, is entirely carried in one Channel: But
I find a Law in my Members warring against the Law
of my Mind; I must strive through a thousand Diffi|culties
and Contradictions, to the discharge of a Du|ty.
O my God! Shall not my heart bemore enlarged
in Zeal, Love, and Delight in thee, than theirs are after
their Lusts? O let me once find it so.
Again, is the Creature so vain and unstable, then
why are my Affections so hot and eager after it? And
why am I so apt to dote upon its beauty, especially
when God is staining all its pride and glory! Ier.
45. 5, 6. Surely it is unbecoming the spirit of a Chris|tian
at any time; but at such a time we may say of
it, as Hushai of Ahitophel's Counsell, It is not good at
this time.
O that my Spirit were raised above them, and my
conversation more in Heaven! O that like that An|gel,
Revel. 10. 1, 2. which came down from Hea|ven
and set one foot upon the Sea, and another upon
the Earth, having a Crown upon his head so I
might set one foot upon all the cares, fears, and ter|rours
of the World, and another upon all the tempt|ing
splendour and glory of the World; treading
both under foot in the dust, and crowning my self
with nothing but spiritual excellencies and glory!



THE POEM.
Iudge in thy self (O Christian) is it meet
To set thy heart on what Beasts set their feet?
'Tis no Hyperbole, if you be told,
You dig for Dross with Mattocks made of Gold.
Affections are too costly, to bestow
Vpon the fair-fac'd Nothings here below.
The Eagle scorns to fall down from on high
(The Proverb saith) to catch the silly Flie.
And can a Christian leave the Face of God:
T' embrace the Earth, or dote upon a Clod?
Can earthly Things thy heart so strangely move,
To tempt it down from the Delights above;
And now to court the World at such a time
When God is laying Iudgment to the Line?
It's just like him that doth his Cabbin sweep
And trim, when all is sinking in the Deep:
Or like the silly Bird, that to her Nest
Doth carry straws, and never is at rest,
Till it be feather'd well, but doth not see
The Axe beneath that's hewing down the Tree.
If on a Thorn thy heart it self repose
With such delight, what if it were a Rose?
Admire, O Saint, the Wisdom of thy God,
Who of the self-same Tree doth make a Rod,
Lest thou shouldst surfeit on forbidden Fruit,
And live not like a Saint, but like a Brute.



CHAP. XVIII.

Like hungry Lions, Waves for Sinners gape:
Leave then your Sins behind, if you'll escape.


OBSERVATION.
THE Waves of the Sea are sometimes raised by
God's Commission, to be Executioners of his

Threatnings upon sinners. When Ionah fled from
the presence of the Lord to Tarshish, the Text saith,
The Lord sent out a great Wind into the Sea, and there
was a mighty Tempest, so that the Ship was like to be
broken, Joh. 1. 4. These were God's Bailiffs, to arrest
the Run-away Prophet. And Psal. 148. 8. The
stormy winds are said to fulfil his word; not only
his word of Command, in rising when God bids
them, but his word of threatning also. And hence it
is called a destroying wind, Jer. 51. 1. and a stormy
wind in God's fury, Ezek. 13. 13.


APPLICATION.
If these be the Executioners of the Lord's threatn|ings,
how sad then is their condition that put forth
to Sea under the guilt of all their sins? O, if God
should commissionate the Winds to go after and
arrest thee for all thou owest him, where art thou
then? How dare you put forth under the power
of a Divine threat, before all be cleared betwixt
God and thee? Sins in Scripture are called debts,
Mat. 6. 12. They are debts to God; not that we
owe them to him, or ought to sin, but Metonymically,
because they render the Sinner obnoxious to God's
Judgments, even as pecuniary debts oblige him that
hath not wherewith to pay, to suffer punishment.
All sinners must undergo the Curse, either in their
own person, according to the express letter of the
Law, Gen. 2. 17. Gal. 3. 10. or their surety, ac|cording
to the tacite intent of the Law, manifested
to be the mind of the Law-giver, Gen. 3. 15. Gal.
3. 13, 14.
Now he that by Faith hath Interest in his Surety,
hath his Discharge, his Quietus est, sealed in the Blood
of Christ; all Process at Law, or from the Law, is
stopt Rom. 8. 1. But if thou be an impenitent,
persisting sinner, thy debt remains upon thine own

score. And be sure thy sin will find thee out, where-ever
thou goest, Num. 32. 23. (i. e.) God's revenging
hand for sin will be upon thee: Thou maist lose the
sight and memory of thy sin, but they lose not the
sight of thee; they follow after, as the Hound doth
the fleeting game upon the scent, till they have fetcht
thee up: And then consider, How fearful a thing it
is to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.
31. How soon may a storm arrest, and bring thee
before the Bar of God?


REFLECTION.
O my Soul, what a case art thou in, if this be so?
Are not all thy sins yet upon thine own score? Hast
not thou mane light of Christ, and that precious
Blood of his, and hitherto persisted in thy Rebellion
against him? And what can the issue of this be at
last, but ruine? There is abundant mercy indeed for
returning sinners; but the Gospel speaks of none for
persisting and impenitent sinners. And though ma|ny
who are going on in their sins are overtaken by
Grace, yet there is no Grace promised to such as
go on in sin. O, if God should arrest me by the
next Storm, and call me to an account for all that
I owe him, I must then lie in the Prison of Hell to
all Eternity; for I can never pay the debt; nay, all
the Angels in Heaven cannot satisfie for it. Being
Christless, I am under all the Curses in the Book of
God; a Child of Hagar. Lord, pity and spare me
a little longer! O discover thy Christ unto me, and
give me Faith in his Blood, and then thou art fully
satisfied at once, and I discharged for ever. O re|quire
not the debt at my hand, for then thou wilt
never be satisfied, nor I acquitted. What profit,
Lord, is there in my Blood! O my soul, make hast
to this Christ, thy Refuge-City; thou knowest not
how soon the avenger of Blood may overtake thee.



THE POEM.
Thy sins are debts, God puts them to account:
Canst tell, poor wretch, to what thy debts amount?
Thou fill'st the treasure of thy sins each hour.
Into his Vials God doth also pour
Proportionable wrath: Thou seest it not;
But yet assure thy self, there's drop for drop.
For every Sand of Patience running out,
A drop of Wrath runs in. Soul, look about.
God's Treasure's almost full, as well as thine:
When both are full, O then the dreadful time
Of Reckoning comes; thou shalt not gain a day
Of patience more, but then there hastes away
Heaven's Pursivant, who comes upon the wing
With his Commission seal'd, to take and bring.
Do'st still reject Christ's tenders? Well, next storm
May be the Bailiff ordered to perform
This dreadful office. O then restless be,
Till God in Christ be reconcil'd to thee.
The Sum is great, but if a Christ thou get,
Fear not, a Prince can pay a Beggar's debt.
Now if the Storm should rise, thou need not fear;
Thou art, but the Delinquent is not there.
A pardoned Soul to Sea may boldly go:
He fears not Bailiffs, that doth nothing owe.



CHAP. XIX.

To save the Ship, rich Ladings cast away.
Thy Soul is Shipwrackt if thy Lusts do stay.


OBSERVATION.
IN Storms and Distresses at Sea, the Richest Com|modities
are cast over-board; they stand not
upon it, when Life and all is in jeopardy and ha|zard.

Ionah 1. 5. The Mariners cast forth the
Wares that were in the Ship into the Sea, to light|en
it. And Act. 27. 18, 19. they cast out the very
tacklings of the Ship. How highly soever Men
prize such Commodities, yet reason tells them, It
were better these should perish, than Life. Satan
himself could say, Job 1. Skin for skin, and all that
a Man hath, will he give for his Life.


APPLICATION.
And surely, it is every way as highly reasonable,
that Men should mortifie, cast out, and cut off their
dearest Lusts, rather than their Immortal Souls
should sink and perish in the Storm of God's wrath.
Life, indeed, is a precious Treasure, and highly va|lued
by Men: You know what Solomon saith, Eccles.
9. 4. That a Living Dog is better than a Dead Lion.
And we find Men willing to part with their E|states,
Limbs, or any outward Comfort, for the pre|servation
of it. The Woman in the Gospel spent
all she had on the Physicians for her Health, a de|gree
below Life. Some Men indeed do much over|value
their Lives, and part with Christ and Peace of
Conscience for it; but he that thus saves it, shall
lose it. Now if Life be so much worth, What
then is the Soul worth? Alas! Life is but a va|pour,
which appeareth for a little while, and then va|nisheth
away, Jam. 4. 14.
Life indeed is more worth than all the World, but
my Soul is more worth than Ten thousand Lives.
Nature teacheth you to value the first so high, and
Grace should teach you to value the second much
higher, Mat. 19. 26. Now here is the case: Either
you must part with your Sins, or with your Souls; if
these be not cast out, both must sink together. If
ye live after the flsh, ye must die, Rom. 8. 13. God
saith to you in this case, as to Ahab, when he spa|red

Benhadad, 1 King. 20. 40. Because thou hast let
go a Sin, which God hath appointed to destruction, there|fore
thy Life shall go for his Life. Guilt will raise a
Storm of Wrath, as Ionah did, if not cast out.


REFLECTION.
And must Sin or the Soul perish? Must my Life,
yea, my Eternal Life go for it, if I spare it? O
then let me not be cruel to mine own Soul, in spa|ring
my Sin; O my Soul, this foolish pity, and cru|el
Indulgence will be thy ruine: If I spare it, God
hath said, He will not spare me, Deut. 26. 20. It is
true, the pains of Mortification are sharp, but yet
it's easier than the pains of Hell. To cut off a right
hand, or pluck out a right eye, is hard; but to have
my Soul cut off eternally from God, is harder. Is
it as easie (O my Soul!) to burn for them in Hell,
as to Mortifie them on Earth? Surely, it is profitable
for me, that one member perish, rather than that all be
cast into Hell, Mat. 5. 24. I see the Merchant wil|ling
to part with rich Wares, if embarqued with
them in a Storm: And those that have Gangreen'd
Legs or Arms, willingly stretch them out to be cut
off, to preserve Life: And shall I be willing to
endure no difficulties for my Soul? Christ reckon'd
Souls worth his Blood; And is it not worth my
Self-denyal? Lord, let me not warm a Snake in
my Bosom, that will at last sting me to the heart.


THE POEM.
Thy Soul's the Ship, its Lading is its Lusts,
God's Iudgments stormy Winds and dang'rous gusts,
Conscience the Master; but the stubborn Will
Goes Supra Cargo, and doth keep the Bill.
Affections are the Men, the VVinds do rise,
The Storm increases: Conscience gives Advice
To throw those Lusts o're-board, and so to ease
The Vessel, which else cannot keep the Seas.
The VVill opposes, and th' Affections say,
The Master's Counsel they will not obey.
The case is dangerous, that no man can doubt,
Who sees the storm within, and that without.
Lusts and Affections cannot part, no, rather
They are resolv'd to swim or sink together.
Conscience still strives, but they cannot abide
That it, or Reason should the Case decide.
Lust knows what Reason in like cases still
Determines well: Then chuse ye whom ye will.
Shall's make the Devil Iudge? This case has been
Before him, and he judg'd, That skin for skin,
And all men have, they'll part with for their life.
Then how unreasonable is this strife?
They that their sins do with their persons ship,
Do for their Souls prepare a dreadful whip.



CHAP. XX.

Christ with a word can surging Waves appease;
His Voice a troubled Soul can quickly ease.


OBSERVATION.
WHen the Sea works, and is tempestuous, it is
not in the power of any Creature to appease
it. When the Egyptians would by their Hierogly|phicks
express an Impossibility, they did it by the
Picture of a Man treading upon the Waves. It is
storied of Canute, an ancient Danish King, That
when a mighty storm of Flattery arose upon him,
he appeased it by shewing that he could not appease
the Sea: But one of his Courtiers told him, as he
rode near the Sea-side, That he was Lord of the Sea,
as well as Land. Well, said the King, we shall see that

by and by: and so went to the Water-side, and with
a loud Voice cried, O ye Seas and Waves, come no
further, touch not my feet. But the Sea came up, not|withstanding
that charge, and confuted the flattery.
But now Jesus Christ hath the command of them
indeed: It is said of him, Mat. 8. 26. That he re|buked
them. And Mark. 4. 38. He quiets them with
a word, Peace, be still: as one would hush a Child,
and it obeyed him.


APPLICATION.
Conscience, when awakened by the terrors of the
Lord, is like a raging tempestuous Sea; so it works,
so it roars; and it is not in the power of all the
Creatures to hush or quiet it. Spiritual Terrors, as
well as spiritual Consolations, are not known till
felt. O when the Arrows of the Almighty are shot
into the Spirit, and the Terrors of God set them|selves
in array against the Soul; when the Venome
of those Arrows drink up the Spirits, and those
Armies of Terrours charge violently and successively
upon it, as Iob 6. 4. What Creature then is able to
stand before them! Even God's own dear Children
have felt such Terrours, as have distracted them, Psal.
81. 15. Conscience is the seat of Guilt. It is like
a Burning-glass, so it contracts the Beams of the
Threatnings, twists them together, and reflects them
on the Soul, until it smoke, scorch, and flame. If
the wrath of a King be like the roaring of a Lion,
then what is the Almighties wrath! which is burn|ing
wrath, Job 19. 11. Tearing wrath, Psal. 50. 22.
Surprizing wrath, Job 20. 23. And abiding wrath,
Job 3. 36.
In this case no Creature can relieve, all are Phy|sicians
of no value; some under these terrors, have
thought Hell more tolerable, and by a violent hand
have thrust themselves out of the World into it, to

avoid these gnawings: Yet jesus Christ can quickly
calm these mystical Waves also, and hush them with
a word; yea, he is the Physician, and no-other. It
is the sprinkling of his Blood, which, like a cooling
Fomentation, allays those heats within: That
Blood of sprinkling speaks Peace, when all other
have practised upon the Soul to no purpose; and
the reason is, because he is a Person in whom God
and Man, Justice and Mercy meet, and kiss each o|ther,
Eph. 2. 14. And hence Faith fetches in peace
to the Soul, Rom. 5. 1.


REFLECTION.
Can none appease a troubled Conscience, but
Christ? Then learn, O my Soul, to understand, and
daily more and more to savour that glorious Name,
even Jesus, that delivers not only from the wrath
to come, but that which is felt here also. Oh if the
foretaste of Hell be so intolerable, if a few drops
let fall on the Conscience in this life, be so scalding
and insufferable; what is it to have all the Vials
poured out to Eternity, when there shall be nothing
to divert, mitigate, or allay it?
Here men have somewhat to abate those Terrours,
some hopes of Mercy, at least a possibility; but there
is none. O my Soul! how art thou loaded with
Guilt! And what a Magormissabib wouldst thou be,
should God rouze that sleepy Lion in thy bosom
My condition is not at all the better, because my
Conscience is quiet. Ah, the day is coming, when
it must awake, and will lighten and thunder terribly
within me, if I get not into Christ the sooner.
O Lord, who knows the power of thy wrath?
O let me not carry this guilt out of the World
with me, to maintain those everlasting flames?
let me give no sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber

to my eye-lids, till I feel the comfort of that Blood
of Sprinkling, which alone speaketh Peace.


THE POEM.
Amongst the dreadful works of God, I find
No Metaphors to paint a troubled Mind.
I think on this, now that, and yet will neither
Come fully up, though all be put together.
'Tis like the raging Sea, that casts up mire,
Or like to Aetna, breahing smoke and fire;
Or like a rouzed Lion fierce and fell,
Or like those Furies that do howl in Hell.
O Conscience! Who can stand before thy power,
Endure thy gripes and twinges but an hour?
Stone, Gout, Strapado, Racks, whatever is
Dreadful to Sense, is but a toy to this.
No Pleasures, Riches, Honours, Friends can tell
How to give ease: in this 'tis like to Hell,
Call for the pleasant Tymbrel, Lute, and Harp;
Alas! The Musick howls, the pain's too sharp
For these to charm, divert or lull asleep:
These cannot reach it, no, the wound's too deep.
Let all the Promises before him stand,
And set a Barnabas at his right hand;
These in themselves no comfort can afford,
'Tis Christ, and none but Christ, can speak the word.
And he no sooner speaks, but all is still,
The storm is over, and the mind tranquil.
There goes a power with his Majestick Voice,
To hush the dreadful'st storm, and still its noise.
Who would but fear and love this glorious Lord,
That can rebuke such Tempests with a VVord?




CHAP. XXI.

Our Food out of the Sea God doth command;
Yet few therein take notice of his hand.


OBTERVATION.
THE Providence of God in furnishing us with
such plenty and variety of Fish, is not slightly
to be past over. We have not only several sorts of
Fish in our own Seas, which are caught in their
Seasons; but from several parts, especially the
Western parts of England, many Sail of Ships are
sent yearly to the American parts of the VVorld; as
New-found-Land, New-England, c. Whence every
Year is brought home, not only enough to supply
our own Nation, but many thousand pounds worth
also yearly returned from Spain, and other Countries;
by which Trade many thousand Families do subsist.


APPLICATION.
But, now, what retrns do we make to Heaven
for these Mercies? O what notice is taken of the
good hand of Providence, which thus supplies and
feeds us with the Blessings of the Sea? I fear there
are but few that own, act in submission to it, and
are careful to return according to received benefit.
Men do not consider, That their works are in the
hand of God, Eccles. 9. 1. And even those that
have the most immediate dependence upon Provi|dence,
as Merchants and Sea-men, yet are very prone
to undertake designes in the confidence of their own
wisdom and industry; not looking higher for the
blessing, Iam. 4 13. They often sacrifice to their own
net, and burn incense to their drag, because by them their
portion is fat, and their meat plenteous, Hab. 1. 16. viz.
They attribute what is due to God, unto the crea|ture.

Now this is a sin highly provoking to the
Lord: for look in what degree the heart cleaves to
the second cause, in the same degree it departs from
the living God, Ier. 10. 5.
And how do you think the blessed God will take
it, to see himself thus debased, and the creature thus
exalted into his place; to see you carry your selves
to the creature as to a God, and to the Blessed God,
as to a creature. Surely, it is a great and common
evil, and such as will blast all, if not timely discover'd
and lamented. If we make flesh our arm, it's just
with God to wither and dry up the arm. Do we
not, my Brethren, look upon second causes, as if they
had the main stroke in our business? And with a
neglective eye pass by God, as if he came in but
collaterally, and on the by, into it? But certainly,
all endeavours will be unsanctified, if not succesess,
in which God is not eyed and engaged.
It is in vain for you to rise up early, and sit up late,
and eat the bread of sorrows; for so he giveth his beloved
sleep, Psal. 127. 2. (i. e.) It is to no purpose for
men to beat their brains, tire their spirits, and rack
their Consciences for an estate. The true way of
acquiring and enjoying the Creature, is by submitting
quietly to the Will of God, in a prudent and dili|gent,
yet moderate use of lawful means: Nothing
can thrive with us till then.


REFLECTION.
Why then should I disquiet my self in vain; and
rob my self of my peace, by these unbelieving cares
and distractions? O this hath been my sin! I have
acted; as if my condition had been at my own dis|pose;
I have eyed creatures and means too much,
and God too little. How have my hands hanged
down with discouragement, when second Causes have
disappeared, or wrought cross to my designs in the

World, ready to transfer the fault on this thing, or
that! And again, how apt am I to be vainly lifted
up in carnal confidence, when I see my self com|petently
furnish'd with Creature-munition and pro|vision?
Oh, what a God provoking wickedness is
this! How oft hath Providence checked my carnal
presumption, and dasht many hopeful projects? yet
have I not owned it, as I ought, and submitted to it.
Oh, it is a wonder this hath not closed the hand of
Providence against me, and pulled down a Curse up|on
all! Ah Lord, let me now learn to acquaint myself
with thee, then shall I decree a thing, and it shall be e|stablished,
Job 22. 28.


THE POEM.
In all the Gifts of God we should advance
His glorious Name; not say, It came by chance.
Or to the Idol of our Prudence pay
The tribute of his praise, and go our way.
The waves do clap their hands, and in their kind
Acknowledge God; And what, are they more blind
That float upon them? yea, for what they get,
They offer Sacrifices to their Net.
This is your manner, thus to work you go:
Confess the naked truth; say, Is't not so?
This Net was wisely cast, 'tis full, 'tis full:
O well done Mates, this is a gallant pull.
Thus what is due to God, you do apply
Vnto your selves most Sacrilegiously.
I cannot wonder such come empty home,
That are so full of self and sin: yet some
I hope look higher, and on God reflect
Due praise. A Blessing such may well expect.




CHAP. XXII.

Whilst thou by art the silly Fish dost kill,
Perchance the Devils Hook sticks in thy Gill.


OBSERVATION.
THere is skill in Fishing; they that go to Sea in
a Fishing Voyage, use to go provided with
their Craft (as they very fitly call it) without which
they can do nothing. They have their Lines, Hooks
of several sizes, and their Bait. They carefully ob|serve
their Seasons; when the Fish falls in, then they
ply their business day and night.


APPLICATION.
But how much more skilful and industrious is Sa|tan
to ensnare and destroy Souls? The Devil makes
a Voyage as well as you; he hath his Baits for you,
as you for the Fish: he hath his Devices and Wiles
to catch Souls, 2 Cor. 2. 11. Ephes. 6. 11. He is a
Serpent, an old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9. Too crafty for
Man in his perfection, much more in his collapsed
and degenerated State, his understanding being
cracked by rhe Fall, and all his Faculties poisoned
and perverted.
Divines observe four steps, or degrees of Satan's
tempting Power.
First. He can find out the Constitution-evils of
Men; he knows to what sin their Natures are more
especially prone and inclinable.
Secondly. He can propound suitable objects to
those Lusts, he can exactly and fully hit every Mans
humour. As Agrippina mixed her Poison in that
Meat her Husband loved best.
Thirdly. He can inject and cast motions into the
Mind, to close with those tempting objects; as it is

said of Iudas, Joh. 13. 2. The Devil put it into his heart.
Fourthly. He can sollicite, irritate, and provok
the Heart, and by those continual restless sollicita|tions
weary it; and hereby he often draws Men to
commit such things as startled them in the first mo|tion.
All this can he do, if he find the work stick, and
meet with rubs and difficulties; yet doth he not act
to the utmost of his skill and power, at all times and
with all persons; neither indeed need he so to do,
the very propounding of an object, is enough to
some, without any further sollicitation: The De|vil
makes an easie conquest of them.
And beside all this, his Policy much appears in the
election of place, time and instruments to tempt by:
And thus are poor Souls caught, as Fishes in an evil
Net, Eccles. 9. 12. The carnal Man is led by Sense,
as the Beast; and Satan handles and fits him accor|dingly.
He useth all sorts of Motives, not only in|ternal,
and intellective, but external and sensitive
also; as the sparkling of the Wine, when it gives
its colour in the Glass: the Harlot's beauty, whose
eye-lids are snares; hiding always the Hook, and
concealing the issue from them. He promises them
gain and profit, pleasure and delight, and all that is
tempting, with assurance of Secresie. By these he
fastens the fatal Hook in their Jawes, and thus they
are led captive by him at his Will.


REFLECTION.
And is Satan so subtil and industrious to entice
Souls to sin? Doth he thus cast out his golden baits,
and allure Souls with pleasure to their ruine? Then
how doth it behove thee, O my Soul, to be jealous
and wary! How strict a guard should I set upon
every sense! Ah, let me not so much regard how

sin comes towards me in the Temptation, as how it
goes off at last. The day in which Sodom was de|stroyed,
began with a pleasant Sun shine, but ended
in Fire and Brimstone. I may promise my self much
content in the satisfaction of my Lusts: But O, how
certainly will it end in my ruine! Ahab doubtless
promised himself much content in the Vineyard of
Naboth, but his blood paid for it in the portion of
Iezreel. The Harlots Bed was perfumed to entice
the simple young man, Prov. 7. 17. But those
Chambers of Delight proved the Chambers of Death,
and her House the way to Hell. Ah, with what a
smiling face doth sin come on towards me in its
temptations! How doth it tickle the carnal phantasie,
and please the deceived heart? But what a dreadful
Catastrophe and Upshot hath it? The delight is
quickly gone, but the guilt thereof remains to amaze
and terrifie the Soul with ghastly forms, and dread|ful
representations of the wrath of God: As sin hath
its Delights attending it to enter and fasten it, so it
hath its horrours and stings to torment and wound:
And as certainly as I see those go before it to make
away, so certainly shall I find these follow after, and
tread upon its heels. No sooner is the Conscience
awakened, but all those Delights vanish as a Night|vision,
or as a Dream when one awakes; and then
I shall cry, Here is the Hook, but where is the Bait?
Here is the guilt and horrour, but where the delight
that I was promised! And I, whether shall I now
go? Ah my deceitful Lusts! You have enticed
and left me in the midst of all miseries.


THE POEM.
There's skill in Fishing, that the Devil knows;
For when for Souls Satan a fishing goes,
He Angles cunningly: He knows he must
Exactly fit the Bait unto the Lust.
He studies Constitution, Place, and Time,
He guesses what is his delight, what thine;
And so accordingly prepares the Bait;
Whilst he himself lies closely hid to wait
When thou wilt nibble at it. Dost incline
To drunken Meetings? then he baits with Wine:
Is this the way; if unto this he'll smell,
He'll shortly pledge a Cup of Wrath in Hell.
To Pride or Lust is thy vile Nature bent?
An Object suitable he will present.
O think on this, when you cast in the hook,
Say, Thus for my poor Soul doth Satan look.
O play not with Temptations; do not swallow
The sugar'd Bait, consider what will follow.
If once he hitch thee, then away he draws
Thy captive Soul close Prisoner in his paws.



CHAP. XXIII.

Doth Trading fail, and Voyages prove bad?
If you cannot discern the cause, 'tis sad.


OBSRRVATION.
THere are many sad Complaints abroad (and I
think not without cause) that Trade fails,
nothing turns to account. And though all Countries
be open, and free for Traffick, a general Peace with
all Nations, yet there seems to be a Dearth, a secret
Curse upon Trading. You run from Country to
Country, and come losers home. Men can hardly
render a reason of it; few hit the right cause of this
Judgment.


APPLICATION.
That prosperity and success in Trade is from the
blessing of God, I suppose few are so Atheistical, as

once to deny or question. The Devil himself ac|knowledges
it, Job 1. 10. Thou hast blessed the work
of his hands, and his substance is increased in the Land.
It is not in the power of any man to get Riches,
Deut. 8. 18. Thou shalt remember the Lord thy God,
for it is He that giveth thee power to get wealth. It is
his Blessing that makes good men rich, and his Per|mission
that makes wicked men rich. That Maxime
came from Hell, Quisque fortunae suae faber: Every
man is the Contriver of his own Condition: Certainly,
The good of man is not in his own hand, Job 21. 16.
Promotion cometh not from the East or West, Psal. 76. 6, 7.
This being acknowledged, it is evident, that in
all disappointment, and want of success in our
Callings, we ought not to stick in second cause, but
to look higher, even to the hand and dispose of God:
For, whose it is to give the Blessing, his also it is to
with-hold it. And this is as clear in Scripture as
the other. It is the Lord that takes away the Fishes
of the Sea, Hos. 4. 3. Zeph. 1. 3. It is he that
curseth our blessings, Mal. 2. 2.
This God doth as a punishment for sin, and the
abuse of mercies: And therefore in such cases, we
ought not to rest in general complaints to, or of one
another, but search what those sins are that provoke
the Lord to inflict such Judgments.
And here I must request your patience, to bear a
plain and close word of Conviction. My Brethren,
I am perswaded these are the sins, among many o|ther,
that provoke the Lord to blast all your Im|ployments.
1. Our undertaking designs without Prayer. Alas,
how few of us begin with God? Interest him in our
dealings, and ask counsel and direction at his mouth.
Prayer is that which sanctifies all employments and

enjoyments, 1 Tim. 4. 5. The very Heathen could
say, A Iove Principium, They must begin with God
O that we had more Prayers and fewer Oaths.
2. Injustice and Fraud in our dealings. A sin to
which Merchants are prone, as appears by that ex|pression,
Hos. 12. 7. This is that which will blast
all our enjoyments.
3. An over-earnest endeavour after the World.
Men make this their business, they will be rich: And
hence it is, they are not onely unmerciful to them|selves,
in wearing and wasting their own spirits
with carking cares, but to such also as they employ;
neither regarding the Souls or Bodies of Men:
Scarce affording them the liberty of the Lord's Day
(as hath been too common in our New-found-Land
Employments;) or if they have it, yet they are so
worn out with incessant Labours, that that precious
time is spent either in sleep or idleness. It is no
wonder God gives you more rest than you would
have, since that day of Rest hath been no better im|proved.
This over-doing hath not been the least
cause of our undoing.
Lastly, Our abuse of Prosperity, when God gave
it; making God's Mercies the Food and Fewel of
our Lusts. When we had an afluence and confluence
of outward Blessings, this made us kick against God,
as Deut. 32. 15. Forget God, Deut. 4. 14. Yea,
grow proud of our strength and riches, Ezek. 16.
15. and Ier. 2. 31. Ah! How few of us in the
days of our prosperity, behaved our selves as good
Iehosaphat did? 2 Chron. 17. 5, 6. He had silver and
gold in abundance, and his heart was lifted in the way
of God's Commandments; not in pride and insolence.


REFLECTION.
Are these the sins that blast our Blessings, and
wither our Mercies? O then let me cease to wonder

it is no better, and rather admire that it is no worse
with me; that my neglect of Prayer, injustice in
dealings, Earthly-mindedness, and abuse of former
Mercies, have not provoked God to strip me naked
out of all my enjoyments. Let me humbly accept
from the Lord the punishment of my Iniquities, and
lay my hand upon my mouth. And O that these
disappointments might convince me of the Creatures
vanity, and cause me to drive on another trade for
Heaven; then shall I adore thy wisdom in rending
from me those idolized enjoyments. Ah Lord, when
I had them, my heart was a perpetual drudge to
them. How did I then forget God, neglect duty,
and not mind my eternal concernments! Oh, if these
had not perished, in all probability I had perished.
My God, let my Soul prosper, and then a small
portion of these things shall afford me more com|fort
than ever I had in their greatest abundance. A
little that a righteous man hath, is better than the riches
of many wicked, Psal. 37. 16.


THE POEM.
There's great Complaint abroad that Trading's bad;
You shake your head, and cry, 'Tis sad, 'tis sad.
Merchants lay out their stock, Sea-men their pains,
And in their eye they both may put their gains.
Your Fishing fails, you wonder why 'tis so,
'Tis this (saith one) or that: but I say No;
'Twill ne'r be well, till you confess and say,
It is our sin that frights the Fish away.
No wonder all goes into Bags with Holes,
Since so the Gospel hath been in your Souls.
We kick'd, like Jesurun, when the flowing Tide
Of Wealth came tumbling in, this nourish'd Pride.
'Twixt Soul and Body, now I wish it may
Fare, as betwixt the Jews and us this day.
O that our outward want and loss may be
To us a Soul-enriching Poverty!
If disappointments here, advance the Trade
For Heaven, then complain not; you have made
The richest Voyage, and your empty Ships
Return deep laden with Soul-benefits.



CHAP. XXIV.

In Seas the greater Fish the less devour:
So some Men crush all those within their power.


OBSERVATION.
THere are Fishes of Prey in the Sea, as well as
Birds and Beasts of Prey on the Land. Our
Sea-men tell us, how the devouring Whales, Sharks,
Dolphins, and other Fishes follow the Caplein, and
other smaller Fish, and devour multitudes of them.
It is frequent with us, in our own Seas, to find se|veral
smaller Fishes in the Bellies of the greater
ones; yea, I have often heard Sea-men say, That
the poor little Fry, when pursued, are so sensible of
the danger, that they have sometimes seen multi|tudes
of them cast themselves upon the Shoar, and
perish there, to avoid the danger of being devoured
by them.


APPLICATION.
Thus cruel, merciless, and oppressive are wicked
Men, whose tender mercies are cruelty, Prov. 22. 10.
We see the like cruelty in our Extortioners, and
over-reaching Sharks ashore, who grind the faces of
the Poor, and regard not the Cries of the Father|less
and Widows, but fill their Houses with the gain
of Oppression. These are, by the Holy Ghost, com|pared
to the fishes of the Sea, Hab. 1. 13, 14. This

is a crying sin, yea, it sends up a loud cry to Hea|ven
for Vengeance, Exod. 22, 23. If thou afflict the
widow and the fatherless, and they cry unto me, I will
surely hear their cry. And Verse 27. I will hear his
cry, for I am gracious. Nay, God will not only hear
their Cry, but avenge their Quarrel. That is a re|markable
Text, 1 Thes. 4. 6. That no man go be|yond
and defraud his brother in any matter, because that
the Lord is the [Avenger] of all such. This word
Avenger, is but once more used in the
New Testament,. Rom. 13. 4. And there
it is applyed to the Civil Magistrate,
who is to see Execution done upon Offenders. But
now this is a Sin that sometimes may b out of the
reach of mans Justice, and therefore God himself
will be their Avenger. You may overpower the
Poor in this World, and it may be they cannot
contend with you at mans Barr, therefore God will
bring it before his Barr.
Believe it, Sirs, it is a sin so provoking to God,
that he will not let it 'scape without severe pu|nishment,
sooner or later. The Prophet Habbak|kuk,
Chap. 1. verse 13. wondred how the holy
God could forbear such till the general day of re|ckoning,
and that he did not take exemplary Ven|geance
on them in this Life. Thou art of purer
eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look upon Ini|quity:
Wherefore then lookest thou upon them that deal
treacherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked de|vours
the man that is more righteous than he? And
Prov. 23. 10, 11. Enter not into the Fields of the Fa|therless,
i. e. Of the poor and helpless. But why is
it more dangerous violently to invade their right,
than anothers? The reason is added, For their
Redeemer is mighty, and he shall plead their cause with
thee. It may be they are not able to retain a Coun|sel

to plead their cause here; therefore God will
plead their cause for them.


REFLECTION.
Turn in upon thy self (O my Soul) and consider,
Hast thou not been guilty of this crying sin? Have
I not (when a Servant) over-reached and defraud|ed
others, and filled my Master's House with Violence
and Deceit? and so brought myself under that dread|ful
threatning, Zeph. 1. 9. Or since I came to trade
and deal upon mine own account, have not the
Ballances of Deceit been in my hand? I have (it may
be) kept many in my service and employment;
have not I used their labours without reward, and so
am under that woe? Ier. 22. 13. Or not given
them Wages proportionable to their work? Isai.
58. 3. Or by bad Payment and unjust Deductions
and Allowances, defrauded them of a part of their
due? Mal. 3. 5. Or at least delayed payment, ou
of a covetous disposition to gain by it; whilst their
necessities in the mean time cryed aloud for it; and
so sinned against God's express commands, Deut. 24.
14, 15. Levit. 19. 30. Or have I not persecuted
such as God hath smitten? Psal. 69. 26. And
rigorously exacted the uttermost of my due, though
the hand of God hath gone out against them, brek|ing
their estates? O my Soul, examine thy self upon
these particulars; rest not quiet, until this guilt be
emoved by the application of the Blood of Sprink|ling.
Hath not the Lord said, Jam. 2. 13. That
they shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed
no mercy? And is it not a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, who hath said, He will take
vengeance for these things?



THE POEM.
Devouring Whales and ravenous Sharks do follow
The lesser Fry, and at one gulp do swallow
Some hundreds of them, as our Sea-men say:
But we can tell far stranger things than they.
For we have Sharks ashore, in every Creek,
That to devour poor Men do hunt and seek.
No Pity, Sense, or Bowels in them be,
Nay, have they not put off Humanity?
Extortioners and Cheaters, whom God hates,
Have dreadful open Mouths, and through those Gates
Brave Persons with their Heritages pass
In Funeral-state, Friends crying out Alas!
O give me Agur's wish, that I may never
Be such my self, or feel the hands of either.
And as for those that in their paws are grip'd,
Pity and rescue, Lord, from that sad plight.
When I behold the squeaking Lark, that's born
In Falcon's Talons, crying, bleeding, torn;
I pity its sad case, and would relieve
The Prisoner, if I could, as well as grieve.
Fountain of Pity, hear the piteous Moans
Of all thy Captive and Oppressed Ones.



CHAP. XXV.

In Storms to spread much Sail endangers all:
So carnal Mirth, if God for Mourning call.


OBSERVATION.
IN Storms at Sea, the wise Navigator will no
spread much Sail; that is the way to lose Masts
and all; They use then to furl up the Sails, and lie
a Hull, when not able to bear a Knot of Sail; or
else to lie a Try, or Scud before the Wind and Seas

It is no time then to hoist up the Top and Top-gallant,
and shew their bravery.


APPLICATION.
When the Judgments of God are abroad in the
earth, it is no time then to make mirth, Ezek. 21.
10, 11. Should we [then] make mirth? It contemneth
the rod of my son as every tree. (i. e.) As if it were
a common Rod, and ordinary affliction; whereas
the Rod of my Son is not such as may be had of
every Tree, but it is an Iron Rod to such as dispise
it, Psal. 2. 9. O it is a provoking evil, and com|monly
God severely punishes it. Of all persons,
such speed worst in the common calamity, Amos 6.
1. VVo to them that are at ease in Sion, that are not
grieved for the afflictions of Ioseph, as ver. 4. It may
be (as one observes upon the Text) they did not
laugh at him, or break Jests upon him; but they did
not condole with him. And what shall be their
punishment? See vers. 7. Therefore now shall they go
captive with the first that go captive: God will begin
with them first. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 3. 4. There
is a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn,
and a time to dance: Only (as Master Trap notes up|on
the Text) we must not invert the order, but weep
with Men, that we may laugh with Angels. To be
merry and frolick in a day of tribulation, is to disturb
the order of seasons. That is a terrible Text, Isai.
22. 12. which should make the hearts of such as are
guilty in this kind to tremble: In that day did the
Lord of Hosts call to mourning, and to girding with
sackcloath; and behold, joy and gladness, slaying Oxen,
killing Sheep, drinking VVine, c. Well, what is the
issue of this? Surely, this iniquity shall not be purged
from you, till ye die. O dreadful word! Surely (my
Brethren) Sympathy is a debt we owe to Christ
Mystical. Whatever our Constitution, Condition,

or Personal Immunities be, yet when God calls for
Mourning, we must hear and obey that call. David
was a King, an expert Musician, a Man of a sanguine
and chearful constitution; yet who more sensible of
the evil of those times, than he? Rivers of water
ran down his eyes at the consideration of them.
Melancthon was so affected with the Miseries of the
Church in his days, that he seemed to take little or
no notice of the death of his Child, whom he entirely
loved. At such a time we may say of laughter, Thou
art mad, and of mirth, What doth it?


REFLECTION.
Blush then, O my Soul! for thy levity and insensi|bility
under God's angry Dispensations. How many
of the precious Sons and Daughters of Sion, lie in
Tears abroad, while I have been Nourishing my heart,
as in a day of slaughter? The voice of God hath cried
to the City, and Men of understanding have heard its
voice, Mic. 6. 9. But I have been deaf to that cry.
How loth (my God) have I been to urge my sensu|al
Heart to acts of Sorrow and Mourning! Thou
hast bid me weep with them that weep but my vain
heart cannot comply with such commands. Ah Lord!
if I mourn not with Sion, neither shall I rejoyce with
her.
O, were mine eyes opened, and my heart sensible
and tender, I might see cause enough to melt into
Tears; and like that Christian Niobe, Luke 7. 38. to
lie weeping at the feet of Christ. Lord, What stu|pidity
is this? Shall I Laugh when thou art Angry,
and thy Children weeping and trembling? Then I
may justly fear, lest when they shall sing for joy 
heart, I shall howl for vexation of spirit, Isai. 65. 13
14. Surely, O my Soul! such laughter will be tur|ned
into mourning, either here or hereafter.



THE POEM.
In troublous Times, Mirth in the Sinners face
Is like a Mourning-Cloak with Silver Lace.
The Lion's roaring makes the Beasts to quake;
God's roaring Iudgments cannot make us shake.
What Belluine Contempt is this of God,
To laugh in's face, when he takes up the Rod?
Such laughter God in tears will surely drown.
(Vnless he hate thee) e're he lay it down.
These Rods have Voices; if thou hear them well:
If not, another Rod's prepar'd in Hell.
And when the Arm of God shall lay it on,
Laugh if thou canst; no, then thy Mirth is gone.
All Sion's Children will lament and cry,
When all her beauteous Stones in dust do lie;
And he that for her then laments and mourns,
Shall want no joy, when God to her returns.



CHAP. XXVI.

A little Leak neglected, dangerous proves:
One Sin connived at, the Soul undoes.


OBSERVATION.
THE smallest Leak, if not timely discovered
and stopt, is enough to sink a Ship of the
greatest burden: Therefore Sea-men are wont fre|quently
to try what Water is in the Hold; and if
they find it fresh, and increasing upon them, they ply
the Pump, and presently set the Carpenters to search
for it and stop it; and till it be found they cannot
be quiet.


REFLECTION.
What such a Leak is to a Ship, that is the smallest
sin neglected to the Soul; it is enough to ruine it

eternally. For as the greatest sin, discover'd, la|mented,
and mourned over by a Believer, cannot
ruine him; so the least sin indulged, covered, and
connived at, will certainly prove the destruction of
the sinner. No sin, though never so small, is tole|rated
by the pure and perfect Law of God, Psal.
119. 96. The command is exceeding broa; not as
if it gave Men a latitude to walk as they please, but
broad, i. e. extending it self to all our words, thoughts,
actions, and affections: Laying a Law upon them
all; conniving at no evil in any Man, 1 Pet. 2. 1.
And as the word gives no allowance for the least
sin, so it is the very nature of sincerity and upright|ness,
to set the heart against [every] way of wicked|ness,
Psal. 139. 23, 24. Iob 4. 23. And especially
against that sin which was its darling in the days of
his vanity, Psal. 18. 23. True hatred (as the Phi|losopher
observes, is of the whole.
kind: He that hates sin, as sin, and
so doth every upright Soul, hate all
sins as well as some.
Again, the Soul that hath had a saving sight of
Jesus Christ, and a true discovery of the evil of sin,
in the Glass both of the Law and Gospel, can ac|count
no sin small. He knows the demerit of the
smallest sin is God's eternal wrath, and that not the
least sin can be remitted, without the shedding and
application of the Blood of Christ, Heh. 9. 22. which
Blood is of infinite value and price 1 Pet. 1. 19.
To conclude, God's People know, that little as
well as great sins are dangerous, deadly and destru|ctive
in their own nature: A little poyson will
destroy a Man. Adrian was choakt with a Gnat;
Caesar stabbed with Bodkins. A man would think
Adam's sin had been no great matter, yet what
dreadful work did it make! It was not as a single

Bullet to kill himself only; but as a Chain-shot, which
cut off all his poor miserable Posterity. Indeed, no
sin can be little, because its object against whom it is
committed is so great, whence it receives a kind of
infiniteness in it self, and hecause the price paid to
redeem us from it is so invaluable.


REFLECTION.
And is the smallest sin not only damning in its
own nature, but will certainly prove the ruine of
that Soul that hides and covers it? O then let my
spirit accomplish a diligent search. Look to it, O
my Soul! that no sin be indulged by thee. Set these
considerations as so many flaming Swords in the
way of thy carnal delights and lust: Let me ne|ver
say of any sin, as Lot did of Zoar, It is a little
one, spare it. Shall I spare that which cost the
Blood of Jesus Christ? The Lord would not spare
him, When he made his Soul an offering for sin, Rom. 8.
32. Neither will he spare me, if I defend and hide
it, Deut. 29. 20. Ah! If my Heart were right, and
my Conversion sound, that lust whatever it be, that
is so favoured by me, would especially be abhorred
and hated, Isai. 2. 20. and 30. 22. Whatever my
convictions and reformations have been, yet if there
be but one sin retained and delighted in, this keeps
the Devils interest still in my Soul: And though for
a time he seem to depart, yet at last he will return
with seven worse spirits, and this is the sin will
open the door to him, and deliver up my Soul,
Matth. 12. 43, 44. Lord, let me make through
work of it: let me cut it off, and pluck it out,
though it be as a right Hand, or Eye. Ah, shall I
come so near the Kingdom of God, and make such
a fair offer for Christ, and yet stick at a small matter,
and lose all for want of one thing? Lord, let me

ed the blood of the dearest lust, for his sake that
shed his dearest blood for me.


THE POEM.
There's many a Soul eternally undone
For sparing sin, because a little one.
But we are much deceiv'd; no sin is small,
That wounds so great a God, so dear a Soul.
Yet say it were, the smallest Pen-knife may
As well as Sword or Lance dispatch and slay.
And shall so small a matter part and sever
Christ and thy Soul? What make you part for ever?
Or wilt thou stand on Toys with him, when he
Deny'd himself in greatest things for thee?
Or will it be an ease in Hell, to think
How easily thy Soul therein did sink!
Are Christ and Hell for trifles sold and bought?
Strike Souls with trembling, Lord, at such a thought.
By little sins, belov'd, the Soul is lost,
Vnless such sins do great repentance cost.



CHAP. XXVII.

Ships make much way when they a Trade-wind get;
With such a VVind the Saints have ever met.


OBSERVATION.
THough in most parts of the World the Winds
are variable, and sometimes blow from every
point of the Compass, by reason whereof, sailing is
low and dangerous; yet about the Equinoctial, Sea|men
meet with a Trade-wind, blowing for the most
part one way; and there they Sail jocund before it,
and scarce need to Lore a Top-sail, for some hun|dreds
of Leagues.



APPLICATION.
Although the People of God meet with many
seeming Rubs and Set-backs in their way to Heaven,
which are like contrary Winds to a Ship; yet are
they from the Day of their Conversion, to the day
of their compleat Salvation, never out of a Trade-winds
way to Heaven, Rom. 8. 21. We know that
all things work together for good, to them that love God,
to them that are the called according to his purpose. This
is a most precious Scripture, pregnant with its Con|solation
to believers in all conditions, a Pillar of
comfort to all distressed Saints: Let us look a little
nearer to it.
(VVe know) Mark the certainty and evidence of
the Proposition, which is not built upon a guess or
remote probability, but upon the knowledge of the
Saints: we know it, and that partly by divine Revela|tion,
God has told us so; and partly by our own ex|perience,
we find it so.
(That all things) Not only things that lie in a
natural and direct tendency to our good; as Ordi|nances,
Promises, Blessings, c. but even such things
as have no natural fitness and tendency to such an
end; as afflictions, temptations, corruptions, de|sertions,
c. All these help onward. They
(VVork together.) Not all of them directly, and
of their own nature and inclination; but by being
over-ruled, and determined to such an issue by the
gracious hand of God: Nor yet do they work out
such good to the Saints, singly and apart, but as
adjuvant causes or helps, standing under and work|ing
in subordination to the supream and principal
cause of their happiness.
Now the most seeming opposite things, yea sin
in itself, which in its own nature is really opposite
to their good, yet eventually contributes to it.

Afflictions and Desertions seem to work against us;
but being once put into the rank and order of Causes,
they work together with such blessed instruments,
as Word and Prayer, to an happy issue. And
though the faces of these things, that thus agree
and work together look contrary ways; yet there
be, as it were, secret chains and connections of
Providence betwixt them, to unite them in their
issue. There may be many instruments employed
about one work, and yet not communicate coun|els,
or hold intelligence with each other. Ioseph's
Brethren, the Midianites, Potiphar, c. knew not
one anothers mind, nor aimed at one end, (much
less the end that God brought about by them:)
one acts out of Revenge another for gain, a third
out of Policy; yet all meet together at last, in that
issue God had design'd to bring about by them,
even Ioseph's advancement. Even so it is here,
Christian, there be more instruments at work for
thine eternal good, than thou art aware of


REFLECTION.
Chear up then, O my Soul, and lean upon this
Pillar of Comfort in all distresses. Here is a pro|mise
for me (if I be a called one) that, like the
Phillosophers Stone, turns all into Gold it toucheth.
This promise is my security, however things go
in the world. My God will do me no hurt, Jer.
25. 6. Nay, he will do me good by every dis|pensation.
O that I had but an heart to make all
things work for his glory, that thus causeth every thing
to work for my good. My God, dost thou turn e|very
thing to my advantage? O let me return
all to thy praise; and if by every thing thou work
my eternal good, then let me in every thing give
thanks.
But ah! How foolish and ignorant have I been?
even as a beast before thee. How hath my heart
been disquieted, and apt to repine at thy dispensa|tions,
when they have crossed my Will! not con|sidering
that my God faithfully pursues my good,
even in those things that cross, as well as in that
which pleases me.
Blessed Lord! What a blessed condition are all thy
people in, who are within the Line of this promise?
All things friendly and beneficial to them, Friends
helpful, Enemies helpful, every thing conspiring and
conducing to their happiness. With others it is not
so; nothing works for their good; nay, every thing
works against it: Their very mercies are snares,
and their Prosperity destroys them, Prov. 1. 32.
Even the blessed Gospel it self is a savour of death
to them: When evil befals them, it is an only evil, Ezek. 7. 5. that is, not turned into good to them;
and as their evils are not turned into good, so all
their good is turned into evil. As this Promise hath
an influence into all that concerns the people, so the
curse hath a influence into all the enjoyments of the
wicked. O my soul, bless the Lord, who hath cast
thy lot into such a pleasant place, and given thee
such a glorious heritage, as this promise is.


THE POEM.
When once the Dog star rises many say,
Corn ripens then apace, both night and day.
Souls once in Christ, that Morning-star lets fall
Such influences on them then, that all
Gods dispensations to them, sweet or sowr,
Ripens their Souls for Glory every hour.
All their afflictions, rightly understood,
Are blessings; every Wind will blow some good.
Sure at their troubles Saints would never grudge,
Were Sense deposed, and Faith made the Iudge.
Falls make them waryer, amend their pace;
When gifts puff up their hearts, and weaken Grace.
Could Satan see the issue and the event
Of his temptations, he would scarcely tempt.
Could Saints but see what fruits their troubles bring,
Amidst those troubles they would shout and sing.
O sacred Wisdom! who can but admire
To see how thou dost save from fire, by fire!
No doubt but Saints in glory wondering stand
As those strange Methods few now understand.



CHAP. XXVIII.

Storms make discovery of the Pilots skill.
Gods Wisdom in affliction triumphs still.


OBSERVATION.
IN fair Weather, when there is Sea-room enough,
then every common person can guide the Ship,
the Pilot may then lie down and take his rest; but
in great storms and stress of weather, or when neer
the dangerous shore, then the most skilful Pilot is
put to it: Then he shews the utmost of his Art and
Skill, and yet sometimes all is too little. They are
(as the Scripture speaks) at their wits end, know not
what to do more, but are forced to commit all to the
mercy of God and the Seas.


APPLICATION.
In the Storms and Tempests of Affliction and
Trouble, there are the most evident and full Dis|coveries
of the Wisdom and Power of our God: It
is indeed continually active for his people in all con|ditions,
Isai. 27. 3. Lest any hurt it, I will keep it night
and day. Psal. 121. 4. He that keepeth Israel, neither

stumbereth nor sleepeth. His peoples dangers are with|out
intermission, therefore his preservations are so
too. But now, when they come into the Streight of
Affliction, and deadly dangers, which threaten like
Rocks on every side; now the Wisdom of their God
rides triumphantly and visibly upon the waves of that
stormy Sea. And this infinite Wisdom is then e|specially
discovered in these particulars.
1. In leaving them still somewhat in the lieu and
room of those Comforts that they are deprived of;
so that they see God doth exchange their comforts,
and that for the better; and this supports them.
So Iohn 14. 1, 2, 3. Christ's bodily presence is re|moved,
but the Spirit was sent in the room of it,
which was better.
2. In doubling their strength, as he doubles their
burdens. It is observed, that the Saints have many
times very strong and sweet Consolation, a little be|fore
their greatest Trials: And this is so ordinary,
that commonly, when they have had extraordinary
Consolations from God, they have then looked for
some eminent Trial. The Lord appeared to Abra|ham,
and sealed the Covenant to him, and then put
him upon that great trial of his Faith. So the Dis|ciples,
Luke 24. 49. It was commanded them that
they should tarry in Ierusalem, till they were endowed
with power from on high. The Lord knew what an
hard providence they were like to have, and what
great oppositions and difficulties they must encoun|ter,
in publishing the Everlasting Gospel to the
World; and therefore first prepares, and endows
them with power from on high, viz. with eminent
measures of the Gifts and Craces of the Spirit; as
Faith, Patience, Self-denial, c. So Paul had first
his Revelations, then his Buffetings.
3. In coming in so opportunely in the time of
their great distress, with relief and comfort, 1 Pet.
4. 14. Then the Spirit of Glory, and of God resteth on
them. As that Martyr cried out to his friend Austin,
at the very stake, He is come, he is come.
4. In appointing and ordering the several kinds of
afflictions to several Saints; and allotting to every
one, that very Affliction, and no other, which is most
suitable to his condition: Which Afflictions, like so
many Portions of Physick, are prepared for that very
malignant humour that predominates most in them.
Peter's sin was self-confidence, God permits him to
fall by denying Christ: which doubtless was sanctifi|ed
to his good, in that particular. Hezekiah's sin
was vain-glory; therefore Spoilers are sent to take
away his Treasures.
5. In the duration of their Troubles; they shall
not lie always upon them, Psal. 125. 3. Our God is
a God of Judgment, Isai. 30. 18. Knows the due
time of removing it, and is therein punctual to a day,
Rev. 2. 10.


REFLECTION.
If the Wisdom of God do thus triumph and glorifie
itself in the Distresses of the Saints, then why should
I fear in the day of evil! Psal. 49. 4. Why doth
my heart faint at the foresight and apprehension of
approaching trouble? Fear none of those things that
thou shalt suffer, O my Soul; if thy God will thus be
with thee in the fire and water, thou canst not perish.
Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of
Death, yet let me fear no evil, whilst my God is thus
with me. Creatures cannot do what they please;
his wisdom limits and over-rules them all, to gracious
and sweet ends. If my God cast me into the Fur|nace,
to melt and try me, yet I shall not be consumed
there; for he will sit by the Furnace himself all the

while I am in it, and curiously pry into it, observing
when it hath done its work, and then will presently
withdraw the fire. O my Soul, bless and adore this
God of Wisdom! who himself will see the ordering
of all thine Afflictions, and not trust it in the hands
of Men or Angels!


THE POEM.
Though tost in greatest Storms, I'll never fear,
If Christ will sit at Helm to guide and steer.
Storms are the triumph of his Skill and Art;
He cannot close his Eyes, nor change his Heart.
VVisdom and Power ride upon the VVaves,
And in the greates danger helps and saves
From dangers, it by dangers doth deliver,
And wounds the Devil out of his own Quiver;
It countermines his Plots, and so doth spoil,
And make his Engines on himself recoil
It blunts the Politicians restless Tool,
And makes Ahitophel the veriest Fool:
It shews us how our Reason us misled,
And if we had not, we had perished.
Lord, to thy VVisdom I will give the Reins,
And not with Cares perplex and vex my brains.



CHAP. XXIX.

Things in the bottom are unseen: No eye
Can trace God's Paths, which in the Deeps do lie.


OBSERVATION.
THE Ocean is so deep, that no Eye can disco|ver
what lies in the bottom thereof. We use
to say proverbially of a thing that is irrecoverably
lost, It is as good it were cast into the Sea. What
lies there, lies obscure from all eyes, but the Eye of
God.



APPLICATION.
Thus are the Judgments of God, and the Ways of
his Providence, profound and unsearchable, Psal. 36.
16. The Righteous is like the great Mountains, and thy
Iudgments are a great Deep: (i. e.) his Providences
are secret, obscure, and unfathomable; but even then,
and in those Providences, his Righteousness stands
up like the great Mountains, visible and apparent to
every eye. Though the Saints cannot see the one,
yet they can clearly discern the other, Ier. 12. 1.
Ieremiah was at a stand; so was Iob in the like case,
Iob 12. 7. So was Asaph, Psal. 73. and Habbakkuk,
Chap. 1. 3. These Wheels of Providence are dread|ful
for their height, Ezek. 1. 18. There be deep
Mysteries of Providence, as well as of Faith. It may
be said of some of them, as of Paul's Epistles, That
they are hard to be understood. Darkness and Clouds
are round about the Throne of God: No man can
say what will be the particular issue and event of some
of his dispensations. Luther seemed to hear God say
to him, when he was importunate to know his mind
in some particular Providence, Deus sum non sequax:
I am a God not to be traced. Some Providences, like
Hebrew Letters, must be read backward, Psal. 92. 7.
Some Providences pose Men of the greatest parts and
graces. His way is in the Sea, his paths in the great
VVaters, and his foot-steps are not known, Psal. 77. 19.
Who can trace Foot-steps in the bottom of the Sea?
The Angels, Ezek. 1. Have their hands under their wings.
The hand is either, Symbolum roboris, The Symbol of
strength; or Instrumentum Operationis, The Instru|ment
of Action: Where these hands are put forth,
they work effectually, yea, but very secretly, they are
hid under their wings. There be some of God's
Works that are such Secrets, as that they may not be
enquired into; they are to be believed and adored,

but not pryed into, Rom. 11. 33. Others that may
be enquired after, but yet are so profound, that few
can understand them, Psal. 111. 2. The works of the
Lord are great, sought out of all those that have pleasure
therein. When we come to Heaven, then all those
mysteries, as well in the Works, as in the Word of
God, will lie open to our view.


REFLECTION.
O then, why is my heart disquieted, because it can|not
sometimes discern the way of the Lord, and see
the connection and dependence on his providential
dispensations? Why art thou so perplexed, O my
Soul, at the Confusions and Disorders that are in the
world! I know that Goodness and Wisdom sits at
the Stern: And though the Vessel of the Church be
tossed and distressed in Storms of Trouble, yet it shall
not perish. Is it not enough for me, that God hath
condescended so far for my satisfaction, as to shew me
plainly the ultimate and general issue of all these
mysterious Providences, Ephes. 1. 22. Rom. 8. 28. un|less
I be able to take the height of every particular?
Shall I presume to call the God of Heaven to account?
Must he render a reason of his ways, and give an ac|count
of his matters to such a worm as I am? Be
silent (O my Soul) before the Lord; subscribe to
his Wisdom, and submit to his Will, whatsoever he
doth. However it be, yet God is good to Israel;
the event will manifest it to be all over a design of
love. I know not how to reconcile them to each o|ther,
or many of them to the Promise; yet are they all
harmonious betwixt themselves, and the certain means
of accomplishing the Promises. O what a favour is
this, that in the midst of the greatest confusions in
the world, God hath given such abundant security to
his people, that it shall be well with them? Amos 9.
8. Eccles. 8. 12.



THE POEM.
Lord! how stupendious, deep, and wonderful,
Are all thy draughts of Providence! So full
Of puzling Intricacies, that they lie
Beyond the ken of any mortal eye.
A Wheel within a Wheel's the Scripture Notion.
And all those VVheels transverse, and cross in motion.
All Creatures serve it in their place; yet so,
As thousands of them know not what they do.
At this or that, their aim they do direct;
But neither this, nor that, is the effect:
But something else they do not understand,
VVhich sets all Politicians at a stand.
Deep Counsels, as the birth, this hand doth break,
And deeper things performeth by the weak.
Men are like orses, set at every stage,
For Providence to ride from age to age;
VVhich like a Post spurs on, and makes them run
From stage to stage until their Iourney's done;
Then take a fresh: But they the business know,
No more than Horses the Post-Letters do.
Yet though its work be not conceal'd from sight,
'Twill be a glorious piece, when brought to light.



CHAP. XXX.

Millions of Men are sunk into the Main:
But it shall not those Dead always retain.


OBSERVATION.
WHat multitudes of Men hath the Sea devour|ed!
Thousands have made their Graves in
it. What numbers of Men have been ingulfed to|gether
in Sea-fights, or Storms, or Inundations,

whereby whole Towns have been swallowed up!
Certainly the dead which are there are innumer|able.


APPLICATION.
But though the Sea have received so many thousand
Bodies of Men into its devouring Throat, yet is it
not the absolute Lord or Proprietor of them, but
rather a Steward intrusted with them, till the Lord
require an account of them; and then it must deliver
up all it hath received, even to a person. Revel. 20.
11, 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great stand be|fore
God: and the books were opened: and another book was
open, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged
out of those things which were written in the Books, ac|cording
to their works. And the Sea gave up the dead
which were in it.
The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body, is a
Doctrine full of singular Consolations to Believers,
1 Cor. 15. and most clearly asserted in Scripture, Acts
26. 8. Iob 19. 25. 1 Cor. 15, c. And it is well for
us this point is so plainly revealed; because, as it is
a most comfortable Truth to the people of God, so
there is scarce any truth that lies under more pre|judice
as to Sense or Reason, and is more difficult to
receive, than this is. The Epicures and Stoicks laugh|ed
Paul to scorn when he preached it to them, Acts
17. 32. The Familists and Quakers at this day reject
it as a Fable. The Socinians say the same Body shall
not rise, but an aerial Body. And indeed if Men set
up Reason as the onely Judge of supernatural things,
it is incredible to think that a Body should be re|stored
that hath been burnt to ashes, and those ashes
scattered in the wind, as History tells us was fre|quently
done by the Bodies of the Saints in Dioclesi|an's
Reign! Or when drowned in the Sea, and there
devoured by several Fishes, and those again devour|ed

by others. But yet this is not to be objected to
the Almighty Power of God, that gave them their
first being. Difficulties and Impossibilities are for
Men, but not for him. Why should it be thought a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?
Acts 26. 8.


REFLECTION.
And must I rise again, where-ever my body fall at
death? Then, Lord, how am I concerned to get
union with Christ while I live? by vertue thereof
only, my Resurrection can be made comfortable and
blessed to me! Ah, let my body lie where it will, in
Earth or Sea; let my bones be scattered, and flesh de|voured
by Worms or Fish, I know thou canst and
wilt reunite my scattered parts; and in this body I
must stand before thine awful Tribunal, to receive
according to what I have done therein, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Thou that commandest me to stand forth amongst
the noblest rank of Creatures, when I had no being,
and sawest my Substance, being yet imperfect, canst
as easily reduce me to that Being again.
What though Reason vote impossible, and Sense
incredible? Though all these Difficulties and En|cumbrances
grow upon my Faith, yet I know my body
is not lost for ever; the sound of thy last and dread|ful
Trumpet shall awaken me; and thy mighty Power,
to which all things are possible, shall bring me before
thy Bar.
O Lord, I know that I shall stand in that great As|sembly
at the last day, when multitudes, multitudes,
even all the sons and daughters of Adam shall appear
together. O! if I die Christless, it were good for
me that there were no Resurrection: for then those
eyes that have been windows of Lust, must behold
Christ the Judge, not as a Redeemer, but as a Re|venger.
That tongue that has vented so much of the

filthiness of my heart, will then be struck speechless
before him; and this flesh which I so pamper'd and
provided for, condemned to everlasting flames. O
my God, let me make sure work for such a day. If I
now get real union with thy Son, I shall awake with
singing out of the dust: And then, as thou saidst to
Iacob, so to me, when I go down into the Sea or
Grave, Gen. 46. 3, 4. Fear not to go down into the deep;
for I will surely bring thee up again.


THE POEM.
It should not seem incredible to thee,
That God should raise the dead in Seas that be:
We see in VVinter, Swallows, VVorms, and Flies
Depriv'd of Life, yet in the Spring they rise.
What though you Bodies several Fish devour,
Object not that to the Almighty power.
Some Chymists in their Art are so exact,
That from one Herb they usually extract
Four different Elements: what think ye then,
Can pose that God, who gave this Skill to men?
The Gard'ner can distinguish thirty kinds
Of seeds from one another, though he finds
Them mixt together in the self-same dish;
Much more can God distinguish Flesh from Fish.
They seem as lost, but they again must live;
The Sea's a Steward, and Stewards account must give.
Look what you are, when in the Ocean drown'd,
The very same at Iudgment you'll be found
I would not care where my vile body lies,
Were I assur'd it should with comfort rise.




CHAP. XXXI.

The Sea-man's greatest danger's near the Coast;
VVhen we are nearest Heav'n, the danger's most.


OBTERVATION.
THough Sea-men meet with violent Storms, yet
if they have Sea-room enough, they are not
much dismaid; but if they find themselves near the
shoar, they look upon their condition as very
dangerous. The sight of the Shore is to them (as
Soloman speaks of the Morning in another case) like
the shadow of death, if not able to Weather it. For
one Ship swallowed up in the Ocean, may perish up|on
the Coast.


APPLICATION.
The greatest Streights and Difficulties that many
Saints meet with in all their lives, is when they come
nearest to Heaven, and have almost finished their
Course. Heaven indeed is a glorious Place, the Spa|cious
and Royal Mansion of the great King; but
difficilia quae pulchra. It hath a streight and narrow
entrance, Luke 13. 24. O the difficulty of arriving
there! How many hard tugs in Duty! What earnest
contention and striving, even to an Agony, as that
word imports! Luke 13. 24. Multitudes put forth,
and by profession are bound, for this fair Haven; but
of the multitudes that put out, how few do arrive
there? A man may set out by a glorious profession,
with much resolution, and continue long therein; he
may offer very fair for it, and not be far from the
Kingdom of God, and yet not be able to enter at
the last, Matth. 7. 22.
Yea, and many of those who are sincere in their
profession, and do arrive at last, yet come to Heaven

(as I may say) by the gates of Hell; and put in, as
a poor Weather-beaten Vessel comes into the Harbour,
more like a Wrack than a Ship, nor Mast nor Saile
left. The righteous themselves are scarcely saved,
(i. e.) they are saved with very much difficulty.
They have not all an abundant entrance, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Pet. 1. 11.
Some Persons (as one well notes) Manton on Iude
are afar off, Eph. 2. 23. (i. e.) touch p. 119.
with no care of Religion: Some come near, but never
enter; as Semiconverts, see Matth. 12. 34. Others
enter, but with great difficulty; they are saved as by fire,
1 Cor. 3. 13. Make an hard shift. But then there be
some that go in with full sail before a VVind, and have
an abundant entrance: They go triumphing out of the
world. Ah! when we come into the Narrow Chan|nel,
at the very point of entrance into life, the Soul
is then in the most serious frame, all things look with
a new face. Conscience scans our evidence most crit|tically;
then also Satan falls upon us, and makes his
sorest assaults and batteries. It is the last encounter;
it they escape him now, they are gone out of his reach
for ever: And if he cannot hinder their Salvation,
yet if he can but cloud their Evening, and make them
go groaning and haling out of the world, he reaches
another end by it, even to confirm and prejudice the
wicked, and weaken the hands of others that are
looking towards Religion.


REFLECTION.
If this be so, how inevitable is my perdition, may
the careless Soul say; if they that strive so much,
and go so far, yet perish at last; and if the righteous
themselves are scarcely saved, then where shall such an
ungodly Creature, as I appear? O Lord! if they that
have made Religion their business, and have been
many years pursuing a work of Mortification, have

gone mourning after the Lord Jesus, and walked
humbly with God; yet if some of these have such
an hard tug at last, then what will become of such a
vain, sensual, careless, Flesh-pleasing Wretch as I
have been?
Again, Do Saints find it so streight an entrance?
Then, though I have well-grounded Hopes of safe
arrival at last; yet let me look to it, that I do not
increase the difficulty. Ah! they are the things that
are now done, or omitted, that put Conscience into
such an agony then; for when it comes to review
the life with the most serious eye. O, let me not
stick my Death-bed full of Thorns, against I come to
lie down upon it. O that I may turn to the Wall,
in that hour, as Hezekiah did, 2 Kings 20. 2, 3. and
say, Remember now, O Lord, I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart,c.


THE POEM.
After a tedious Passage, Saints descry
The glorious Shore, Salvation being nigh;
Death's Long boat's launch'd, ready to set ashore
Their panting Souls. O, how they tug at Oar,
Longing to be at rest! but then they find,
The hardest Tug of all is yet behind.
Iust at the Harbours mouth, they see the Wrach
Of Souls there cast away, and driven back.
A world of dangerous Rocks before it lie;
The Harbours barr'd, ad now the VVinds blow high
Thoughts now arise fears multiply apace;
All things about them have another face
Life blazes just like an expiring light;
The Soul's upon the lip, prepar'd for flight.
Death, till the Resurrection, tears and rends
Out of each other's arms, two parting Friends,
The Soul and Body. Ah! but more than so,
The Devil falls upon them ere they go,
With new temptations, back'd with all his power,
And scruples kept on purpose for that hour.
This is the last encounter, now or never.
If he succeeds not now, they're gone for ever.
Thus in they put, with hardship at the last,
As Ships out of a Storm, nor Sail, nor Mast:
Yet some go in before a Wind, and have
Their Streamer of Assurance flying brave.
Lord, give me easier entrance, if thou please;
Or if I may not there arrive with ease,
Yet I beseech the set me safe ashore,
Though stormy Winds at Harbours mouth should roar.



CHAP. XXXII.

How glad are Seamen, when they make the Shore
And Saints no less, when all their Danger's o're,


OBSERVATION.
WHat Joy is there among Sea-men, when at last,
after a tedious and dangerous Voyage, they
descry Land, and see the desied Haven before them?
Then they turn out of their loath'd Cabbins, and
come upon open Deck with much joy, Psal. 107. 30.
Then they are glad, because they be quiet: So he bringeth
them to their desired Haven. Now they can reflect
with comfort upon the many dangers they have past,
Olim haec meminisse juvabit; It is sweet to recount
them.


APPLICATION.
But O, what transcendent Joy, yea, ravishing, will
ove-run the hearts of Saints, when after so many
Conflicts, Temptations, and Afflictions, they arrive
in glory, and are harbour'd in Heaven, where they

shall rest for ever! 2. Thes. 1. 7. The Scripture saith,
They shall sing the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, Rev.
15. 3. The Song of Moses was a triumphant Song,
composed for the celebration of that glorious Deli|verance
at the Red Sea. The Saints are now fluctuat|ing
upon a troublesome and tempestuous Sea; their
hearts sometime ready to sink and die within them,
at the apprehension of so many and great dangers and
difficulties. Many an hard storm they ride out, and
many streights and troubles they here encounter
with: But at last they arrive at their desired and
long expected Haven, and then Heaven rings and
resounds with their joyful acclamations. And how
can it be otherwise, when as soon as ever they set
foot upon that glorious Shoar, Christ himself meets
and receives them with a Come ye blessed of my Father?
Matth. 25. 34. O joyful voice! O much desired
Word? (saith Parus) What tribulation would
not a man undergo for his Words sake!
Besides, then they are perfectly freed from all
evils, whether of sin or suffering, and perfectly filled
with all desired good. Now they shall joyn with
that great Assembly, in the high praises of God. O
what a day will this be! if (saith a worthy Divine)
Diagoras died away with an excess of
Joy,Morning-Ex|ercise,
p. 651. whilst he enbraced his three Sons
that were crowned as Victors in the
Olympic Games in one day: And good
old Simeon, when he saw Christ but in a body subject
to the insirmities of our natures cryed out, Now let thy
Servant depart in peace; what unspeakable joy will it
be to the Saints, to behold Christ in his glory, and
see their godly relations also, (to whose conversion,
perhaps, they have been instrumental) all crown'd
in one day with everlasting Diadems of bliss! And
if the stars did (as Ignatius saith) make a Quire, as

it were, about that star that appear'd at Christ's in|carnation,
and there be such joy in Heaven at the
conversion of a sinner: no wonder then, the Morn|ing-stars
sing together, and the Sons of God shout
for Joy, when the general Assembly meet in Heaven;
O how will the Arches of Heaven ring and eccho,
when the high praises of God shall be in the mouth
of such a Congregation! then shall the Saints be joy|fbl
in glory, and sing aloud upon their Beds of ever|lasting
Rest.


REFLECTION.
And is there such a day approaching for the Sons
of God indeed! and have I [authority] to call my
selfe one of the number! Iohn 1. 12. O then let me not
droop at present difficulties, nor hang down my
hands when I meet with hardships in the way. O
my Soul, what a joyful day will this be! for at pre|sent
we are tost upon an Ocean of troubles, fears,
temptations; but these will make Heaven the sweet|er.
Chear up then, O my Soul, thy Salvation is now
nearer, than when thou first believedsts Rom. 13. 11.
And it will not now be long ere I receive the end
of my Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. And then it will be sweet to
reflect even upon these hardships in the way. Yet a
few days more, and then comes that blessed day thou
hast so long waited and panted for. Oppose the
glory of that day (O my Soul) to thy present aba|sures
and sufferings, as blessed Paul did, Ram. 1. 18.
And thou shalt see how it will shrink them all up to
nothing. Oppose the Inheritance thou shalt receive
in that day, to thy losses for Christ now; and see how
joyfully it will make thee bear them, Heb. 10. 34.
Oppose the honour that will be put upon thee in that
day, to thy present reproaches; and see how easiei
will make them to thee, 1 Cor 4. 5. What condition

can I be in, wherein the believing thoughts of this
blessed day cannot relieve me?
Am I poor, Here is that which answers Poverty,
Jam. 3. 5. Hearken, my beloved Brethren, hath not God
chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs of
the Kingdom?
Am I tempted? Here is relief against that, Revel.
12. 16. Now is come Salvation and strength; for the
Accuser of our Brethren is cast down, c.
Am I deserted? Here is a remedy for that too,
Revel. 22. 5. And there shall be no night there, c.
Come then, my Soul, let us enter upon our Inheri|tance
by degrees, and begin the Life of Heaven upon
Earth.


THE POEM.
VVhen Solomon in Isreal first was King,
Heaven's Arches, Earth's Foundations seem'd to ring
VVith joyful Exclamations! How much more
VVill Heaven resound, when Saints are come ashore!
How will the ravish'd Souls transported be
At the first glimpse of Christ! VVhom they shall see
In all his glory; and shall live and move
Like Salamanders, in the fire of love,
A flood of tears convey'd them to the Gate,
VVhere endless Ioys receiv'd them. Now the date
Of all their Sorrow's out; henceforth they walk
In Robes of Glory. Now there's no more talk
Of fears, temptations, of that snare, or this:
No Serpent in that Paradise doth hiss.
No more desertions, troubled thoughts or tears;
Christ's full enjoyment supersedes those fears.
Delights of Princes Courts are all but toys
To these delights, these are transcendent joys,
The joys of Christ himself; and what they are,
An Angel's Tongue would stammer to declare.
Were our Conceptions clear, did their Tongues go
Vnto their Ela, yet the Note's too low.
What! Paint the Son too bright! it cannot be;
Sure Heaven suffers no Hyperbole.
My thoughts are swallowed up, my Muse doth doth tire
And hang her Wings, Conception soars no higher.
Give me a place among thy Children there,
Although I lie with them in Dungeons here.


A Concluding Speech.
I Have now done, and am looking to Heaven for
a blessing upon these weak Labours: what use
you will make of them, I know not; but this I know,
that the day is coming, when God will reckon with
you for this, and all other helps and means afforded
to you. And if it be not improved by you, be sure
it will be produced as a witness against you. Sirs,
I beg you in the Name of Christ, before whom both
you and I must shortly appear, that you receive not
these things in vain. Did I know what other lawful
means to use that might reach your hearts, they
should not be in vain to you; but I cannot do God's
part of the work, nor yours. Onely I request you
all, both Masters, common Men, and all others,
into whose hands this shall come, that you will lay to
heart what you read; pray unto him that hath the
Key of the House of David, that openeth and no man
shutteth, to open your hearts to give entertainment
to these truths. Alas! If you apply it not to
your selves, I have Iaboured to no purpose, the Pen
of the Scribe is in vain: But God may make such an
application of them, in one Storm or another, as may
make your hearts to tremble. O Sirs! when Death and
Eternity look you in the face, Conscience may reflect
upon these things to your horror and amazement,

and make you cry out, as Prov. 5. 12, 13. How have I
hated knowledge, and my heart despised reproof? And
have not obeyed the voice of my Teacher, nor inclined my
ears to them that instructed me? And O what a dread|ful
shriek will such Souls give, when the Lord opens
their eyes, to see that misery that they are here
warned of! But if the Lord shall bless these things to
your Conversion, then we may say to you, as Moses
did to Zebulun, the Mariner's Tribe Deut. 33. 12.
Rejoyce Zebulun, in thy going out. The Lord will be
with you which way soever you turn you selves;
and being in the bosome of the Covenant, you are safe
in the midst of all dangers. O! thou that art the
Father of Spirits, that formedst, and canst easily re|form
the heart, open thou the blind eye, unstop the
deaf ear, let the Word take hold upon the heart. If
thou wilt but say the word, these weak Labours shall
prosper, to bring home many lost Souls unto thee.
Amen.
FINIS








A Pathetical and Serious
DISSWASIVE
From the Horrid and Detestable Sins
OF
Drunkenness, Swearing, Unclean|ness,
Forgetfulness of Mercies, Uio|lation
of Promises; and Atheistical
Contempt of Death. APPLIED
By way of CAUTION to Sea-men,
and now added as an APPENDIX
to their NEW COMPASS. Being an Essay toward their much desi|red
Reformation: Fit to be seriously re|commended
to their Profane Relations,
whether Sea-men or others, by all such as
unfeignedly desire their Eternal Welfare. By IOHN FLAVEL,
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
2 Cor. 5. 19. Knowing therefore the terrours of the
LORD, we perswade men.
Ezek. 3. 19. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn
not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he
shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.
LONDON,
Printed by Tho. Parkust and M. Fabian. 1698.




To the Right Worshipful
Sir Iohn Frederick, Kt,
One of the
Worshipful Aldermen of the City of LONDON,
and their Honourable BURGESS in the
present PARLIAMENT.
And to the truly Religious and ever Honoured,
Mr. Iohn Lovering,
Of the City of London, MERCHANT.
Much honour'd and esteem'd,
ALthough Dedications are too often abused to a
vain flattery, yet is there an excellent use and
advantage to be made of them: Partly to en|courage
Persons of VVorth and Eminency to espouse the
Interest of Religion themselves; and partly to oblige
those Readers, for whom such Books are principally in|tended,
to a diligent perusal of them, by interesting such
Persons in them, for whom they have great Respects, o
on whom they have any dependance.
Vpon the first account, a Dedication would be needless
to you: for I am perswaded, you do not only in your
Iudgment approve the Design I here manage, viz. The
Reformation of the prophane and looser sort of our Sea-men;
but are also heartily willing to improve your
Interest to the uttermost for the promotion of it. I can|not
look upon you as Persons acted by that low and com|mon
spirit that the most of your Profession are acted by,
who little regard, if they be good Servants to them, whe|ther
God have any Service from them, or no, and if

they pay them the Wages due for their work never think
of the Wages they are to receive for their sin. You are
judged to be Persons of another spirit, who do not only
mind, but advance Christ's Interest above your own, and
negotiate for his Glory, as well as for your own gain:
And yet, herein you consult your own Interest as well as
God's: Subordinata non pugnant. Your Interest is
never more prosperously managed, or abundantly secur|ed,
than when it is carried on in a due subordination to
God's. Their Reformation will apparently tend to your
advantage. Those sins of theirs, against which I have
here engaged, are the Jonahs in your Ships: 'tis sin that
sinks them, and drives them against the Rocks. One
sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 8. 11. How much
more a leud Crew of them conspiring to provoke God!
The death of their Lusts, is the most probable means to
give life to your Trade. And as these Counsels prosper
in their hearts, so will your Business thrive in you hands.
Piety and Prosperity are married together in that Pro|mise,
Psal. 1. 3. Onesimus was never so profitable a
Servant to Philemon, as when he became his Brother in
a Spiritual, as well as his Servant in a Civil Capacity.
Philem. vers. 11. and 16. compared. And yet if your
Interest were forced to step back, to give way to Christ's;
I hope you would (notwithstanding) rejoyce therein.
So that my present business is, not so much to perswade
you, whose hearts, I hope, God hah already perswaded,
to so good a work; as to make your Fames and Respects,
which are great among them, an innocent Bait to tempt
them to their Duty. And if either your Name or In|terest
may be useful to such an end, I presume I may use
them freely, and welcome: for, sure I am, they can
never be put to a better use.
Well then, I will make bould to send this small Ad|venture
in your Ships; and if the Return of it be but
tke Conversion of one Soul to God, I shall reckon that I

have made a better Voyage than you, let your Returns be
never so rich.
How these things will affect them, I know not. I do
suppose it will produce different effects upon them, ac|cording
to the different tempers of their spirits, and ac|cording
as God shall command, or suspend the Blessing.
Possibly some will storm at the close and cutting Rebukes
of the Word, (for most mens Lusts are a great deal
more sensible and tender than their Consciences) and
will fondly imagine that this necessary plainness tends
to their reproach. But if none but the guilty can be sup|posed
to be angry at them, they will thereby reproach
themselves a great deal more than ever I intend to do.
I confess it is a bitter Pill, and compounded of many
perative and strong Ingredients, which do acute it;
ut not a jot more than is necessary. I shall beg the
ssistance of your Prayers to God for them, and of your
rave Admonitions and Exhortations to them for God;
hich will much help its Operation, and facilitate my
Design, to do their Souls a piece of everlasting Service;
ith which Design I can truly say I even travel in pain
 them. Your assistance therefore in this good Work,
ill put the highest Obligation upon
Your most affectionate
Friend and Servant
to be commanded,
IOHN FLAVEL.





A
Sober Consideration
Of the SIN of
DRUNKENNESS.
IN the former Treatise I have endeavoured to
Spiritualize earthly Objects, and elevate your
thoughts to more sublime and excellent Con|templations;
that earthly things may rather be
step, than a stop to Heavenly. You have therein my
best advice to guide you in your Course to that Po
of your Eternal Rest and Happiness.
In this, I have given warning of some dangero
Rocks and Quick-sands that lie upon your left hand
upon which millions of Souls have perished, and
thers are wilfully running to their own preditio
Such are the horrid Sins of Drunkenness, Vncleanness
profane Swearing, Violation of Promises and Ingage|ments
made to God, and Atheistical slighting and co|tempt
of Death and Eternity. All which I have
 given warning of, and held forth a Light to d|cover
where your danger is. If after this you
stinately prosecute your Lusts, and will not be
claimed; you perish without Apology, I have fre
mine own Soul.
Let none interpret this necessary plainness, as
reproach to Sea-men, as if I represented them 
the world worse than they are. If upon that

count any of them be offended, methinks these three
or four Considerations should remove that offence.
First, that if this close and plain dealing be necessa|ry
in order to your Cure, and you will be offended
thereat, it's better you should be offendd than God.
Ministers are often put upon lamentable streights,
they sail betwixt Sylla and Charibdis; the wrat of
God upon one side, if we do not speak , and
home, as the necessity of the Case equires; and
Man's wrath, if we do: What shall we do in this
streight? Either God or you, it seems, must be
offended; and if it cannot be avoided, I shall rather
hazard your anger than Gods, and think it far more
tolerable.
Secondly, If you did but see the necessity and end
of this manner of dealing with your Souls, you
would not be offended. But put it into a more
sensible case, and you will see and acknowledge it
presently. If I should see an high-bult Wall giving
way, and ready to fall upon you; would you be
angry with me, if by plucking you out of the dan|ger,
I should pluck your arm out of joynt? Certainly
you would not. Why this is the case here: See
Isa. 30. 13. Therefore this Iniquity shall be unto you
as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high Wall,
whose breaking cometh suddenly, at as instant.
Thirdly, What a madness is it to abide in a con|dition
over which all Woes and Curses hang, and
yet not be able to endure to hear of it! Why what
will it profit you to have your misery hid from your
eyes, and kept from your eares a little while? You
must see this wrath, and hear louder vollies of
Woes from your own Consciences, If you remain
in this condition. You cannot bear that from us,
which your Conscience will one of these days preach

themselves to you, and that in a more dreadful
dialect than I have used here.
Fourthly, I do not charge these sins indifferent|ly
upon all Sea-men. No, I know there are some
choice and good men amongst your men, that fear
an Oath, and hate even the garments spotted with
the flesh, who are (I question not) the credit and
glory of our English Nation, in the eyes of Strangers
that converse with them. Nor yet do I think, that
all that are wicked amongst them, are equally guilty
of all these evils; for though all that are graceless,
be equally under the dominion of Original Corruption,
yet it follows not from thence, that therefore actual
sins must reign alike in them: There is great diffe|rence,
even among ungodly men themselves, in this
respect; which difference ariseth from their various
Customs, Constitutions, Abilities, Educations, and
the different Administrations of the Spirit, in en|lightning,
convincing, and putting checks upon
Conscience: For though God be not the Author,
yet he is the Orderer of sin. And this makes a great
disparity, even among wicked men themselves.
Some are persons of good Morals, though not
Gracious Principles, which produce a civil and sober,
though not a holy and a religious Life. And o|thers,
though they live in some one of these Lusts,
yet are not guilty of some others of them. For it
is with Original Corruption, just as it is with the
sap of the Earth, which though it be the matter of
all kind of Fruits, yet in some ground it sorts better
with one grain than with another: And so in Plants,
in one tree it becomes a Apple, in another a Cherry;
even so it is with this Original Corruption: In one
man it runs most into Swearing, in another into
Uncleanness, in a third into Drunkenness. Lust is
nothing else but the corrupt appetite of the Crea|ture

to some sinful object: and therefore look as it
is with the Appetite with respect to Food, so it is
with the vitiated Appetites of Souls to sin. One
man loves this Food best, and another that; there
is endless variety in that, and so in this.
Having spoken thus much to remove offence, I
shall now beg you to peruse the following Discourse.
Consider what evidence these things carry with
them. Search the alledged Scriptures, see if they be
truly recited and applied to the case in hand: And
if so, Oh tremble at the truth you read; bring forth
your Lusts that they may die the death: Will you
not part with these abominable practices till Death
and Hell make the seperation? Ah how much bet|ter
is it for you, that Grace should do it! And be|cause
many of you see not the danger, and there|fore
prize not the Remedy, I do here Request all
those that have the Bowels of Pity in them for their
poor Relations, who are sinking, drowning, perish|ing,
to spread these following Cautions before
the Lord for a Blessing, and then put them in|to
their hands. And oh that all pious Masters
would perswade those that are under their charge
to buy this ensuing Treatise, and diligently per|use
it. And the first Caution I shall give them, is
this.

I. CAUTION.
TAke heed and beware of the detestable Sin of
Drunkenness, which is a beastly sin a volun|tary
madness, a sin that unmans thee, and makes
thee like the beast that perishes; yea, sets thee be|low
the brute beasts, which will not drink to to

excess; or if they do, yet it's not their sin. One
of the Ancients calls it,Turbution capitis, subversio sensus tem|pestas linguae, procella corporis, naufragium virtutus, amissio tem|poris, insnia volunta|ria, blande daemon, dulce venenum, suave peccatum, quam qui+habet, seipsum no ha|bet, quam qui fecit, peccatum non fecit, sed ipse totus est pecca|tatum. Aug. ad lacr. Viginis. A
distemper of the Head, a sub|version
of the senses, a tempest
in the tongue, a storm of the
body, the shipwrack of vertue,
the loss of time, a wilful mad|ness,
a pleasant devil, a sugar'd
poyson, a sweet sin, which he
that has, has not himself, and
he that commits it, doth not
only commit Sin, but he himself
is altogether sin. It is a Sin at
which the most sober Heathens
blushed. The Spartans brought
their Children to loath it, by shewing them a
Drunkard, whom they gazed at as a-Monster: even
Epicurus himself, who esteemed happiness to consist
in Pleasure, yet was temperate, as Cicero observes:
Among the Heathens, he was accounted the best
man, that spent more Oyl in the Lamp, than Wine
in the Bottle. Christianity could once glory in
its professors: Tertullian saith of the Primitive
Christians, They sat not down before they prayed,
they eat no more than might suffice hunger, they
drank no more than was sufficient for temperate
men; they did so eat and drink, as those that re|membred
they must pray afterward. But now it
may blush to behold such beastly sensualists adorn|ing
themselves with its name, and sheltring them|selves
under its wings.
And amongst those that profess Christianity, how
ordinarily is this sin committed by Sea-men? This
insatiable Dropsie is a Disease that reigns especially
among the inferiour and ruder sort of them. Some
of them have gone aboard drunk, and laid the

oundation of their Voyage in sin. O what a pre|paration
is this! They know not whether ever they
shall see the Land of their Nativity any more; the
next Storm may send them into Eternity: yet this
is the Farewe they take; this is their preparation
to meet the Lord. And so in their returns, not|withstanding
the terrible and astonishing Works of
the Lord, which they have beheld with their eyes,
and their marvellous preservation iu so great and
terrible extremities; yet thus do they requite the
Lord, assoon as their dangers are over, as if they had
been deliver'd to commit all these abominations. But
a few hours, or days since, they were reeling to and
fro upon a stormy Ocean, and staggering like drunk|en
men, as it is Psal. 107. 27. and now you may see
them reeling and staggering in the streets, drowning
the sense of all those precious Mercies and Deliver|ances
in their drunken Cups.
Reader, If thou be one that is guilty of this sin,
for the Lords sake, bethink thy self speedily and
weigh, with the reason of a man, what I shall now
say, in order to thy Conviction, Humiliation and Re|formation.
I need not spend many words, to open
the nature of this sin to you: we all grant, that
there is a lawful use of Wine and strong
Drink,Qui dedit a|quam, dedit vinum. to support Nature, not to clog
it; to cure Infirmities, not to cause them.
Drink no longer water, but use a little Wine,
for thy stomachs sake, and thine often in|firmities,
saith Paul to Timothy, 1 Tim. 5. 23. mark;
drink not water, but wine, sed modice (i. e.) medice;
pro remedio, non pro delicius, saith Ambrose: that is, use
it modestly, viz. Medicinally, not for pleasure, but
for Remedy. Yea, God allows it, not noly for bare
necessity, but for chearfulness and alacrity, that the
body may be more fit and expedite for duty, Prov.

31. 7. But further no man proceeds, without the
violation of Sobriety. When men sit till Wine have
inflamed them, and reason be disturbed (for Drunk|enness
is the privation of reason, caused by immode|rate
drinking) then do they come under the guilt
of this horrid and abominable Sin. To the Satis|faction
and refreshment of nature, you may drink;
for it is a part of the Curse, to drink, and not be
satisfied: but take heed you go no further, For Wine
is a [mocker] strong Drink is raging, and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise, Prov. 20. 1. The Throat
is a slipery place; how easily may a sin slip through
it into the Soul? these sensual Pleasures have a kind
of inchanting power upon the Soul; and by custom
gain upon it, till they have enslaved it, and brought it
under their power. Now this is the sin against which
God hath delivered so many Precepts, and denounced
so many Woes, in his Word: Ephes. 5. 18. Be not drunken
with wine wherein is excess, Rom. 13. 18. Not in
rioting and drunkenness. not in chambering and wan|tonness,
Isa. 5. 11. Wo to them that rise early in the mor|ning,
that they may follow strong drink; that continue
until night, till wine inflame them; with many other
of dreadful importance. Now to startle thee for
ever from this abominable and filthy lust, I shall
here propound to thy Consideration these ten ensu|ing
Arguments: and oh that they might stand in the
way, as the Angel did in Balaam's, when thou art in
the prosecution of thy sensual Pleasures! And the
first is this.
Arg. 1. It should exceedingly disswade from this
Sin, to consider that it is an high abuse of the Boun|ty
and Goodness of God, in affording us those sweet
Refreshments, to make our Lives comfortable to us
upon earth. In Adam we forfeited all right, to all
earthly, as will as heavenly Mercies. God might

have taken thee from the Womb, when thou wast a
Sinner but of a span long, and immediately have sent
thee to thine own place: thou hadst no right to a
drop of water, more than what the bounty of God
gave thee. And whereas he might have thrust thee
out of the world, as soon as thou camest into it,
and so all those days of mercy thou hast had on earth,
might have been spent in howling and unspeakable
misery in Hell: Behold the Bounty and Goodness of
God in thee; I say, behold it, and wonder: He hath
suffered thee for so many years to live upon the earth,
which he hath prepared and furnished with all things
fit for thy necessity and delight; out of the earth on
which thou treadest, he bringeth forth thy food and
[VVine] to make glad thy heart, Psal. 104. 14, 15.
And dost thou thus requite the Lord? Hath Mercy
armed an enemy to fight against it with its own
Weapos? Ah that ever the Riches of his Goodness,
Bounty, and Long sffering (all which are arguments
to lead thee to repentance) should be thus abused!
If God had not been so bountiful, thou couldst not
have been so sinful.
Arg. 2. It degrades a man from the honour of his
Creation, and equalizeth him to the beast that per|isheth.
Wine is said to take away the heart, Hos. 4.
11. (i. e.) the wisdom and ingenuity of a man, and
so brutifies him; as Nebuchadnezzar, who lost the
heart of a man, and had the heart of a beast given
him, Dan. 4. 32. The heart of a man hath is ge|nerosity
and sprightliness, brave vigorous spirit in it,
capable of, and fitted for noble and worthy actions
and imployments; but his lust effeminates quenches
and drowns that masculine vigour in the puddle of
excess and sensuality. For no sooner is a man brought
under the dominion of this Lust, but the government
of Reason is renounced, which should exercise a co|ercive
power over the Affections; and all is deliver|ed

up into the hand of Lust and Appetite; and so
they act, not by discretion and reason, but by Lust
and Will, as the Beasts do by Instinct. The spirit
of Man entertains it self with intellectual and chast
Delights, the soul of a Beast is onely fitted for such
low, sensitive and dreggie Pleasures. Thou hast som|ething
of the Angel, and something of the Beast in
thee; thy Soul partakes of the nature of Angels, thy
Body of the nature of Beasts: Oh how many pam|per
the Beast, while they strave the Angels! God in
the first Chaper, put all the Creatures in subjection
to thee; by this Lust thou puttest thy in self Subjecti|on
to the creature, and art brought under his power,
1 Cor. 6. 12. If God had given thee the feet or head
of a beast, Oh what a misery wouldst thou have es|teemed
it! And is it nothing to have the heart of a
Beast? Oh consider it sadly.
Arg. 3. It is a Sin by which thou greatly wrong|est
and abuseth thine own Body. The Body
is the Souls Instrument, it is as the Tools are to a
skilful Artificer, this Lust both dulls and spoils it, so
that it's utterly unfit for any service of him that
made it. Thy body is a curious piece. not made by
a word of command, as other Creatures, but by a word
of counsel, I am fearfully and wonderfully made, and cu|riously
wrought, (saith the Psalmist) Psal. 139. 14. or
as the Vulgar: Ace pictus sum, Painted as with a Nee|dle,
like a Garment of Needlework of divers colours,
richly embroydered. Look how many members, so
many wonders. There are Miracles enough (saith
one) betwixt head and foot, to fill a volume. There
is (saith another) such curious workmanship in the
eye, that upon the first sight of it some Atheists
have been forced to acknowledge a God; especially
that fifth Muscle in the eye is wonderful, whereby

(as a learnedColumb. de re Anat. Author observes) Man
differeth from all other Creatures, who
have but four; one to turn the eye down|ward,
a second to hold it forward, a
third to move it to the right hand, a fourth to the
left; but none to turn it upward as a man hath. Now
judge in thy self, did God frame such a curious piece,
and enliven it with a Soul, which is a spark, a ray of
his own light, whose motions are so quick, various
and indefatigable, whose flights of reason are so
transcendent, did God, thinkest thou, send down
this curious piece, the top and glory of the Creati|on,
the Index and Epitome of the whole world, Eccl.
12. 2. did God (I say) send down this picture of his
own perfection, to be but as a striner for meats and
drinks, a spung to suck in Wine and Beer? Or canst
thou answer for the abuse and destruction of it? By
this excess thou fillest it with innumerable diseases
under which it languisheth; and at last thy life, like
a lamp extinguisnt, being drowned with to much
Oyle. Infinite Diseases are begot|ten
by it (saith Zanch.) hence come
Apoplexies,Infinitae morbo|rum gener indenscuntur, Apple, Paralyses, Arri|des, c. Ille opi|mus me dicus sibi, qui modicus cibi. Aug. Gouts, Palfies, sudden
Death, trembling of the hands and
legs; herein they bring Cain's curse
upon themselves, saith Ambrose.
Drunkenness slays more then the
Sword. Oh! what a terrible thing
will in be to consider upon a Death-bed,
that these pangs and aches are the fruits of thy
Intemperance and Excess! VVho hath wo Who hath
sorrows VVho hath contention? VVho hath babling? VVho
hath wounds without cause? VVho hath redness of eyes?
They that tarry long at VVine, they that go to seek mixt
VVine, Prov. 23. 29, 30. By this Enumeration,
and manner of Interrogation, he seems to make it

a difficult thing to recount the miseries that Drunk|enness
loads the outward man with: for look as Ver|mine
abound where there is store of Corn, so do
Diseases in the bodies of Drunkards, where crudities
do so abound: Now methinks if thou have no re|gard
to thy poor Soul, or the glory of God; yet
such a sensible Argument as this, from thy body,
should move thee.
Arg. 4. Drunkenness wastes and scatters thine
estate, Proverty attends excess: the Drunkard shall
be cloathed with Rags, and brought to a morsel of
bread. Solomon hath read thy fortune, Prov. 21.
17. He that loveth Wine and Oyl shall not be rich,
Luxury and Beggary are seldom far asunder. When
Diogenes heard a Drunkards house cryed to be sold;
I thought, quoth he, it would not be long ere he
vomited up his house also. The Hebrew word
 and the Greek word , which signifie
Luxury; the former is compounded of two words,
which signify, Thou shalt be poor; and the latter
signifies the losing of the possession of that good
which is in our hand. The Drunkard and the Glutton
shall surely come to poverty, Prov. 23. 21. In the He|brew
it is, He shall be disinherited, or disposessed.
It doth not only dispossess a man of his Reason,
which is a rich and fair inheritance given to him by
God, but it also dispossesses him of his estate: it
wastes all that either the provident care of thy
Progenitors, or the blessing of God upon thine own
industry, hath obtained for thee. And how will
this sting like and Adder, when thou shalt consider
it? Apicius the Roman, hearing that there were
seven hundred Crowns only remaining of a fair
estate, that his Father had left him, fell into a deep
Melancholly, and fearing want, hanged himself, saith
Seneca. And not to mention the miseries and sor|rows

they bring hereby upon their Families, drink|ing
the tears, yea, blood of their Wives and Chil|dren:
Oh what an account will they give to God,
when their reckoning day comes! Believe it, Sirs,
there is not a shilling of your estates, but God will
reckon with you for the expence thereof. If you
have spent it upon your luts, while the necessity of
your families, or the poor, called upon you for it;
I should be loth to have your account to make, for
a thousand times more than ever you possessed. O
woful expence, that is followed with such dreadful
reckonings!
Arg. 5. Consider what vile and ignominious
Characters the Spirit of God hath put upon the
subjects of this sin. The Scripture every where
notes them for infamous, and most abominable
persons. When Eli supposed Hannah to be drunken,
Count not thy hand-maid a daughter of Belial, said she,
1 Sam. 1. 16. Now a Son or daughter of Belial is,
in Scripture-language, the vilest of men or women.
So Psal. 69. 12. They that sit in the gate, speak against
me, and I am the Song of Drunkards, (i. e.) of the
basest and vilest of men, as the opposition plainly
shews; for they are opposed to them that sit in the
gate, that is, honourable persons. The Lord would
have his people shun the society of such, as a pest.
Not to eat with them, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Yea, the Scri|pture
brands them with Atheism; they are such
as have lost the sense and expectation of the Day of
Judgment; mind not another world, nor do they
look for the coming of the Lord, Matth. 24. 27, 28.
He saith the Lord delayeth his coming, and then
falls a drinking with the drunken. The thoughts
of that day will make them leave their Cups, or their
Cups will drown the thoughts of such a Day. And
will not all the contempt, shame and infamy, which

the Spirit of God hath poured on the head, of this
sin, cause thee to abhor it? Do not all Godly, yea
Moral Persons, abhor the Drunkard? Oh methinks
the shame that attends it, should be as a fence to
keep thee from it.
Arg. 6. Sadly consider, there can be nothing of
the sanctifying Spirit in a soul that is under the
dominion of this lust; for upon the first discovery
of the Grace of God, the Soul renounces the Govern|ment
of Sensuality. The Grace of God that bringeth
Salvation, teacheth men to live soberly, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
That is one of its first effects. Drunkenness indeed
may be found among Heathens, that are lost in the
darkness of Ignorance; but it may not be once
named among the Children of the Day. They that
be drunken are drunken in the night; but let us that are
of the day be sober, 1 Thes. 5. 7, 8. And the Apostles
often oppose Wine and the Spirit as things incom|patible,
Eph. 5. 16. Be not drunk with Wine wherein
is excess, but be filled with the Spirit. So Jude 19.
Sensual, not having the Spirit. Now what a dread|ful
Consideration is this: If any man have not the Spi|rit
of Christ the same is none of his, Rom 8. 9. Sensu|al
persons have not the Spirit of Christ, and so can
be none of his. It's true, Noah, a Godly man, once
fell into this sin, but as Theodoret saith, and that
truly, it proceeded ab inexperientiae non ab intem|perantia,
from want of experience of the force and
power of the Grape, not from Intemperance; and
besides, we find not that ever he was again over|taken
with that sin; but thou knowest it, and yet
persistest. O wretched Creature! the Spirit of
Christ cannot dwell in thee. The Lord help thee
to lay it to heart sadly.
Arg. 7. It's a Sin over which many direful woes
and threats hang in the Word, like so many lowring

clouds, ready to power down vengeance upon the
heads of such Sinners. Look as the condition of
the Saints is compassed round with Promises, so is
yours with Threatnings, Isai. 5. 11. Wo to them that
rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong
drink, and continue until night, until VVine inflame.
So Isai. 28. 1, 2. Wo to the Crown of Pride, to the
Drunkards of Ephraim, c. With many other, too
long to enumerate here. Now consider what a
fearful thing it is to be under these woes of God:
Sinner, I beseech thee, do not make light of them,
for they will fall heavy: assure thy self, not one of
them shall fall to the ground: they will all take
place upon thee, except thou repent.
There are woes of Men, and woes of God: Gods
woes are true woes, and make their condition woful
to purpose on whom they fall. Other woes (as
one saith) do but touch the skin; but these strike
the Soul; other woes are but temporal, these are
eternal; others do only part betwixt us and our
outward comforts, these betwixt God and us for
ever.
Arg. 8. Drunkenness is a leading sin, which has
a great retinue and attendence of other sins waiting
on it, it's like a sudden Land-flood, which brings a
great deal of dirt with it. So that look as Faith
excels among the Graces, because it enlivens,
actuates, and gives strength to them; so is this a|mong
sins. It is not so much a special sin against a
single Precept of God, as a general violation of the
whole Law, (saith accurate Amesius.) It doth not
only call off the guard, but warms and quickens all
other Lusts, and so exposes the Soul to be prostitut|ed
by them. (1.) It gives occasion, yea, is the
real cause of many contentions, and fatal quarrels,
Prov. 23. 29. VVho hath Wo VVho hath sorrow, Who

hath [contention] babling, wounds without cause? They
that tarry long at the wine, c. Contentions and
Wounds are the ordinary effects of drunken meet|ings:
when Reason is deposed, and Lust heated,
what will not men attempt? (2.) Scoff and re|proaches
of the ways and people of God. Psal. 69.
12. David was the Song of the Drunkards. (3.) It's
the great incendiary of Lust: You shall find rioting
and drunkenness joyned with chambering and
wantonness, Rom. 13. 13. Nunquam ego ebrium
castum putabo, saith Hierome, I will never think a
drunkard to be chaste. Solomon plainly tells us,
what the issue will be, Prov. 23. 33. Thine eyes shall
behold a strange woman, and thy heart shall utter perverse
things, speaking of the Drunkard. It may be called
Gad, for a troop followeth it. Hence one aptly calls
it, The Devils bridle, by which he turneth the sinner
which way he pleases: he that is overcome by it, can
overcome no other sin.
Arg. 9. But if none of the former Considerations
can prevail, I hope these two last may, unless all
sense and tenderness be lost. Consider therefore in
the 9th place, That Drunkards are in Scripture
marked out for Hell: the Characters of Death are
upon them. You shall find them pinioned with o|ther
Sons of death, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not,
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? Be not deceived: Neither Fornicaters, nor Idol|aters,
nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with Mankinde, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor [Drunkards,] nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Oh dreadful thunder|bolt!
He is not asleep but dead, that is not startled
at it. Lord, how are guilty sinners able to face such
a Text as this is! Oh Soul! Darst thou for a super|fluous
Cup adventure to drink a Cup of pure un|mixed

wrath? Oh think when the Wine sparkles in
the glass, and gives its colour, think, I say, what a
Cup of trembling is in the hand of the Lord for
thee. Thou wilt not now believe this; Oh but the
day is coming, when thou shalt know the price of
these brutish pleasures. Oh it will then sting like an
Adder. Ah! this short-lived beastly pleasure is the
price for which thou sellest Heaven, and rivers of
pleasure that are at Gods right hand.
Obj. But I hope I shall repent, and then this Text
can be no bar to my Salvation.
Sol. True, if God shall give thee Repentance, it
could not. But in the last place, to awaken thee
throughly, and startle thy secure Conscience, which
Sensuallity hath brawned and cauterized, let me tell
thee.
Arg. 10. That it is a sin out of whose power few
or none are ever rescued or reclaimed. On this
account it was that Saint Augustine called it the Pi
of Hell: he that is addicted to this Sin, becomes in|curable
(saith a Reverend Divine) for seldom, or
never, have I known a Drunkard re|called.Ames, de con p. 139.
And its power to hold the
soul in subjection to it, lies in two
things especially: (1) as it becomes
habitual; and habits are not easily broken; be
pleased to view an Example in the case, Prov. 23. 35.
They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not
sick; they have beaten me and I felt it not. When I
shall awake, I will seek it yet again. (2.) As it takes
away the heart, Hos. 4 11. that is, the understanding,
reason and ingenuity of a man, and so makes him un|capable
of being reclaimed by counsel. Upon this
account it was, that Abigail would not speak less or
more to Nabal, till the Wine was gone out of him,
1 Sam. 25. 36, 37. plainly intimating, that no

wholsome counsel can get in, till the Wine be gone
out. When one asked Cleostratus, whether he were
not ashamed to be drunken, he tartly replied; And
are not you ashamed to admonish a Drunkard? intimat|ing
that no wise man would cast away an admonition
upon such an one. And it not only renders them
uncapable of councel for the time, but by degrees it
besots and infatuates them; which is a very grievous
stroke from God upon them, making way to their
eternal ruine. So then you see upon the whole, what
a dangerous gulph the sin of Drunkenness is. I beg
you for the Lords sake, and by all the regard you
have to your souls, bodies, and estates, beware of it.
Oh consider these ten Arguments I have here pro|duced
against it. I should have proceeded to answer
the several Pleas and Excuses you have for it. But
I mind brevity, and shall shut up this first Caution,
with a very pertinent and ingenious Poem of Mr.
George Herbert, in his Temple.

Drink not the third glass, which thou canst not tame
When once it is within thee; but before
Mayst rule it as thou list, and pour the shame
which it will pour to thee, upon the floor.
It is most just to throw that on the ground,
Which would throw me there, if I kept the round.


He that is drunken may his Mother kill,
lie with his Sister; he hath lost the Reins;
Is outlaw'd by himself: all kind of ill
did with the liquor slide into the veins.
The Drunkard forfeits Man, and doth devest
All worldly right, save what he has by Beast.



Shall I to please anothers wine-sprung mind,
lose all my own? God has giv'n me a measure
Short of his Can, and Body: must I finde
a pain in that wherein he finds a pleasure?
Stay at the third glass; if thou lose thy hold,
Then thou art modest, but the wine grows bold.


If Reason move not Gallants, quit the room,
(all in a shipwrack shipt their several way.)
Let not a common Ruine thee entomb;
be not a Beast in courtesies, but stay;
Stay at the third Glass, or forgo the place;
VVine above all things doth Gods stamp deface.



II. CAUTION.
THe Second Evil I shall deal with, is the evil of
the Tongue, which, as St. Iames saith, is full
of deadly Poyson, Oathes, Curses, Blasphemies:
and this poyson it scatters up and down the
World in all places; an untamed member that
none can rule, Iam. 3. 7, 8. The fiercest of
beasts have been tamed by Man, (as the Apostle
there observes) which is a relique of his old supe|riority
and dominion over them; But this is an un|ruly
Member that none can tame, but he that made
it: no beast so fierce and crabbed as this is. It may
be, I may be bitten by it for my labour and indea|vours
to put a restraint upon it: but I shall adven|ture
it. My design is not to dishonour or exaspe|rate
you: But if my faithfulness to God and you
should accidentally do so, I cannot help that.
Friends, Providence oftentimes confines many
of you together within the narrow limits of a
Ship, where you have time enough, and if your

hearts were sanctified, many choice advantages of e|difying
one another. O what transcendent sub|jects
doth Providence daily present you with, to
take up your discourses! How many experiences of
extraordinary mercies and preservations have you
to relate to one another, and bless the Lord for!
Also, how many works of wonder do you daily be|hold,
who go down into the deeps? O what hea|venly
imployment is here for your Tongues! How
should they be talking of all his wonders! How
should you call upon each other, as David did, Psal.
66. 16. Come hither, and I will tell you what God hath
done for my soul, at such a time, in such an extremity.
How should you call upon one another, to pay the
vows your lips have uttered in your distress? Thus should
one provoke another to this Angelical Work, as one
lively Bird sets the whole Flock a Chirping.
But tell me, Sirs, Should a Man come abaord
you at Sea, and ask of you, as Christ did of those
two Disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24. 17. VVhat
manner of communication is this that ye have hy the way?
O what a sad account would he have from most of
you! It may be he should find one Iesting, and ano|ther
Swearing, a third Reviling Godliness and the Pro|fessors
of it, so that it would be a little Hell for a
serious Christian to be confined to your Society. This
is not (I am confident) the manner of all. We have
a company of more sober Seamen, and blessed be God
for them; but surely thus stands the case with most
of you. Oh what stuff is here from persons profes|sing
Christianity, and bordering close upon the con|fines
of Eternity, as you do!
It is not my purpose to write of all the diseases of
the Tongue; that would fill a Volume, and is incon|sistent
with my intended brevity. Who can re|count
the evils of the Tongue? The Apostle saith,

It is a world of Iniquity, Jam. 3. 6. And if there be a
world of Sin in one member, Who can number the
Sins of all the members? Laurentius reckons as ma|ny
sins of the Tongue, as there are Letters in the
Alphabet. And it is an observable Note that one
hath upon Rom. 3. 13, 14. That when Paul anato|mizeth
the natural Man there, he insisteth longer
upon the Organs of Speech, than all the other
members. Their throat is an open sepulchre, with their
tongues they have used deceit, the poyson of Asps is under
their Lips, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
But to be short, we find the Spirit of God in Scri|pture
comparing the Tongue to a Tree, Prov. 15.
4. A wholesome Tongue is a Tree of Life. And words
is the fruit of the Tree, Isa. 57. 12. I create the
fruit of the Lips. Some of these Trees bear preci|ous
fruits, and it is a lovely sight to behold them
laden with them in their seasons, Prov. 25. 11. A
word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver. Such a Tongue is a Tree of Life. Others
of these Trees bear evil Fruit, Grapes of Sodome, and
Clusters of Gomorrah. I shall onely insist upon two
sorts of these fruits, viz. (1.) Withered sapless
fruit; I mean, idle and unprofitable words. (2.)
Rotten and corrupt fruit; I mean, prophane Oathes,
and prophanations of the sacred Name of God. No
fruit in the world so apt to corrupt and taint, as
the fruits of the Lips. When it is so, the Scripture
calls it , corrupt r rotten communi|cation,
Ephes. 4. 29. To prevent this, the Spirit of
God prescribes an excellent way to season our words,
and keep them sweet and sound, that they may
neither wither nor become idle and sapless, nor pu|trifie
and become rotten, as prophane words are,
Col. 4. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, season|ed
with salt, that you may know how to answer every

man. Oh if the salt of Grace were once cast into
the fountain, the Heart, the streams must needs be|come
more savory and pleasant, as the waters of
Marah when they were healed. My present work
is to attempt the cure of this double evil, of idle
words, and prophane Oathes, whereof thousands a|mong
you are deeply guilty. I shall begin with
the first, viz.
1. IDLE WORDS: that is, useless Chat,
unprofitable Talk, that is not referred any way to
the glory of God: This is a common evil, and little
regarded by most men, but yet a sin of severer
aggravations than the most imagine. Light words
weigh heavy in Gods ballance.
Arg. 1. For first, the evil of them is exceedingly
aggravated by this: They abuse and prevert the
Tongue, that noble member, from that employ|ment
and use which God by the law of Creation
designed it to. God gave not to man the Organs
and power of Speech (which is his excellency above
the Beasts) to serve a passion, or vain humour, to
vent the froth and vanity of his spirit: but to extol
his Creator, and render him the praise of all his
admirable and glorious works. For though the
Creation be a curious well tuned Instrument, yet
man is the Musician that must touch it and make the
melody; this was the end of God in forming those
Instruments and Organs: but now hereby they are
subject to Satan and Lust, and employed to the
dishonour of God that made them. God is pleased
to suspend the power of Speech (as we see in Chil|dren)
till Reason begin to bud in them; they have
not the liberty of the one, till they have the use of
the other: which plainly shews, that God is not
willing to have our words run waste.
Arg. 2. It is a sinful wasting of our precious time,
and that puts a further aggravation upon it. Con|sider,
Sirs, the time of Life is but a little spot be|twixt
two eternities. The long-suffering God
wheels about those glorious Celestial Bodies over
your heads in a constant revolution, to beget time
for you; and the preciousness of every minute there|of
results from its use and end: It is intended and
afforded as a space to you to repent in, Rev. 2. 21.
And therefore great things depend upon it: no less
than your eternal Happiness or Misery, hangs upon
those precious opportunities. Every minute of it
hath an influence into Eternity. How would the
damned value one hour of it, if they might enjoy it!
The business you have to do in it, is of unspeakable
weight and concernment; this great work, this
Soul-work, and Eternity-work lies upon your hands,
you are cast into streights of time about it. And
if so, Oh what an evil is it in you, to waste it away
thus to no purpose!
Arg. 3. It's a sin that few are sensible of, as they
are of other sins, and therefore the more dangerous.
It's commonly committed, and that without checks
of Conscience. Other sins, as Murther and A|dultery,
though they be horrid sins, yet are but
seldom committed, and when they are, Conscience
is startled at the horridness of them: Few, except
they be prodigious wretches indeed, dare make light
of them. But now for idle and vain words, there
are inumerable swarms of these every day, and few
regard them. The intercourse betwixt the heart
and tongue is quick; they are quickly committed,
and as easily forgotten.
Arg. 4. And then 4thly, They have mischievous
effects upon others. How long doth an idle word
or foolish jest stick in mens minds, and become an

occasion of much sin to them? The froath and
vanity of thy Spirit, which thy tongue so freely vents
among thy vain Companions, may be working in
their minds, when thou art in the dust, and so be
transmitted from one to another; for unto that no
more is requisite than an objective existence of those
vain words in their memories. And thus mayst
thou be sinning in the persons of thy Companions,
when thou art turned into dust. And this is one
reason that Suarez gives for a general Judgment,
after men have past their particular judgment, im|mediately
after their death, Because (saith he) after
this, multitudes of sins by their means will be committed
in the world,, for which they must yet be judged to a fuller
measure of wrath. So that look as many of the
precious Servants of God now in glory, have left
many weighty and holy Sayings behind them, by
which many thousands of souls have been benefitted,
and God glorified on Earth, after they had left it
So thou leavest that vanity upon the mind of others
behind thee, by which he may be dishonoured to ma|ny
generations.
And then 2. For PROPHANE OATHES, th
corrupt fruit of a graceless heart; Oh how common
are these among you! yea, the habit of swearing 
so strengthened in some, that they have lost all Sens
and Conscience of the sin. Now, Oh that I migh
prevail with you to repent of this wickedness, an
break the force of this customary evil among you
Will you but give me the reading of a few page
more; and weigh with the reason of men, what yo
read? If you will not hearken to counsel, it is a fat
sign, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. and you shall mourn for th
obstinacy hereafter, Prov. 5. 12, 13. Desperate
that evil that scorns the remedy. And if you ha
patience to read it, the Lord give you an heart 

consider what you read, and obey the Counsels of
God; or else it were better thine eyes had never
een these lines. Well then, I beseech you con|sider,
Arg. 1. That prophane Oathes are an high abuse
of the dreadful and sacred Name of God, which
should neither be spoken or thought of without the
eepest awe and reverence. It is the taking of that
acred Name in vain, Exod. 20. 7. Now God is
xceeding tender and jealous over his Name: it is
ear to him: his Name is dreadful and glorious,
Malac. 1. 14. I am a great King, and my Name is
readful among the Heathens. The Heathen would
ot ordinarily mention the names of such as they
everenced. Suetonius saith, that Augustus pro|ibited
the common use of his name: he thought it
 indignity to have his name tost up and down in
very one's mouth. Yea, saies Dr. Willet on Exod.
. it was a use among them to keep secret such
ames as they would have in reverence. They durst
ot mention the name of Demogorgon, whom they
eld to be the first God: They thought when he
as named, the earth would tremble. Also the
me of Murcurius Trismegistus was very sparingly
ed, because of that reverence the people had for
. Now consider, shall poor worms be so tender
 preserving the reverence of their names? Shall
 Heathens dare to use the names of their Idols;
 shall the sacred and dreadful name of the true
 be thus bandied up and down by tongues of his
 Creatures? Will not God be avenged for these
ses of his Name? Be confident, it shall one day 
sanctified upon you in judgment, because ye did
 sanctifie it according to your duty.
Arg. 2. Swearing is a part of the Worship of
, and therefore prophane swearing can be no

less than the profanation of his worship, and robbing
him of all the glory he has thereby, Deut. 6. 13.
Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
shalt swear by his Name. So Jer. 4. 2. Thou shal
swear, the Lord liveth, in Truth, in Iudgment, and 
Righteousness. If a man swear by God after thi
manner, God is exceedingly glorified thereby
Now that you may see what revenue of Glory Go
hath from this part of his worship, and how it be|omes
a part of Divine Worship; you must know
That an Oath is nothing else, but The asking o
desiring a Divine Testimony, for the confirmation of th
truth of our testimony. Heb. 6. 16. For men veril
swear by the greater, and an Oath for [confirmation]
is to them an end of all strife. The corruption o
humane nature by the fall, has made man such a fals
and ickle creature, that his single testimony canno
be sufficient Security for another, (especially i
weighty Cases) to rest upon: and therefore i
swearing, he calleth od for a witness of the trut
of that he affirms, or promiseth. I say, calleth Go
to be a witness of the truth of what he saith, becau
he is Truth it self, and cannot lie, Heb. 6. 18. No
this calling for, or asking of a Testimony from Go
makes an Oath become a part of Gods Worshi
and gives him a great deal of Glory and Honour
For hereby he that sweareth, acknowledgeth 
Omnisciency, and Infallible Truth and Righteousne
His Omnisciency is acknowledged; for by this appe
to Him, we imply and acknowledge him to be 
Searcher of the hearts and reins; that he knows 
secret intents and meaning of our spirits. His 
preme and Infallible Truth is also acknowledged; 
this is manifestly carried in an Oath, That thoug
am a false and deceitful Creature, and my affirmati
cannot obtain universal and full credence, yet

that is greater than I, by whose Name I swear, cannot
deceive. And lastly, his Righteousness is acknow|ledged
in an Oath: for he that sweareth doth either
expresly or implicitly put himself under the curse and
wrath of God, if he swear falsely, Every Oath hath
n execration or imprecation in it, Neh. 10. 29.
They entered into a curse and an oath to walk in Gods law.
And so 2 Cor. 1. 23. I call God for a record upon
my soul. And the usual form in the Old Testament
was, The Lord do so to me, and more also. Now hereby
God hath the Glory of his Righteousnes and Justice
given him by the Creature, and therefore it is a
hoice part of the Divine Worship, or of that hom|age
which a creature oweth to his God. And if this
e so, then how easily may the sin of rash and pro|ane
Oaths be hence argued and aggravated? The
more excellet any thing is by an institution of God,
y so much more horrid and abominable is the abuse
hereof. O how often is the dreadful Majesty of
Heaven and Earth called to witness to frivolous
hings! and oft to be a witness of our rage and fu|y!
as 1 Sam. 14. 39. Is it a light thing to rob him
of his peculiar Glory, and subject poor souls to his
urse and wrath, who has said, He will be a swift wit|ess
against you? Mal. 3. 5. Your tongues are nimble
 committing this sin, and God will be swift in pun|shing
for it.
Arg. 3. It is a sin which God hath severely threatn|d
to punish, and that with temporal and corporal
lagues: For by reason of Oaths, the land mourns, Hos.
. 2, 3. That is, it brings the heavy Judgment of
God upon whole Nations, under which they shall
ourn. And in Zech. 5. 2, 3, 4. you have there
 Roll of cuses, (i. e.) a Catalogue of judgments and
oes, the length thereof twenty Cubits (i. e. ten yards.)
o set out the multitude of woes contained in it

it's a long Catalogue: and A flying Rill, to denote
the swiftness of it; it flyes towards the house of the
Swearer, it makes haste. The Judgments that are
written in it linger not, but are even in pain to be
delivered. And this flying Roll full of dreadful
Woes, flyes and enters into the house of the Swear|er:
and it shall therein remain, saith the Lord, it shall
cleave to his family; none shall claw off these woes
from him: And it shall consume the Timber thereof,
and the Stones thereof, (i. e.) bring utter subver|tion,
ruine, and desolation to his House. O dread|ful
sin! What a desolation doth it make! Your
Mouths are full of Oathes, and your Houses shall be
full of Curses. Wo to that wretched Family into
which this flying Roll shall enter; Wo, I say, to the
wretched Inhabitants thereof. The Curse of the Lord
(saith Solomon) is in the house of the wicked; but He
blesseth the [habitation] of the just, Prov. 3. 33. Tu|guriolum,
(i. e.) saith Mercer, his poor little Tene|ment
or Cottage. There is a Blessing, the promises
like Clouds of Blessing, dwell over it, and drop mer|cies
on it: but a Curse is in the house of the wicked.
Ah, how many stately Mansious are there, in which
little other language but Oathes and Curses are
heard! and these are as so much Gunpowder laid
under the foundation of them, which when Justice
shall set fire to, Oh what work will it make! Wo
to the Inhabitants thereof. Well then, break off
this sin by Repentance, unless you intend to ruine
your Families, and bring all the Curses of God into
your Houses. If you have no pity for your selves, yet
pity your Posterity; have mercy for your Wives and
Children, don't ruine all for the indulgence of a lust
Arg. 4. But that is not all; It brings Soul-judg|ments
and spiritual plagues upon you: It brings Hel
along with it. And if thou be not afraid to
sin, yet methinks thou shouldst be afraid to burn

if the love of God can work nothing upon thy
brawny heart, yet methinks the Terrors of the Lord
should startle and affright it. To this purpose, I
beseech you, weigh these Scriptures; and methinks,
unless God hath lost all his Authority with you, and
Hell all its Terrors, it should startle you. The first
is that dreadful Scripture, James 5. 12. But above
all things, my Brethen, swear nat; neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, neither by any other oath, but let your
yea, be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into [Con|demnation.]
O view this Text seriously. Methinks
it should be like the ingers that came forth and
wrote upon the wall, that dreadful Sentence that
changed the Countenance of a King, and that in the
height of a frolick humour, and made his Knees smite
together. Mark, [Above all things] a form of ve|hemency
and earnestness, like that, Ephes. 6. 16.
But above all, taking the shield af Faith. As Faith
hath a prelation there before all the Graces, so Swear|ing
here before all other Vices. [Swear not] (i. e.)
vainly, rashly, profanely; for otherwise 'tis a lawful
thing, and a part of Gods worship, as I have shew|ed:
but swear not vain Oaths, by the Creatures,
Heaven, or Earth, c. Which is to advance the crea|ture
into the room of God. A sin to which the Jews
were much addicted. But, Let your yea, be yea! and
nay, nay? (i. e.) accustom your selves to short and
plain Affirmations and Negations, to a simple and
candid expression of your minds. And the thunder|ing
Argument that backs it, is this; [lest ye fall into
Condemnation] (i. e.) lest for these things the Judge
of Heaven and Earth pass a Sentence of condemnati|on
to Hell upon you. Oh Sirs Dare you touch with
this hot iron? Dare you from henceforward commit
that Sin, that you know will bring you under the
condemnation and judgment of God? Do you know

what it is for a soul to be cast at Gods bar? Did you
never see a poor malefacter tried at the Assizes, and
observe how his face gathers paleness, how his Legs
tremble, and Death displays its colours in his cheeks,
when sentence is given upon him? But what's that
to Gods condemnation? What is a Gallous to Hell?
Another Text I would commmend to your consider|ation
is that Exod. 20. 7. The Lord will not hold him
guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. Where vain
Oathes are especially included. Now what doth
God mean, when He saith, He will not hold him
guiltless? The meaning is plain, his sins shall be
reckoned and imputed to him, they shall lie upon
his Soul; he shall be bound over to answer God for
them. O terrible sentence! What Soul can bear it,
or stand before it! Blessed is the man (saith David)
to whom the Lord imputeth not inquity. Surely then,
cursed is that man, to whom God will impute them.
And to the Swearer they shall all be imputed, if he
break not off his sin by repentance, and get a Christ the
sooner. O Soul! How dar'st thou think of going
before the Lord with the guilt of all thy sins upon
thee? When Christ would administer the very spi|rit
of Joy in one sentence to a poor Sinner, Matth.
9. 4. He said, Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiv|en.
And when God would contract the sum of all
misery into one word, He saith, His sins shall lie down
with him in the dust, Job 20. 11. Ah soul! One of
these days thou shalt be laid on thy Death-bed, or
see the waves that shall entomb thee leaping and
roaring upon every side; and then thou wilt surely
have other thoughts of the happiness that lies in re|mission
of sin, than thou hast now. Observe the
most incorrigible Sinner then; hark how he sighs,
and groans, and cries; Ah Lord! and must I die?
And then see how the tears trickle down his Cheeks,

and his heart ready to burst within him. Why,
what's the matter? Oh, the Lord will not pardon
him, he holds him guilty. If he were sure his sins
were forgiven, then he could die; but oh! to appear
before the Lord in them, appals him, daunts him,
kills the very heart of him. He would fain cry for
mercy, but Conscience stops his mouth. Oh, saith
Conscience, how canst thou move that tongue to God
in prayer for mercy, that hath so often rent and torn
his glorious Name, by Oaths and Curses? Sirs! I
pray you, do not make light of these things: they
will look wishly upon you one of these days, except ye
prevent it by sound conversation.
Arg. 5. And then lastly, to name no more, I pray
you consider, that a custom of vain words and pro|phane
Oaths, is as plain an indication and discovery of
an unregenerate Soul, as any in the world. This is
a sure ign thou art none of Christs, nor hast any
thing to do with the promises and priviledges of his
people: for by this the Scripture distinguisheth the
state of Saints and Sinners, Eccl. 9. 2. There is one
event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the clean,
and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth and to him that
sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner: and he that
sweareth, as he that feareth an Oath. Mark; he that
sweareth, and he that feareth an Oath, do as mani|festly
distinguish the Children of God from wicked
men, as clean and unclean, righteous and wicked,
sacrificing and not sacrificing This fruit of the tongue
plainly shews what the tree is that bears it, Isai. 2. 6.
The vile person will speak of villany; and out of the abund|ance
of the heart, the mouth speaks. Loquere, ut videam,
said one; Speak, that I may see what you are. Look
what is in the heart that is vented by the Tongue:
where the treasures of Grace are in the Heart,
words ministring Grace will be in the Lips, Psal.

37. 30. The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom, and
his tongue talketh of Iudgment; for the law of the Lord
is in his heart. To this sense we must understand
that Scripture, att. 12. 27. By thy words thou shalt
be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.
Certainly, Justification and Condemnation, in the
day of Judgment, shall not pass upon us meerly
for the good or bad words we have spoken; but
according to the state of the Person, and frame of
the heart. But the meaning is, that our words
shall justifie or condemn us in that day, as evidence
of the state and frame of the Soul. We use to say,
such Witnesses hang'd a man; the meaning is, the
Evidence they gave cast and condemned him. O
think seriously of this; if words evidence the state
of the Soul, what an woful state must thy Soul
needs be in, whose mouth overflows with Oathes
and Curses! How many witnesses will be brought
in, to cast thee in the great Day? Your own tongue
shall then fall upon you, as the expression is, Psal.
64, 8. And out of your own mouth, God will fetch
abundant evidence to condemn you. And thus I
have opened unto you the evil of vain words, and
prophane Oathes; and presented to your view their
several aggravations. If by these things there be a
relenting pang upon thy heart, and a serious resolu|tion
of reformation, then I shall commend these few
helps or means to thy perusal, and conclude this Head.
And the first help is this.
Help. 1. Seriously fix in thy thoughts that Scri|pture,
Matth. 12. 36. But I say unto you, that eve|ry
idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give an
account thereof in the day of Iudgment. Oh let it soun
in thine ears day and night! Oh ponder them in thy
heart. [I say unto you] I that have always been
in the Fathers bosome, and do fully know his mind,
I that am constituted the Judge of quick and dead,

and do fully understand the rule of Judgment; and the
whole process thereof, I say, and do assure you,
that [every idle word that men shall speak,] (i. e.)
every word that hath not a tendency and reference
to the Glory of God though there be no other obli|quity
or evil in them than this, that they want a
good end. How much more then scurrilous Words,
bloody Oathes and Blasphemies! [Men shall give
an account thereof] that is, shall be cast and condemn|ed
to suffer the wrath of God for them; as appears
by that parallel Scripture, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5. For as
the Learned observe, there is plainly a Matalepsis in
these words; The Antecedent, to give an account, is put
for the Consequent, punishment, and condemnation to
hell fire; the certainty whereof admits but of this
one exception, viz. intervenient repentance, or a
pardon obtained through the blood of Christ here,
before you be presented at that judgment-seat. Oh
then, what a bridle should this Text be to thy extra|vagant
tongue! I remember Hierom was wont to say,
Whether I eat or drink, or whatever I do, methinks I
still hear the sound of these words in mine ear, Arise ye
dead, and come to judgment. O that the sound of the
words may be always in your ears!
Help. 2. Consider before you speak and be not
rash to utter words without knowledge. He th
speaks what he thinks not, speaks Hipocitically 
he that thinks not what to speak, sperks inconsi|rately.
You have cause to weigh your words, before
you deliver them by your tongue; for whether you
do, or do not, the Lord pondereth them. Records
are kept of them; else you could not be called to an
account for them, as I shewed you you must.
Help. 3. Resign up your Tongues to God every
day, and beg him to guide and keep it. So did Da|vid,
Psal. 141. 3. Set a watch, O Lord before my mouth,

and keep thou the door of my lips. Beg him to keep
you from provocations and temptations; or if you
fall into them, intreat him for strength to rule your
spirits in them, that you may not be conquered
by temptations.
Help. 4. But above all, labour to get your Souls
cleansed and purified by Faith, possest with saving
and gracious Principles: All other means will be in|effectual
without this. Oh see the vileness of thy
nature, and the necessity of a change to pass upon it
First make the tree good, and then his fruit good: a
new Nature will produce new words and actions. To
binde your souls with Vows and resolutions, while
you are strangers to a regenerate work, is to bind
Sampson with green withs, whilst his locks remain
upon his head. I will shut up this with the Advice
of that divine Poet, Mr. George Herbert it may be it
may affect thee, and run in thy thoughts when thou
art alone.

Take not his Name, who made thy mouth, in vain;
it gets thee nothing, and hath no excuse.
Lust and wine, plead a pleasure; avarice gain:
but the cheap Swearer, though his open sluce,
Lets his Soul run for nought, as little fearing.
VVere I an Epicure, I could hate swearing.


VVhen thou dost tell another jest, therein
Omit the Oathes, which true VVit cannot need;
Pick out of tales the mirth, but not the sin.
He pares his apple, that will cleanly feed.
Play not away the virtue of that Name,
VVhich is thy best stake, when grief makes thee tame.


The cheapest sins most dearly punisht are,
because to shon them also is so cheap:
For we have wit to mark them, and to spare.
O crumble not away thy Souls fair heap.
If thou wilt die, the gates of Hell are broad.
Pride, and full sins, have made the way a road.



III. CAUTION.
THe next danger I shall give you warning of, is
the sin of Vncleanness; with which, I fear, too
many of the rude and looser sort of Sea-men defile
themselves; and possibly, the temptations to this
sin are advantaged, and strengthened upon them
more than others, by their condition and employ|ments.
Let no Man be offended that I here give
warning of this evil; I intend to asperse no Man's
person, nor raise up jealousie against any: but would
faithfully discharge my duty to all, and that in all
things. It was the complaint of Salvi|an
many hundred years ago,Guber, Dei, lib. 4. salv. that he
could not speak against the Vices of men,
but one or other would thus object,
There he meant me, he hit me; and so storm and fret.
Alas (as he replieth) it is not we that speak to you,
but your own Conscience; we speak to the Order, but
Conscience speaks to the Person. I shall use no other
Apology in this case. That this Sin is a dreadful
Gulph, a Quick-sand that hath suck'd and destroy|ed
thousands, is truly apparent, both from Scri|pture
and Experience. Solomon tells us, Prov. 22.
14. That it is a deep ditch, into which such as are ab|horred
of the Lord shall fall. Oh the multitudes of
dead that are there! And if so, I cannot in duty
to God, or love to you, be silent, where the
danger is so great. It is both needless, and besides
my intention, here to insist largely upon the expli|cation

of the particulars in which uncleanness is
distributed: the more ordinary and common sins
of this kind are known by the names of Adultery
and Fornication: the latter is, when single persons
come together, out of the state of marriage; the for|mer
is, when at least one of the persons committing
uncleanness is contracted in marriage. This now is
the evil I shall warn you of. And that thou mayst
never fall into this pit, I shall endeavour to fence
and hedge up thy way to it, by these ensuing Argu|ments:
And Oh that the light of every Argu|ment
may be powerfully reflected upon your Con|science!
Many men are very wise in generals, but
very vain , in the reasonings, or ima|ginations,
as the Apostle calls them, Rom. 1. 22.
(i. e.) in their practical inferences. They are good
at speculation, but bunglers at application. But it
is truth in the particulars, that, like an hot Iron,
pierces; and Oh that you might find these to be
such in your Soul! To that end, consider.
Arg. 1. The names and titles by which this sin is
known in scripture, are very vile and base. The
Spirit of God, doubtless, hath put such odious names
upon it, on purpose to deter and affright men from
it. In general, it's called Lust; and so (as one
notes) it beareth the name of its mother. It is
Vncleanness in the abstract, Nub. 5. 19. Filthiness
it self; An abomination; Ezek. 22. 11. And they
that commit are called abominable, Revel. 21. 8.
Varro saith, the word imports that which is not
lawful to mention; or rather, abominable persons
are such as are not fit for the society of men, such as
should be usht out of all mens company: They are
rather to be reckoned to beasts than man. Yea,
the Scripture compares them to the filthiest of beasts.
even to Dogs: When Ishbosheth charged this sin up|on

Abner, 2 Sam. 3. 8. Am I a Dogs head, (saith
he) that thou chargest me with a fault concerning this
woman? And in Deut. 23. 18. The hire of a whore,
and the price of a dog, are put together. The ex|pression
of this lust in words or gesture, is called
neighing, Jer. 5. 8. Even as fed horses do, that
scatter their lust promiscuously. Or if the Scripture
speaks of them as men, yet it allows them but the
external shape of men, not the undestanding of
men. Among the Jews they were called Fools in
Israel, 2 Sam. 13. 13. and so Prov. 6. 32. Whoso
committeth adultery with a woman, lacketh understand|ing.
And sinners, Luke 7. 37. And behold a woman
that was a [inner;] that is, an eminent notorious
sinner: by which term, the Scripture deciphers an
unclean person; as if among sinners there were none
of such a prodigious stature in sin as they. And we
find that when the spirit of God would set forth any
sin by an odious name, he calls it Adultery; so
Idolatry is called Adultery, Ezek. 16. 32. And in|deed
this spiritual and corporal Adultery, often|times
are found in the same persons. They that
give themselves up to the one are by a righteous
hand of God given up to the other, as it is too
manifestly and frequently exemplified in the World.
So earthly-mindedness hath this name put upon it,
o purpose to affright men from it, Iam. 4. 4.
Now certainly, God would never borrow the name
of this sin to set out the evil of other sins, if it were
not most vile and abominable. It's call'd the sin of
the Gentiles, or heathen, 1 Thes. 4. 5. And oh that
we could say, it were only among them that know
not God! Now then, are you able to look these
Scriptures in the face, and not blush? Oh what a
sin is this! Art thou willing to be ranked with Fools,
Dogs, Sinners, Heathens, and take thy lot with them?

God hath planted that affection of shame in thy
nature, to be as a guard against such filthy lusts; it's
a sin that hath filthiness enough in it, to defile the
tongue that mentions it, Ephes. 5. 3.
Arg. 2. It is a sin that the God of Heaven hath
often prohibited, and severely condemned in the
Word, which abundantly declares his abhorrence of
it. You have prohibition upon prohibition, and
threatning upon threatning in the Word against it.
Exod. 20. 14. Thou shalt not commit adultery. This
was delivered upon Mount Sinai, with the greatest
solemnity and terrour, by the mouth of God him|self.
Turn to, and ponder the following Scriptures,
among many others, Prov. 5. 2, 3, 4. Acts 5. 29.
Rom. 1. 24, 29. Rom. 13. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14, 15,
16, 18. 2 Cor. 12. 21. Gal. 5. 29. Ephes. 5. 3. Col.
3. 5. 1 Thes.  2, 3, 4, 5. Heb. 12. 16. Heb. 13. 4.
All these, with many others, are the true sayings of
God; By them thou shalt be tryed in the last day.
Now consider how terrible it will be to have so
many words of God, and such terrible ones too, as
most of those are, to be brought in and pleaded
against thy Soul in that day: mountains and hills
may depart, but these words shall not depart;
Heven and Earth shall pass away, but not one tittle
of the Word shall pass away. Believe it, Sinner,
as sure as the Heavens are over thy head, and the
Earth under thy seet, they shall one day take hold
of thee, though we poor worms who plead them
with thee, die and perish, Zech. 1. 5, 6. The Lord
tells us it shall not fall to the ground. Which is a
borrowed speech from a Dart that is flung with a
weak hand; it goes not home to the mark, but falls
to the ground by the way. None of these words
shall so fall to the ground.
Arg. 3. It is a sin that defiles and destroys the
body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. He that committeth adultery,
sinneth against his own body. In most other sins the
body is but the Instrument, here it is the Object against
which the sin is committed; that body of thine,
which should be the Temple of the holy Ghost, is
turned into a stye of filthiness; yea, it not only
defiles, but destroys it. Iob calls it a fire that burneth
to destruction, Iob 31. 12. or as the Septuagint reads
it, a fire that burneth in all the Members. It is a
sin that God hath plagued with strange and terrible
diseases; that Morbus Gallicus, and sudor Anglicus,
and that Plica Polonica whereof you may read in
Bolton's four last things, page 30. and Sclater on
Rom. 1. 30. These were judgments sent immediately
by Gods own hand, to correct the new sins and
enormities of the world; for they seem to put the
best Physicians besides their Books. Oh how terrible
is it to lie groaning under the sad effects of this
sin? As Solomon tells us, Prov. 5. 11. And thou
mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are con|sumed.
To this sense some expound that terrible
Text, Heb. 13. 4. Marriage is honourable in all, and
the bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge: (i. e.) with some remarkable judg|ment
inflicted on them in this world: if it escape
the punishment of men, it shall not escape the
vengeance of God. Ah! with what comfort may
a man lie down upon a sick bed, when the sickness
can be looked upon as a Fatherly Visitation coming
in Mercy? But thou that shortenest thy life, and
bringest sickness on thy self by such a sin, art the
Devils Martyr; and to whom canst thou turn in
such a day for comfort?
Arg. 4. Consider what an indelible blot it is to
thy nature, which can never be wiped away: though

thou escape with thy life, yet as one says, thou shalt
be burnt in the hand, yea, branded in the forehead.
What a foul scar is that upon the face of David him|self,
which abides to this day? He was upright in all
things, save in the matter of Uriah. And how was
he slighted by his own Children and servants after
he had committed this sin? Compare 1 Sam. 2. 30.
with 2 Sam. 12. 10, 11. A wound and dishonour shall
he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away. This
is to give thine honour to another, Prov. 5. 9. The
shame and reproach attending it, should be a pre|servative
from it. Indeed the Devil tempts to it by
hopes of secresie and concealment; but though many
other sins lie hid, and possibly shall never come to
light, until that day of manifestation of all hidden
things, yet this is a sin that is most usually discover|ed.
Under the Law, Cod appointed an extraordinary
way for the discovery of it, Numb. 5. 13. And to
this day the Providence of God doth often very
strangely bring it to light, though it be a deed of
darkness. The Lord hath many times brought such
persons either by terrors of Conscience, Phrensie, or
some other means, to be the publishers and pro|claimers
of their own shame. Yea, observe this,
saith Reverend Mr. Hildersham on the Fourth of
Iohn, even those that are most cunning to conceal
and hide it from the eyes of the world, yet through
the just judgment of God, every one suspects and con|demns
them for it, this dashes in pieces, at one
stroke, that Vessel in which the precious Oyntment
of a good name is carried. A fool in Israel shall be
thy title; and even Children shall point at thee.
Arg. 5. It scatters thy substance, und roots up the
foundation of thy state. Iob 31. 12. It roots up all
the increase. Strangers shall be filled with thy wealth,
and thy labours shall be in the house of a stranger. Prov.

5. 10. For by means of a whorish woman, a man is
brought to a morsel of bread. Prov. 6. 26. It gives
rags for its Livery (saith one:) and though it be
furthered by the fulness, yet it's followed with a morsel
of bread. This is one of those temporal Judgments
with which God punishes the unclean person in this
life. The word Delilah, which is the name of an
Harlot, is conceived to come from a root that
signifiesto exhaust, drain, or draw dry. This sin
will quickly exhaust the fullest estate; and oh what
a dreadful thing will this be, when God shall require
an account of thy Stewardship in the great day! How
righteous is it, that that man should be fuel to the
wrath of God, whose health and wealth have been
so much fuel to maintain the flame of Lust! Oh how
lavish of their estates are sinners to satisfie their
Lusts! If the Members of Christ be sick, or in Prison,
they may there perish and starve, before they will
relieve them; but to obtain their Lusts, Oh how ex|pensive!
Ask me never so much and I will give it, said
Sechem, Gen. 34. 12. Ask what thou wilt, and it
shall be given thee, said Herod to the daughter of his
Herodias. Well, you are liberal in spending trea|sures
upon you lusts; and believe it, God will spend
treasures of wrath to punish you for your Lusts. It
had been a thousand times better for thee, thou hadst
never had an estate, that thou hadst begg'd thy
bread from door to door, than to have such a sad
reckoning as thou shalt shortly have for it.
Arg. 6. Oh stand off from this sin, because it is a
pit out of which very few have been recovered that
have fallen therein. Few are the footsteps of re|turners
from this den. The longer a man lives in
it, the less power he hath to leave it. It is not only
a damning, but an infatuating sin. The danger of
falling this way must needs be great, and the fall

very desperate, because few that fall into it do ever
rise again. I shall lay two very terrible Scriptures
before you to this purpose, either of them enough
to drive thee speedily to Christ, or to drive thee out
of thy wits: the one is that, Eccles. 7. 26. And I
find more bitter than death, the woman whose heart is
snares and nets, and whose hands are bands: Whoso plea|seth
God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be
taken by her. The Argument which the spirit of
God uses here to disswade from this Sin, is taken
from the subject; they that fall into it, for the most
part, are persons in whom God has no delight, and
so in judgment are delivered up to it, and never re|covered
by Grace from it. The other is that in
Prov. 22. 14. The mouth of a strange woman is a deep
pit; he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.
Oh terrible word! able to daunt the heart of the
the securest sinner; your whores embrace you, yea,
but God abhors you; you have their love, oh but you
are under Gods hatred! What say you to these two
Scriptures? If you are not Athiests, methinks such
a word from the mouth of God, should strike like a
Dart through thy Soul. And upon this account it
is that they never are recover'd, because God has no
delight in them. If this be not enough, view one
Scripture more, Prov. 2. 18, 19. For her house in|clineth
unto Death, and her paths unto the Dead: None
that go to her reture again, neither take they hold of the
paths of life. Reader, if thou be a person addicted
to this sin, go thy ways, and think seriously what a
case thou art in. None return again (i. e.) a very
few of many: the examples of such as have been re|covered
are very rare. Pliny tells us, the Mermaids
are commonly seen in green Meadows, and have in|chanting
Voices; but there are always found heaps
of dead mens bones lying by them. This may be

but a fabulous Story: But I am sure it is true of the
Harlot, whose Syren-Songs have allured thousands to
their inevitable destruction. It's a captivating sin,
that leads away the sinner in triumph; they cannot
deliver their souls: Prov. 7. 22. He goeth after her
straightway, as an Ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a
[Fool] to the correction of the stocks. Mark; a Fool:
it dementates and befools men, takes away their
understanding: the Septuagint renders it, ,
As a dog to the Collar, or, like as we use
to say, a dog in a string. I have read of one, that
having by this sin wasted his body, was told by Phy|sitians,
that except he left it, he would quickly lose
his Eyes; he answered, If it be so, then Vale lumen
amicum, Farewel sweet light. And I remember
Luther writes of a certain Nobleman in his Country,
who was so besotted with the sin of Whoredome,
that he was not ashamed to say, That if he might
live here for ever, and be carried from one stews to
another, he would never desire any other Heaven.
The greatest Conquerors that have subdued King|doms,
and scorned to be commanded by any, have
been miserably enslaved and captivated by this Lust.
O think sadly upon this argument; God often gives
them up to Impenitency, and will not spend a rod
upon them to reclaim them. See Hos. 4. 14. Revel.
22. 11.
Arg. 7. And then in the 7th place, Those few
that have been recovered by Repentance out of it,
oh how bitter hath God made it to their souls! I
find it (saith Solomon) more bitter than death, Eccles.
7. 26. Death is a very bitter thing; Oh what a
struggling and reluctance is there in Nature against
it? But this is more bitter. Poor David found it
so, when he roared under those bloody lashes of Con|science
for it, in Psalm 51. Ah! when the Lord

shall open the poor Sinner's eyes, to see the horrid
guilt he hath hereby contracted upon his own poor
soul, it will haunt him as a Ghost, day and night, and
terrifie his soul with dreadful forms and representa|tions.
O dear-bought pleasure, if this were all it
should cost. What is now become of the pleasure of
sin? Oh! what gall and wormwood wilt thou taste,
when once the Lord shall bring thee to a sight of it,
the Hebrew word for Repentance [Nacham] and
the Greek word [Metamelia] the one signifies an
irking of the Soul, and the other signifies After grief.
Yea, it is called A renting of the heart, as if it were
torn in pieces in a mans breast. Ask such a poor
soul, what it thinks of such Courses now? Oh now
it loaths, abhors it self for them. Ask him, if he
dare sin in that kind again? You may as well ask me
(will he answer) whether I will thrust my hand in|to
the fire. Oh it breeds an indignation in him a|gainst
himself. That word [] 2 Cor. 7.
11. signifies the rising of the stomach with very rage,
and being sick with anger. Religious wrath is the
fiercest wrath. Oh what a furnace is the breast of
the poor penitent! what fumes, what heats do a|bound
in it, whilst the sin is even before him, and
the sense of guilt upon him? One night of carnal
pleasure will keep thee many days and nights upon
the rack of horrour, if ever God give thee repent|ance
unto life.
Arg. 8. And if thou never repent, as indeed but
ew do that fall into this sin, then consider how God
will follow thee with eternal vengeance. Thou shalt
have flaming Fire for burning Lust. This is a sin
that hath a scent of fire and brimstone with it,
wherever you meet with it in Scripture. The
Harlots guests are lodged in the depths of Hell, Prov.
9. 18. No more perfumed beds; they must now

lie down in flames. Whoremongers shall have their
part in the Lake that burneth with fire and brim|stone;
which is the second death, Rev. 21. 1. Such
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God and Christ,
1 Cor. 6. 9. No Dog shall come into the new Ieru|salem;
there shall in no wise enter in any thing that
defileth, or that worketh abomination. You have
spent your strength upon sin, and now God sets him|self
a work to shew the glory of his Power in punish|ing,
Rom. 9. 22. The wrath of God is transacted
upon them in Hell by his own immediate hand, Hb.
10. 30. Because no Creature is strong enough to
convey all his wrath, and it must all be poured out
upon them, therefore he himself will torment them
for ever with his own immediate Power; now he
will stir up all his wrath, and sinners shall know the
price of their pleasures. The punishment of Sodom,
is a little Map of Hell, as I may say. Oh how ter|rible
a day was that upon those unclean wretches!
but that fire was not of many days continuance;
when it had consumed them, and their houses, it
went out for want of matter: but here, the breath
of the Lord like a stream of brimstone, kindles it.
The pleasure was quickly gone, but the sting and
torment abide for ever. Who knoweth the power of his
anger? Even according to his fear, so is his wrath,
Psal. 90. 11. Oh consider, how will his Almighty
Power rack and torment thee! Think on this, when
sin comes with a smiling face towards thee in the
temptation. Oh think! If the humane nature of
Christ recoyled, when his cup of Wrath was given
him to drink; if he were fore amazed at it, how
shalt thou a poor worm, bear and grapple with it
for ever?
Arg. 9. Consider further, how closely soever thou
carriest thy wickedness in this world, tho it should

never be discovered here, yet there is a day coming
when all will out, and that before Angels and men.
God will rip up thy secret sins, in the face of that
great Congregation at the day of judgment: then
that which was done in secret shall be proclaim|ed
as upon the house-top, Luke 12. 3. Then God
will judge the [secrets] of men, Rom. 2. 16.
the hidden things of darkness will be brought into the
open light. Sinner, there will be no sculking for thee
in the Grave, no declining this Bar; thou refu|sedst
indeed to come to the Throne of Grace, when
God invited thee, but there will be no refusing to
appear before the Bar of Iustice, when Christ shall
summon thee. And as thou canst not decline ap|pearance,
so neither canst thou then palliate and
hide thy wickedness any longer: for then shall the
Books be opened; the Book of God's Omniscience,
and the Book of thine own Conscience, wherein all
thy secret Villany is recorded; for though it cea|sed
to speak to thee, yet it ceased not to write and
record thy actions. If thy shameful sins should be
divulged now, it would make thee tear off thy hair
in indignation; but then all will be discovered. An|gels
and men shall point at thee, and say, Lo, this
is the Man, this is he that carried it so smoothly in
in the world. Mr. Thomas Fuller relates a story of
Ottocar King of Bohemia, who refusing to do his homage
to Rodolphus the first, Emperour, being at last sorely
chastised with war, condescended to do him homage pri|vately
in a Tent: but the Tent was so contrived by the
Emperours Servants, (saith the Historian) that by draw|ing
one cord it was all taken away, and so Ottocar pre|sented
on his knees, doing Homage to the Emperour, in
the view of three Armies. O Sirs, you think to carry
it closely, you wait for the Twilight: that none may
see you; but alas! it will be to no end, this day will

discover it; and then what confusion and everlasting
shame will cover thee! Will not this work
then?
Arg. 10. Lastly, consider but one thing more,
and I have done. By this sin thou dost not only damn
thine own soul but, drawest another to hell with thee.
This sin is not as a single bullet that kills but one,
but as a chain-shot, it kills many, two at least, un|less
God give repentance. And if he should give
thee repentance, yet the other party may never re|pent,
and so perish for ever through thy wickedness;
and oh, what a sad consideration will that be to thee,
that such a poor soul is in Hell, or likely to go thi|ther
by thy means! Thou hast made fast a snare up|on
a Soul which now thou canst not untie; thou hast
done that which may be matter of sorrow to thee as
long as thou livest; but though thou canst grieve
for it, thou canst not remedy it. In other sins it is
not so; If thou hadst stoll'n anothers Goods, resti|tution
might be made to the injured party, but here
can be none. If thou hadst murthered another, thy
sin was thine own, not his that was murthered by
thee; but this is a complicated sin, defiling both at
once; and if neither repent, then oh what a sad
greeting will these poor wretches have in hell! hw
will they curse the day, that ever they saw each o|thers
face! Oh what an aggravation of their misery
will this be! For look, as it will be matter of joy in
Heaven, to behold such there as we have been instru|mental
to save; so must it needs be a stinging ag|gravation
of the misery of the damned, to look upon
those that have been the instruments and means of
their damnation. Oh, methinks, if there be any
tenderness at all in thy Conscience, if this sin have
not totally brawned and stupified thee, these Argu|ments
should pierce like a sword, through thy Guilty

Soul. Reader, I beseech thee, by the mercies of
God, if thou hast defiled thy Soul by this abominable
sin, speedily to repent. Oh get the blood of sprink|ling
upon thee; there is yet mercy for such a wretch
as thou art, if thou wilt accept the terms of it. Such
were some of you, but you are washed, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Publicans and Harlots may enter into the Kingdom
of God, Matth. 21. 31. Though but few such are
recovered, yet how knowest thou but the hand of
mercy may pull thee, as a brand out of the fire, if
now thou wilt return and seek it with tears? Though
it be a fire that consumeth unto destruction, as Iob calls
it, Iob 1. 12. yet it is not an unquenchable fire, the
blood of Christ can quench it.
And for you whom God hath kept hitherto, from
the contagion of it, O bless the Lord, and use all
Gods means for the prevention of it. The seeds of
this sin are in thy nature; no thank to thee, but re|straining
grace, that thou art not delivered up to it
also. And that thou mayest be kept out of this Pit,
conscionably practice these few Directions.
Direct. 1. Beg of God a clean heart, renewed and
sanctified by saving grace; all other endeavours do
but palliate a cure: the root of this is deep in thy na|ture,
Oh get that mortified, Matth. 15. 9. Out of the
heart proceed fornication, adulteries, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.
Abstain from fleshly lusthaving your Conversation
honest. The lust must first be subdued, before the
conversation can be honest.
Direct. 2. Walk in the fear of God all the day
long, and in the sense of his Omniscient eye, that is
ever upon thee. This kept Ioseph from this sin, Gen
39. 9. How can I do this wickedness, and sin agains
God? Consider, the darkness hideth not from him,
but shineth as the light. If thou couldst find a place
where the eye of God could not discover thee, it

were somewhat: Thou darest not to act this wicked|ness
in the presence of a Child, and wilt thou ad|venture
to commit it before the face of God? See
that Argument, Prov. 5. 20 And why wilt thou my
Son, be ravisht with a strange woman, and embrace the
bosome of a stranger? For the ways of man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.
Direct. 3. Avoid lewd Company, and the Society
of unclean persons; they are but panders for Lust.
Evil communication corrupts good manners. The
tongues of sinners do cast fire-balls into the hearts
of each other, which the corruption within is easily
kindled and enflamed by.
Direct. 4. Exercise thy self in thy Calling diligent|ly.
It will be an excellent means of preventing this
sin. It is a good observation that one hath; That
Israel was safer in the Brick-kilns in Egypt, than in
the Plains of Moab, 2 Sam. 11. 2. And it came to
pass in the even-tide, that David arose from off his bed,
and walked on the roof of the Kings house; and this
was the occasion of his fall. See 1 Tim. 5. 11, 13.
Direct. 5. Put a restraint upon thine appetite:
feed not to excess. Fulness of bread and idleness
were the sins of Sodom, that occasioned such an ex|uberancy
of Lust. They are like fed
horses every one neighing after his neigh+bours
Wife.Sine Cerere  Baccho frige venus. When I had fed the to the
full, then they committed Adultery, and
assembled themselves by troops in the Harlots houses, Jer.
5. 7, 8. This is a sad requital of the bounty of
God, in giving us the enjoyment of the Creatures,
to make them fuel to lust, and instruments of sin.
Direct. 6. Make choice of a meet Yoke-fellow,
and delight in her you have chosen; This is a law|ful
Remedy; See 1 Cor. 7. 9. God ordained it,
Gen. 2. 21. But herein appears the corruption of

nature, that men delight too tread by-pathes, and
forsake the way which God hath appointed; as that
Divine Poet Mr. Herbert saith:
If God had laid all common, certainly,
Man would have been the closer: but since now
God hath impal'd us, on the contrary,
Man breaks the fence, and every ground will plow.
O what were Man, might he himself misplace!
Sure, to be cross he would shift feet and face.
Stollen waters are sweeter to them, than those
waters they might lawfully drink at their own
fountain: but withal know, it is not the having,
but the delighting in a lawful Wafe, as God requires
you to do, that must be a ence against this sin. So
Solomon, Prov. 5. 19. Let her be as the loving Hinde,
and pleasant Roe; Let her breasts satisfie thee at all
times, and be thou ravisht always with her love.
Direct. 7. Take heed of running on in a course
of sin, (especially Superstition and Idolatry) in
which cases, and as a punishment of which evils,
God often gives up men to these vile affections,
Rom. 1. 25, 26. Who changed the truth of God into a
lye [worshipped] and served the Creature more than
the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. [For this
cause] God gave them up to vile affections, c. They
that defile their Souls by Idolatrous practices, God
suffers as a just recompence their bodies also to be
defiled with uncleanness, that so their ruine may be
hastned. Let the admirers of Traditions beware
of such a judicial Tradition as this is. Wo to him
that is thus delivered by the hand of an angry God:
No punishment in the world like this, when God
punishes sin with sin. When he shall suffer those
 those common notices of Conscience to

be quench'd, and all restraints to be moved out of
the way of sin, it will not be long ere that sinner
come to his own place.


IV. CAUTION.
IN the next place, I shall make bold to expostulate
a little with your Conscience concerning the
precious mercies you have received, and the solemn
promises you have bound your selves withal for the
obtaining of those mercies. I fear God hath many
bankrupt debtors among you, that have dealt slip|perily
and unfaithfully with him, that have not
rendered to the Lord according to the great things
he hath done for them, nor according to those good
things they have vowed to the Mighty God of
Iacob: But truely, if thou be a despiser of mercy,
thou shalt be a pattern of wrath; God will remember
them in fury, who forget him is his favours. I will
tell you what a grave and eminent Minister once
told his people (dealing with them about this sin
of unthankfulness for mercy) and I pray God it
may affect you duely: Let us all mourn
(saith he) and take on;Mr. Lockyer on Col. 1. p. 113. we are all be|hindhand
with God: The Christian world
is become bankrupt, quite broke, makes no
return to God for his love. He is issuing out process to
seize upon body, goods, and life, and will be put off no
longer: Bloody Bayliffs are abroad for bad debtors all
the world over. Christians are broke, and make no re|turn,
and God is breaking all. He cannot have what he
would have, what he should have; he will take what he
can get: for money, he will take goods, limbs, arms,
legs; he will have his own out of your skin, out of your
blood, out of your bodies and souls. He is setting the

Christian world as light and as low as they have set his
love. Ah Lord! what a time do we live in? Long-suffering
is at an end, Mercy will be righted in Iustice,
Iustice will have all behind, it will be paid to the utmost
farthing; 'twill set abroach your blood, but 'twill have all
behind, c.
Do you hear, Souls? Is not this sad news to some
of you, who have received vast sums of mercy, and
given God your bond for the repayment of him in
praise and answerable fruit, and yet forfeited all,
and lost your credit with God? Oh how can you
look God in the face, with whom you have dealt so
perfidiously? I am now come in the Name of God
to demand his due of you; to call to remembrance
the former receipts of mercy which you mind not,
but God doth, and there is a witness in your bosome
that doth, and will one day witness to your faces,
that you have dealt perfidiously with your God;
your souls have been the graves of mercy, which
should have been as so many gardens where they
should have lived and flourished. I am come now
to open those graves, and view those mercies that
your unthankfulness hath killed and buried, to lay
them before your eyes, and see whether your un|greatful
hearts will bleed upon them. Buried mercies
are not lost for ever; they shall as
certainly have a day ofThere is a double resurrecti|on of Mercy: A resurrection of Mercy in Mercy, and a resurrection of Mercy in Wrath. It is the first I now labour for, and that to prevent the second  Resur|rection
as thy self: It were better
for thee they should have a Resur|rection
now in thy heart, than to
rise as witnesses against thee, when
thou shalt rise out of the dust that
will be a terrible Resurrection in|deed,
when they shall come to plead
against thy Soul: nothing pleads
more dreadfully against a Soul than

abused mercy doth. But I shall come to the parti|culars
upon which I interrogate your Consciences,
and I pray deal truly and ingenuously in answering
these Queries.
Quer. 1. And first I shall demand of you, Whe|ther
you never had experience of the power and
goodness of God, in restoring you to Health from
dangerous Sickness and Diseases? Have you not
sometimes had the sentence of Death in your selves?
and that possibly when you have been in remote parts
far from your Friends and Relations, and destitute of
all means and accommodations. Did you not say
in that condition, as Hezekiah did in a like case? Isai.
38. 10, 11, 12. I said in the cutting off of my days, I
shall go to the gates of the grave, I am deprived of the
residue of my years. I said, I shall not see the Lord,
even the Lord in the land of the living; I shall behold
man no more with the inhabitants of the world. Re|member
thy self, man, canst not thou call to mind
the day when the Arrows of death came whisking
by thee, and it may be hit those next thee; took away
those that were as lively and as lusty as thy self,
when you began your Voyage, and yet they were
cast for death, thou for life, and that when there
was but an hairs breadth betwixt thee and the grave?
Tell me, Soul, What friend was that stood by thee
then, when thou wast forsaken of all friends? When
it may be thy Companions stood ready to throw thee
over-board, Who was it that pitied and remembred
thee in thy low estate? Who was it that rebuked
thy disease? of (as one very aptly ex|presses
it) restrained the humours of thy
body,Mr. Tho. Goodwin. from overflowing and drowning thy
life? for when they are let out in a sickness,
they would overflow and drown it, as the Waters would
the earth, if God should not say to them, Stay you proud

waves. Who was it, man, that when thy body was
brought low and weak, and like a crazy rotten Ship
in a storm, took in water on all sides, so that all the
Physitians in the World could not have stopt those
Leaks; consider, what hand was that which quieted
and calmed the tempestuous Sea, careened and mend|ed
thy crazy Body, and launched thee into the World
again, as whole, as sound, as strong as ever? Was it
not the Lord, that hath done all this for thee? Did
not he keep back thy Soul from the Pit, and thy
Life from perishing? Yea, when thou wast cha|stened
with pain upon thy Bed (as Elihu speaks)
Iob 33. 19, 20, 21. and the multitude of thy bones
with strong pains, so that thy life abhorred bread,
and thy Soul dainty meat; thy flesh consumed away
that it could not be seen, and thy bones that were
not seen stuck out: yet then, as it is, vers. 28. he
delivered thy Soul from going down into the Pit,
and caused thy Life to see the Light. Had the Lamp
of life been then extinguisht, thou hadst gone into
endless Darkness; Hell had shut her mouth upon
thee. Now tell me, Soul, What hast thou done
with this precious mercy? Hast thou walked before
the Lord in a deep sense thereof, and answered his
end therein, which was, to lead thee to Repentance?
Or hath thy stupid or disingenious heart forgotten
it, and lost all sense of it, so that God's end is fru|strated,
and thy Salvation not a jot furthered there|by?
O If it be so, wo to thee; for the blood of
this Mercy, which thy Ingratitude hath murther'd,
like the blood of Abel, cries to God against thee.
What a Wretch art thou thus to requite the Lord
for such a Mercy! He saw thy Tears, and heard thy
groans, and said within himself, He shall not die, but
live; Alas, poor Creature, if I cut him off now,
he is eternally lost: I will send him back a few

years more into the World; I will try him once
more, it may be he will bear some fruits to me
from this deliverance; and if so, well; if not, I will
cut him down hereafter: He shall be set at liberty
upon his Good Behaviour a little longer. And is
all this nothing in thine eyes? Wretch that thou
art, Dost thou forget and flight such a favour as
this? Is it worth no more in thine eyes? Well, it
would be worth something in the eyes of the poor
Damned Souls, if they might have so many years
cut out of their Eternity, for a meer intermission of
their Torments, much more as a time of patience
and mercy. O consider, what pity and goodness
thou hast abused.
Quer. 2. Wast thou never cast upon miserable
streights and extremities, wherein the good Provi|dence
of God relieved and supplied thee? How
many of you have been beaten so long at Sea, by
reason of contrary winds, and other accidents, till
your Provisions have been even exhausted and spent?
To how short allowance have you been kept? And
what a mercy would you have esteemed it, if you
could but have satisfied Nature with a full draught
of Water? Certainly, this hath been the case of ma|ny
of you. Oh what a price and vallue did you
then set upon those common Mercies, which at o|ther
times have been slightly over-look'd! and
when you have seen no hopes of relief, Have you
not looked sadly one upon another? and it may be
said as that Widow of Zarephtah did to the Prophet,
1 King. 17. 12. And she said, As the Lord thy God
liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a
barrel, and a little oyl in a cruse: aud behold, I am ga|thering
two sticks that I may go in and dress it for
me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. Even
such hath been your case; yet hath that God, whose

Mercies are over all his Works, heard your sorrows,
and provided Relief for you either by some Ship,
which Providence sent to relieve you in that di|stress;
or by altering the Winds, and sending you
safe to the Land, before all your Provisions have
been spent. And hast thou kept no Records of
these gracious Providences? yea, Dost thou abuse
the Creature, when thou art brought again to the
full enjoyment of it? and possibly receivest the
Creatures (whose worth thou so lately hast seen
in the want of them) without thanksgiving, or a
sensible acknowledgment of the goodness of God in
them? I say, dost thou thus answer the expectations
of God? Well, beware lest God teach such an un|worthy
Creature, by woful experience, that the
opening of his hand to give thee a Mercy, is worth
the opening thy Lips to bless him for it. Beware
lest that unthankful Mouth, that will not bless the
Lord for Bread and Water, have neither the one or
the other to bless him for. I can give you a sad in|stance
in the case, and I have found it in the Writing
of an eminent Divine, who saith he had it from an
eye and ear-witness of the truth of it. A young
Man lying upon his Sick-bed, was always calling for
meat, but when the meat he called for was brought
unto him, he shook and trembled dreadfully at the
sight of it, and that in every part of his body; and
so continued, until his food was carried away. And
thus he did, as often as any food was brought into
his presence; and not being able to eat one bit,
pined away: but before his death, he freely acknow|ledged
the Justice of God in this punishment; For,
said he, in the time of my Health, I ordinarily re|ceived
my meat without thanksgiving. O! Let the
abusers and despisers of such Mercies, fear and trem|ble.
Quer. 3. Have you not been eminently protected
and saved by the Lord, in the greatest dangers and
hazards of life; in fights at Sea, when men have
dropt down at your right hand and at your left, and
yet the Lord hath cover'd your heads in the day of
battle? And though you have been equally obnox|ious
to Death and Danger with others, yet your
name was not found among theirs in the list of the
dead? Or in Shipwracks, ah, how narrowly have
some of you escaped! A plank hath been cast in,
you know not how, to save you, when your Com|panions,
for want of it, have gone down to the
bottome; or you have been enabled to swim to the
Shore, when others have fainted in the way, and
perished. In what a variety of strange and astonish|ing
Providences hath God walked towards some of
you, and what returns have you made to God for it?
Oh Sirs, I beseech you, consider but these two or
three things, that I shall now lay before you to con|sider
of.
Consid. 1. An Heathen will do more for a dung-hil-Deity,
than thou, that callest thy self a Christian,
wilt do for the true God, that made Heaven and
Earth, Dan. 5. 4. They praised the Gods of Silver,
and of Gold, and of Brass, of Iron, Wood, and
Stone. When the Philistines were delivered from
the hand of Sampson, the Text saith, Iudg. 16. 24.
They praised their God, c. Then Dagon must be
extolled. Oh let shame cover they face!
Consid. 2. That the abuse of Mercy and Love, is
a sin that goes neer to the heart of God. O! he
cannot bear it. It is not the giving out of mercy
that troubles him, for that he doth with delight; but
the recoyling of his mercies upon him by the crea|tures
ingratitude, this wounds. Be astonished, O ye
heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid. And again,

Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth, Isa. 1. 2. q. d.
O you innocent Creatures which inviolably observe
the law of your Creation, be you all astonished and
cloathed in black, to see Nature cast by sin so far be|low
it self; and that in a Creature so much superiour
to you as Man, who in the very womb, was crown'd
a King, and admitted into the highest Order of Crea|tures,
and set as Lord and Master over you; yet
doth he act not onely below himself, but below the
very beasts. The Ox knoweth his owner, (i. e.) There
is a kind of gratitude in the beasts, by which they
acknowledge their benefactors that feed and preserve
them. Oh! What a pathetical exclamation is that,
Deut. 32. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish peo|ple,
and unwise?
Consid. 3. It is a sin that kindles the wrath of
God, and will make it burn dreadfully against thee
unthankful sinner; it stirs up the anger of God, in
whomsoever it be found, though in the person of a
Saint, 2 Chron. 32. 25. But Hezekiah rendered not
again according to the benefit done unto him: for his
heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him,
and upon Ierusalem. And so you read, Rom. 1. That
the Heathen, because they were not thankful, were
given up to vile affections; the orest Plague in the
world. It is a sin that the God of Mercy scarce
knows how to pardon, Ier. 5. 7. How shall I pardon
thee for this? This forgetting of the God that saves
us in our extremities, is a sin that brings desolation
and ruine, the effects of God's high displeasure, up|on
all our temporal enjoyments. See that remarka|ble
Scripture, Isa. 17. 10, 11. Because thou hast
[forgotten] the God of [thy salvation] and hast
not been [mindful] of the rock of [thy strength]
Therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it
with strange slips; in the day shalt thou make thy plant

to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to
flourish, but the Harvest shall be an heap in the day of
grief and desperate sorrow. The meaning is, that God
will blast and curse all thine employments, and thou
shalt be under desperate sorrow, by reason of the
disappointments of thy hopes.
Consid. 4. It's a sin that cuts off Mercy from you in
future straits: if you thus requite the Lord for for|mer
mercies, never expect the like in future distres|ses.
God is not weary of his blessings, to cast them
away upon such Souls that are but graves to them.
Mark what a reply God made to the Israelites, when
they cryed unto him for help, being invaded by the
Amorites, Judg. 10. 11, 12, 13. Did not I deliver
you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the Children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? The
Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and ye cryed un|to
me, and I delivered you out of their hands; yet ye
have forsaken me, and served other Gods; wherefore I
will deliver you no more. O sad word! It is (as if
the Lord had said) I have tryed what mercy and
deliverance will do with you, and I see you are ne|ver
the better for it; deliverance is but seed sown
upon the Rocks: I will cast away no more favours
upon you; now look to your selves, shift for your
selves for time to come, wade through your troubles
as well as you can. O brethren, there is nothing
more quickly works the ruine of a People, than the
abuse of mercy. O methinks this Text should strike
terrour into your hearts. How often hath God de|livered
you? Remember thy eminent deliverance at
such a time, in such a Country, out of such a deep
distress: God was gracious to thy cry then; thou
hast forgotten and abused this mercy; what now, if
God should say, as in the Text Therefore I will de|liver
thee no more. Ah poor Soul! What would'st

thou do then, or to whom wilt thou turn? It may
be thou wilt cry to the Creatures for help and pity;
but alas, to what purpose? they will give as cold and
as comfortless an answer, as Samuel gave unto Saul,
1 Sam. 28. 15, 16. And Samuel said to Saul, VVhere|fore
hast hou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul
answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make
war against me, and God is departed from me, and an|swereth
me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by Dreams;
therefore have I called thee c. Then said Samuel,
Wherefore then doest thou ask of me, seeing the Lord is
departed from thee, and become thine enemy? O!
thou wilt be a poor shiftless creature, if once by a|busing
mercy thou make it thy Enemy.
Secondly. For the breach of Vows made in di|stress
to obtain these mercies, and easily forgotten
and violated by thee when thou hast obtained thy
desire: A word or two to convince you what a fur|ther
evil lies in this, and how by this consideration
thy sins come to be boyed up to a greater height,
and aggravation of finfulness; and then I have done
with this Head.
A Vow, is a promise made to God, in the things of
God. The Obligation of it is by Casuists judged
to be as great as that of an Oath. It is a sacred and
solemn bond, wherein a Soul binds it self to God in
lawful things: and being once bound by it, it is a
most heinous evil to violate it. It is an high piece
of dishonesty to fail in what we have
promised to men,Case of Consc. saith Dr. Hall; but
to disappoint God in our Vows, is no
less than Sacriledge. The act is free
and voluntary; but if once a just and lawful vow
or promise hath past your lips (saith he) you may
not be false to God in keeping it. It is with us for
our vows, as it was with Ananias and Saphirah, for

their substance: VVhilst it remained (saith Peter)
was it not thine own? He needed not to sell and give
it; but if he will give, he may not reserve; it is
death to save some: he lies to the Holy Ghost, that
defalks from that which he engaged himself to be|stow.
If thou have vowed to the mighty God of Ia|cob,
look to it that thou be faithful in thy perfor|mance,
for he is a great and jealous God, and will
not be mocked.
Now I am confident, there be many among you,
that in your former distresses have solemnly engaged
your Souls thus to God; that if he would deliver
you out of those dangers, and spare your lives, you
would walk more strictly, and live more holy lives
than ever you did. You have, it may be, engaged
your Souls to the Lord against those sins, as Drun|kenness,
Lying, Swearing, Uncleanness, or whatsoe|ver
evil it was that your Conscience then smote you
for: the vows of God (I say) are upon many of
you. But have you performed those vows that your
lips have uttered? Have you dealt truly with God?
or have you mocked him, and lyed unto him with
your lips, and omitted those very duties you promi|sed
to perform, and return'd to the self-same evils
you promised to forsake. I only put the question,
let your Consciences answer it. But if it be so in|deed,
that thou art a person that makest light of
thy engagements to God, as indeed Seamens Vows,
and Sick mens Promises are, for the most part, de|ceitful
and slippery things, being extorted from
them by fear of Death, and not from any deep re|sentment
of the necessity and weight of those Du|ties
to which they bind their Souls: I say, if this
sin lie upon any of your Souls, I advise you to go
to God speedily, and bewail it; humble your self
greatly before him, admire his patience in forbear|ing

you, and pay unto him what your lips have
promised. And to move you thereunto, let these
Considerations, among many other, be laid to
heart.
Consid. 1. Think seriously upon the greatness of
that Majesty whom thou hast wronged, by lying to
him, and falsifying thy engagements. Oh think
sadly on this: It is not man whom thou hast abused,
but God; even that God in whose hand thy life and
breath is. For although (as one truly observes)
there be not in every vow a formal invocation of
God, (God being the proper Correlate, and as it
were a party to every vow, and therefore not for|mally
to be invoked for the contestatio of it) yet
there is in every vow an implicite calling God to
witness; so that certainly the Obligation of a Vow
is not one jot beneath that of an Oath. Now if
God be as a party to whom thou hast past thy pro|mise,
and its obligation on that ground be so great,
oh what hast thou done? for a poor worm to mock
with the most glorious majesty of Heaven, and break
Faith with God, what a dreadful thing is that? If
it were but to thy fellow-creature, though the sin
would be great yet not like unto this. Let me say
to thee, as the Prophet Isai. 7. 13. It is a small
thing for you to weary men, but you will weary my God
also? If you dare to deceive and abuse men, dare
you do so by God also? Oh if the exceeding villanies
of the sin do not affect thee, yet methinks the dan|ger
of provoking so dreadful a Majesty against thee
should. And therefore consider,
Consid. 2. Secondly, That the Lord will most
certainly be avenged upon thee for these things, ex|cept
thou repent. O read and tremble at the word
of God, Eccles. 5. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto
God, defer not to pay it: for he hath no pleasure in

fools; pay that which thou hast vowed. But better it is that
thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not
not pay. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, nei|they
say thou before the Angel, that it was an errour; where|fore
[should God be angry] at thy vice, and [destroy] the
works of thy hands? Mark, God will be angry, and in that
anger he will destroy the Work of thy hand, (i. e.)
saith Diodate, Bring thee and all thy actions to nought, by
reason af thy perjury. Now the anger of God, which thy
breach of promise kindles, as appears by this Text, is a
dreadful fire. Oh what Creature can stand before it! as
Asaph speaks, Psal. 76. 7. Thou, even thou art to be feared:
and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?
Consid. 3. Consider, thirdly, that all this while thou
sinnest against knowledge and Conviction: for did not
thy Conscience plainly convince thee, when imminent
danger open'd its mouth, that the matter of thy neg|lected
vow was a most necessary duty; If not, why
didst thou bind thy Soul to forsake such practises, and
to perform such duties? Thou didst so look upon them
then; by which it appears, thy Conscience is convinced
of thy duty, but Lust masters and over-rules: And it
so, poor sinner, what a case art thou in, to go on from
day to day sinning against Light and Knowledge? Is
not this a fearful rate of sinning? And will not such sin|ners
be plunged deeper into Hell than the poor Indians
that never saw the evil of their ways, as thou doest
Ponder but two or three Scriptures in thy thoughts, and
see what a dreadful way of sinning this is: Rom. 2. 9.
'Tribtlation, anguish and wrath to every Soul of man that
doth evil, to the [Iew first] and also to the Gentile. To the
Jew first (i. e.) to the Jew especially and principally; he
had a precedency in means and light, and so let him have
in punishment. So Iam. 4. 17. To him thrt knoweth to do
good, and doth it not, to him it is sin (i. e.) Sin with a
witness, horrid sin, sin that surpasses the deeds of the
wicked. So Luke 12. 47. And that servant that knew his

Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according
to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Which is a
plain allusion to the Custom of the Iews in punishing an
offender who being convicted, the Judge was to see him
bound fast to a Pillar, his cloaths stript off, and an Exe|cutioner
with a Scourge to beat him with so many
stripes: But now those stripes came but from the arm
of a Creature; these that the Text speaks of, are set on
by the omnipotent arm of God. Of the former there
was a determinate number set down in their law, as forty
stripes, and sometimes they would remit one of that
number too, in mercy to the offender, as you see in the
example of Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 24. Of the ews I received
forty stripes save one; but in Hell no mitigation at all,
nor allay of mercy. The arm of his power supports the
Creature in its being, while the arm of his justice lays
on eternally. Soul, consider these things; do thou not
persist any longer then in such a desperate way of sin|ning,
against the clear conviction of thine own Con|science,
which in this case must needs give testimony
against thee.
Well then; go to God with the words of David. Psal.
66. 13, 14. and say unto him, I will pay thee my vows
which my lips have uttered, and my tongue hath spoken when
I was in trouble. Pay it, Soul, and pay it speedily unto
God, else he will recover it by Justice, and fetch it out
of thy bones in Hell. O trifle not any longer with
God, and that in such serious matters as these are.
And now I have done my endeavour to give your
former Mercies and Promises a Resurrection in your
Consciences; Oh that you would sit down and pause s
while upon these things, and then reflect upon the past
Mercies of your lives, and on what hath past betwixt
God and your Souls, in your former straights and troubles!
Let not these plain words work upon thy spleen
and make thee say, as the Widow of Sarephta did to th
Prophet Elijah, 2 Kings 17. 18. What have I to do wit

thee, O thou man of God? Art thou come to call my sin to
remembrance? But rather let it work kindly on thy heart,
and make thee say as David to Abigail, 1 Sam. 25. 32. 33.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to
meet me, and blessed be thy advice.


V. CAUTION.
THe fifth and last danger I shall warn you of, is,
Your contempt and slighting of Death. Ah how
light a matter do many of you (at least in words) make
of it? It seems you have little reverential fear of this
King of terrours; not onely that you speak slightly of
it, but also because you make no more preparation for
it, and are no more sensible of your preservations and
deliverances from it. Indeed, the heathen Philosophers
did many of them profess a Contempt of Death, upon
the account of Wisdom and Fortitude; and they were
accounted the bravest men, that most despised and
slighted it: But alas, poor Souls, they saw not their ene|my
against whom they taught, but skirmisht with their
eyes shut. They saw indeed its pale face, but not its
sting and dart. There is also a lawful contempt of death:
we freely grant, that in two Cases a believer may con|temn
it; first, when it is propounded to them in a temp|tation,
on purpose to scare them from Christ and duty,
then they should slight it; as Rev. 12. 11. They loved not
their lives to the death. Secondly, When the natural evil
of death is set in Competition with the enjoyment of
God in Glory, then a believer should despise it, as Christ
is said to do, Heb. 12. 2 though his was a shameful death.
But upon all other accounts and considerations, it is
the height of stupidity and security to despise it.
Now to the end that you might have right thoughts
and apprehensions of death, which may put you upon
serious preparation for it; and that when ever your turn
comes to conflict with this King of terrours, under
whose hand the Pompeys, Caesars, and Alexanders of the

world, who have been the terrours of Nations, have
bowed down themselves; I say, that when your turn and
time comes (as the Lord onely knows how soon it may
be) you may escape the stroke of its dart and sting, and
taste no other btterness in death, than the natural evil
of it: To this end I have drawn the following Questions
and Answers which, if you please, may be called, The
Sea-man's Catechism. And Oh that you might not dare
to launch forth into the deeps, untill you have seriously
interrogated and examined your hearts upon those par|ticulars
Oh that you would resolve, before you go
forth, to withdraw your selves a while, from all cla|mours
and distractions, and calmly and seriously Cate|chise
your own selves in this manner.
Quest. 1. What may the issue of this Voyage be?
Answ. Death. Prov. 27. 1. Boast no thy self of to mor|row,
for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. Jam,
4. 13, 14. Go to now, ye that say, To day, or to morrow, we
will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy
and sell, and get gain: VVhereas you know not what shall be
on to morrow, for what is your Life? It is even a vapour
that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away.
Quest. 2 What is Death?
Ans. Death is a separation of Soul and Body, till the
Resurrection, 2 Cor. 5. 1. VVe know that if our earthly
house of this Tbernacle be dissolved. Iob 14. 10, 11, 12.
Read the words.
Quest. 3. Is Death to be despised and slighted if it
be so?
An. O no! It's one of the most weighty and serious things
that ever a creature went about. So dreadful doth it
appear to some, that the fear of it subjects them to
Bondage all their lives, Hebr. 2. 15. And to deliver
them who through fear of death were all their lives subject
to bondage. And in Scripture It's called, the King of ter|rours,
Job 18. 14. Or the black Prince, as some trans|late.
Never had any Prince such a title before. To

some it hath been so terrible, that none might mention
its Name before them.
Quest. 4. What makes it so terrible and affrighting
to Men?
Answ. Several things concur to make it terrible to
the most of Men As first, its Harbingers and Ante|cedents
which are strong Pains, Conflicts, and Agonies.
Secondly, its office and work it comes about, which is
to transfer us into the other world. Hence Rev. 6. 8.
It's set forth by a Pale Horse: An horse, for its use and
office, to carry you away from hence into the upper or
lower region of Eternity; and a pale horse, for it's gast|liness
and terror. Thirdly, but above all, it's terrible
in regard of its consequence; for it's the door of Eter|nity,
the parting point betwixt the present world and
that to come; the utmost line and boundary of all tem|poral
things. Hence Heb. 9. It's appointed for all men once
to die, and after that the Iudgment. Rev. 6. 8. And I look|ed,
and behold a pale Horse, and his name that sat
on him was Death: and Hell followed him. Ah it makes
a sudden and strange alteration upon mens conditions,
to be pluckt out of house, and from among friends, and
honours, and so many delights, and hurried in a mo|ment
into the Land of Darkness, to be cloathed with
flames, and drink the pure wrath of the Almighty for
ever. This is it, that makes it terrible.
Quest. 5. If Death be so weighty a matter, am I pre|pared
to die?
Answ. I doubt Not; I am afraid I want many things
that are necessary to a due preparation for it.
Quest. 6. What are those things wherein a due pre|paration
for Death consisteth?
Answ. Many things are necessary. First, Special and Sa|ving
Union with Jesus Christ. This is it that disarms it
of its sting; O Death, where is thy sting? Thanks be to God
who hath given [us] the victoy through [our] Lord Ie|sus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. So Joh. 11. 26. VVho soever

[liveth] and] [believeth] in me, shall never die. Who|soever
liveth (i. e.) is quickned with a new spiritual
Life and Principle, and so puts sorth the principal act
of that life, viz. Faith, he shall never die, (i. e.) eter|nally;
This hornet, Death, shall never leave its sting in
his sides. Secondly, To entertain Death comfortably,
the evidence and knowledge of this Union is necessary,
2 Cor. 5. 1. or we [know] that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, c.
And then he cannot only be content, but groan to be
uncloathed, vers. 2. A mistake in the former will cost me
my Soul; and a mistake here will lose me my peace and
comfort. Thirdly, In order to this evidence it's ne|cessary
that I keep a good conscience in all things, both
towards God and Man, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoy|cing,
even the testimony of our Conscience, that in sincerity,
and godly simplicity, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world. This
good Conscience respects all and every part of our work
and duty to be done, and all and every sin to be renoun|ced
and denied: So that he that is early united unto
Christ by Faith, hath the clear evidence of that Uni|on;
and the evidence fairly gathered from the testi|mony
of a good Conscience, witnessing his faithfulness
as to all duties to be done, and sins to be avoided, he is
fit to die; Death can do him no harm: but alas, these
things are not to be found in me.
Quest. 7. But what if I die without such a preparati|on
as this is, what will the consequence of that be?
Answ. Very terrible; even the separation of my Soul
and Body from the Lord to all Eternity, John 3. 36.
He that believeth on the Son, bath everlasting life; and he
that believeth not the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath
of God abideth on him. He shall not see life: there's the
privative part of his misery, separation from the blessed
God. And the [wrath] mark it, not anger, but wrath;
not the wrath of a man, bat of [God] at whose re|bukes

the Mountains skip like frighted men, and the
Hills tremble: The wrath of God not only flashes out
upon him, as a transient flash of lightinng, but [abideth]
dwells, sticks fast, there is no power in the world can
loose the soul from it. [Vpon him] not the body only,
nor the soul only, but on [him] (i. e.) the whole per|son,
the whole Man. Here is the principal positive
part of that man's misery.
Quest. 8. Can I bear this misery?
Answ. No: My heart cannot endure, nor my hand
be strong, when God shall have to do with me upon
this account. I cannot bear this wrath; Angels could
not bear it; it hath sunk them into the depths of misery.
Those that feel but a few sparks of it in their Consci|ences
here, are even distracted by it, Psal. 88. 15. Christ
himself had never born up under it, had he not been sub|ported
by the infinite power of the divine nature, Isai.
42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold. How then shall
I live when God doth this? what will be done to the
dry tree? Oh! there is on abiding of it, it is insuffera|ble.
The sinners in Zion are afraid, trembling surprizeth
the hypocrite: who among us shall dwell with the devouring
fire? who can endure the everlasting burning? Isai. 33. 14.
Quest. 9 If it cannot be born, is there any way to
prevent it?
Answ. Yes; there is hope in I srael concerning this
thing. And herein I am in better case than the damned;
I have the [may-be's] of mercy, and they have not.
Oh what would they give for a possibility of Salvation!
Isai. 1. 16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil,
learn to do well, c. Come now, let us reason together: and
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as snow. Isai. 55.
7. Let the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abund|antly

pardon. Though my disease be dangerous, it is not
desperate, it doth not scorn a remedy. Oh there is
Balm in Gilead, and a Physician there. There is yet a
possibility, not only of recovering my Primitive glory,
but to be set in a better case than ever Adam was.
Quest. 10, How may that be?
Answ. By going to the Lord Jesus Christ, Rom. 8. 1.
There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Iesus. Rom. 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth: Who is he
that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea, rather that is
risen again.
Quest. 11. But what is it to go to Christ?
Asw. To go to Christ, is toIohn 1. 12. embrace
him in hisIohn 3. 36. Person, and1 Cor. 1. 30. Offices, and to
rest1 Acts 4. 12. intrely and closely upon him forActs 12. 29.
pardon of sin, andIsai. 45. 22. eternal life; being
deeplyActs 2. 37. sensible of the want and worth
of him. Joh. 1. 12. To as many as [re|ceived]
him, he gave power to become the
sons of God, even to as many as believed on his Name.
John 3. 36. He that believed [on the Son] hath life. 1
Cor. 1. 30. And of him are ye in Christ Iesus, who of God
is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption. Acts 4. 12. Neither is there Salvation in any
other, c. Acts 13. 39. And by him all that believe are
[Iustified from all things] from which ye could not be
Iustified by the Law of Moses. Isai. 45. 22. Look unto me,
and be ye saved. Acts 2. 37. Now when they heard this,
they were pricked to the heart, c.
Quest. 12. Bt will Christ receive me, if I go unto
him?
Answ. Yes, yes; He is more ready to receive thee,
than thou are to come to him. Luk. 15. 20. And he,
ose and came to his Father. But when he was yet a great
way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion on him,
and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. The Son doth

but go, the Father ran: if he had but received him into
the house, it had been much; but he fell on his neck,
and kissed him. He bespeaks him much after that rate he
exprest himself to returning Ephraim. My Bowels are
troubled for him: I will surely have mercy on him, Jerem. 31.
20. There is not the least Parenthesis in all the pages of
Free Grace, to exclude a Soul that is sincerely willing
to come to Christ.
Quest. 13. But how may it appear that he is willing
to receive me?
Answ. Make trial of him thy self. If thou did but
know his heart to poor sinners, you would not question
it. Believe what he saith in the Gospel; there thou shalt
find that he is a willing Saviour: for therein thou hast,
First his most serious invitations, Matth. 11. 28. Come un|to
me ye that are weary and heavy laden. Isai. 55. 1. Ho, e|very
one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters. These seri|ous
Invitations are, Secondly, backt and confirmed with
his Oath, Ezek. 35. 11. As I live I desire not the death of a sin|ner.
Thirdly, amplified with pathetical wishes, sighs and
groans, Matth. 23. 29. Oh that thou hadst known, even thou,
at least in this thy day. Fourthly, Yea, delivered to them
in undissembled tears, Matth. 23. 37, 38. He wept over it,
and said, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem. Fifthly, Nay, he hath
shed not only tears, but blood, to convince thee of his
willingness. View him in his dying posture upon the
Cross, stretching out his dying arms to gather thee,
hanging down his blessed head to kiss thee: every one
of his wounds was a mouth opened to convince thee of
the abundant willingness of Christ to receive thee.
Quest. 14. But my sins are died in grain: I am a sinner of
the blackest hue; will he receive and pardon such an one?
Answ. Yea, Soul, if thou be willing to commit thy self
to him, Isai. 1. 18. Come, now let us reason together: Though
your sins he as scarlet, I will make them as snow; though they
be red like crimson, I will make them as wool. See p. 10, 11.
Quest. 25. This is comfortable news; but may I not

delay my closing with him for a while, and yet not ha|zard
my eternal happiness, seeing I resolve to come un|to
him at last?
Ans. No. There must be no delays in this case: Ps. 119.
60. I made hast and delayed not to keep thy commandments.
Quest. 16. Why may I not defer it, at least for a little
while?
Ans. For many weighty reasons this work can bear no
delays. First, the offers of Grace are made to the present
time, Heb. 3. 15. Wbile it's said to day, harden not your heart.
There may be a few more days of God's patience, but
that is unknown to thee. Secondly, your Life is imme|diate
uncertain; how many thousands are gone into E|ternity
since the last Night? If you can say to sickness
when it comes, Go, and come again another time, it
were somewhat. Thirdly, Sin is not a thing to be
dallied whith. Oh! who would be willing to lie down
one Night under the guilt of all his sins? Fourthly, de|lays
increase the difficulty of Conversion: Sin still roots
itself deeper, habits are the more strengthened, and the
heart still more hardned. Fifthly, There be thousands
now in Hell, that perish through delays: Their Consci|ences
often urged and prest hard upon them, and many
resolutions they had, as thou hast now; but they were
never perfected by answerable executions, and so they
perisht. Sixthly, Thy way of sinning now is desperate;
for every moment thou art acting against clear light and
conviction; and that is a dreadful way of sinning. Se|venthly,
There can be no solid reason for one hours de|lay;
for thou canst not be happy too soon: And be sure
of it, if ever thou come to taste the sweetness of a Chris|tian
Life, nothing will more pierce and grieve thee
than this, that thou enjoyedst it no sooner.
Qu. 17. Oh, but the pleasures of sin engage me to it,
how shall I break these cords and snares?
Ans. That snare may be broken by considering so|lemnly
these five things. First, that to take pleasure in
sin, is an argument of a most deplorable and wretched

state of Soul. What a poysonful nature doth it argue
in a Toad, that is sucking in nothing but poyson and
filth wherever he crawls! Oh what an heart hast thou!
hast thou nothing to find pleasure in, but that which
makes the Spirit of Christ sad, and the hearts of Saints
ache and groan; which digged Hell, and let in endless
miseries upon the world? Secondly, think that the misery
it involves thee in, is infinitely beyond the delights it
tempts thee by: It doth but delight the sensual part and
that but with a brutish pleasure; but will torment thy
immortal Soul, and that for ever. The pleasure will
quickly go off, but the sting will remain behind. I tasted
but a little honey on the top of my rod (said Ionathan) and I
must die, 1 Sam. 14. 43. Thirdly, Nay, that's not all; but the
Lord proportions wrath according to the pleasures souls
have had in sin, Rev. 18. 7. How much she hath lived deli|ciously,
so much torment and sorrow give unto her. Fourthly,
What dost thou pay, or, at least, pawn, for this pleasure?
Thy soul, thy precious soul, is laid to stake for it: and in
effect thus thou sayest, when thou deferrest the closing
with Christ upon the account of enjoying the pleasures
of sin a little longer: Here, Devil, take my Soul into thy
possession and power; if I repent, I will have it again;
if not, it is thine for ever. Oh dearb ought pleasures!

What is the the world? A great exchange of ware,
Wherein all Sorts and Sexes cheapning are:
The Flesh, the Devils, sit and, cry What lack ye?
When most thay fawn, they most intend to rack ye.
The wares are cups of joy, and beds of pleasure;
There's goodly choice, down-weight, and flowing measure.
A soul's the price, but they give time to pay
Vpon the Death-bed, or the Dying-day.
Hard is the bargain, and unjust the measure,
When as the price so much outlasts the pleasure.

Quarles.
Lastly, It's thy gross mistake to think thou shalt be
bereaven of all delights and pleasures, by coming under
the government of Christ: For one of those things in

which his Kingdom consists, is joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom.
14. 17. Indeed, it allows no sinful pleasures to the subjects
of it, nor do they need it; but from the day thou closest
in with Christ, all thy pure, real, and eternal pleasures
and delight begin and bear date When the Prodigal
was return'd to his Father, then, saith the Text, They
began to be merry, Luke 15. 24. See Acts 8. 5, 6. No, no,
Soul, thou shalt want no joy; for the Scripture saith, They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and
thou shalt make them drink the rivers of thy pleasures; for with
thee is the fountain of light, c. Psal. 36. 8, 9.
Qu. 18. But how shall I be able to undergo the seve|rities
of Religion? There are difficult Duties to be done,
and an heavy cross to be taken up; these be the things
that daunt me.
Ans. If Pain and Suffering daunt thee, how is it thou
art not more out of love with sin than with Religion?
For it is most certain, that the Sufferings for Christ are
nothing to Hell, the just reward and certain issue of sin:
the pains of Mortification are nothing to the pains of
Damnation. There is no compare betwixt suffering for
Christ, and suffering from Christ, Matth. 5. 29. If thy
right hand, or eye offend thee, cut it off, and pluck it out: It is
profitable for thee that one member suffer, than that the whole
body be cast into Hell. Secondly, thou eest the worst, but
not the best of Christ. There be Joys and Comforts in
those difficult Duties and Sufferings, that thou seest not.
Col. 1. 24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings. Jam. 1. 2. My
Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverstemptations,
c. Thirdly, Great shall be thy assistance from Christ,
Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through him that strengthens
me. The Spirits helps our infirmities, takes the other end
of the burden, Rom. 8. 26. What meanest thou to stand
upon such terms, when it is Heaven or Hell, eternal
Life or Death, that lie before thee?
Qu. 19. But to what purpose will all my endeavours
to come to Christ be? unless I be elected, all will be to
on purpose.
Ans. True: If thou be not elected, thou canst not ob|tain
him, or happiness by him: But yet, that is no dis|couragement
to strive. For in thy unconverted state, thy
Election or Non-election is a secret to thee; the only way
to make it sure, is by striving and giving all diligence in
the way of duty, 2 Pet. 1. 10. And if you ponder the text
well, you will find, that Election is not only made sure
in the way of diligence and striving; but Calling is put
before it, and lies in order to it. First secure thy effec|tual
Calling, and then thine Election.
Qu. 20. But I have no strength of my own to come
to Christ by; and is it not absurd to urge me upon Im|possibilities
in order to my Salvation?
Ans. First, Certainly you are more absurd in plead|ing
and pretending your impotence against your duty:
for you do think you have a power to come to Christ,
else how do you quiet your Conscience with Promises
and solves of Conversion hereafter? Secondly, Though
it be true, that no saving Act can be done without the
concurrence of special Grace; yet this is as true, that
thy inability to do what is above thy power, doth not
excuse thee from doing what is in thy power to do.
Canst thou not forbear, at least, many external acts of
sin? And canst thou not perform, at least, the external
acts of duty? Oh, if thou canst not come to Christ, yet, as
the blind man, lie in the way of Christ; do what thou
canst do, and confess and bewail thine impotency that
thou canst do no more. Canst thou not take thy Soul aside
in secret, and thus bemoan it; My poor Soul, what wilt
thou do? Oh what will become of thee, thou art Christ|less,
Covenantless, Hopeless, and, which is most sad, sens|less
and bowelless. O! thou canst not bear the infinite
Wrath of the Eternal God, whose Almighty Power will
be set on work to torment such as thou art, and yet thou
takest no course to prevent it. Thou seest the busie dili|gence
of all others, and how the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence by them; and art not thou as deeply en|gaged

to look to thy own happiness, as any in the world?
Will Hell be more tolerable to thee than others? Oh
what a composition of stupidity and sloth art thou?
Thou livest after such a rate, as if there were neither
Fire in Hell to torment thee, nor Glory in Heaven to re|ward
thee. If God and Christ, Heaven and Hell, were
but dreams and fables, thou couldst not be less affected
with them. Ah, my Soul! my Soul! my precious Soul!
Is it easie to perish? Wilt thou die as a fool dieth? Oh
that men would but do thus, if they can do no more!
And now, Soul, you see what death is, that you have
made so slight of; and what is the only way that we, poor
Sons of Death, have to escape its sting. You have here
seen the vanity of all your pleas and pretences against
Conversion, and the way to Christ prepared and cast up
for you. Now, Sirs, I beg you in the name of God that
made you, and as if I made this request upon my bended
Knees to you, that you will now, without any more de|lays,
yield your selves to the Lord. Soul! I beseech thee,
hast thee into thy hamber, shut thy door, and bespeak
the Lord after some such manner as this, before thou
darest to launch out into the Deeps again:
O dreadful and glorious Majesty! thou hast bowels
of mercy, as well as beams of glory: I have heard the
sounding of these bowels for me this day. Lord, I have
now heard a representation of the grim and ghastly face
of Death! Ah! I have now seen it as the King of Ter|rors,
as the door of Eternity, as the Parting-point, where
sinners take their eternal farewel of all their delights. I
have seen this black Prince mounted on his pale Horse,
and Hell following him. I have been convinced this
day, that if he should come and fetch away my Soul in
that condition it is, Hell would follow him indeed. Lord!
I have now heard of the Prince of Life also, in whose
bleeding side Death hath left and lost its envenomed
sting; so that though it may kill, yet it cannot hurt any
of his Members. To this glorious Redeemer I have now

been invited; all my pretences against him have been
confuted, and my Soul in his Name assured of welcome,
if I come unto him, and cast my self upon him. And
now, Lord, I come, I come, upon thy call and invitation;
I am unfeignedly willing to avouch thee, this day to be
my God, and to take thee for my portion. Lord Iesus,
I come unto thee; thy Clay, thy Creature moves towards
the Fountain of pity, look hitherto: Behold a spectacle
of misery. Bowels of mercy, hear, behold my naked Soul,
not a rag of righteousness to cover it; behold my starv|ing
Soul, not a bit of bread for you to eat; ah! it has fed
upon wind and vanity hitherto: Behold my wounded
soul bleeding at thy foot; every part, Head and Heart,
Will and Affections, all wounded by sin. O thou com|passionate
Samaritan, turn aside, and pour thy Soveraign
blood into these bleeding wounds, which like so many
opened mouths plead for pity. Behold a returning
submitting Rebel, willing to lay down the weapons of
unrighteousness, and to come upon the knee for a par|don.
Oh I am weary of the service of sin; I can endure
it no longer. Lord Jesus, thou wast anointed to preach
glad tidings to the meek, and to proclaim liberty to the
aptives, and the opening of the prison to them that are
bound. Come now, and knock off those fetters of unbe|lief;
Oh set my soul at liberty that it may praise thee!
For so many years Satan hath cruelly tyrannized over
me, oh that this might be the acceptable year of the
Lord, and the day of the salvation of my God! Lord, thou
wast lifted up to draw Men unto thee; and indeed thou
art a drawing Saviour, a lovely Jesus. I have hitherto
slighted thee, but it was because I did not know thee:
mine eyes have been held by unbelief, when thou wast
opened in the Gospel; but now I see thee as the chiefest
of ten thousands. Thou art the glory of Heaven,
the glory of Earth, the glory of Sion; and oh
that thou wouldst be the glory of my Soul! I confess,
I am not worthy that thou shouldst look upon me; I
may much rather expect to be trampled under the feet

of Justice, than to be embraced in thine arms of Mer|cy;
and that thou shouldst rather shed my polluted
blood, than sprinkle thine own upon me. But Lord,
what profit is there i my blood? Wilt thou pursue a
dryed leaf? Shall it ever be said, that the merciful
King of Heaven hang'd up a poor soul that put the
rope about its own neck, and so came selfcondemning|ly
to him fot mercy? O my Lord! I am willing to
submit to any terms, be they never so hard and un|grateful
to the flesh. I am sure whatever I shall suf|fer
in thy service, cannot be like to what I have suffer|ed,
or am like to fuffer by sin: henceforth be thou my
Lord and Master; thy service is perfect freedom; be
thou my Priest and Prophet, my Wisdom and Righte|ousness,
I resign up my self unto thee: my poor Soul
with all its faculties, my body with all its members,
to be living instruments of thy glory. Let Holi|ness
to the Lord be now written upon them all; let my
tongue henceforth plead for thee, my hands be lifted
up unto thy testimonies, my feet walk in thy ways.
Oh let all my affections, as willing servants, wait upon
thee, and be active for thee. Whatever I am, let me
be for thee; whatever I have; let it be thine; what|ever
I can do, let me do for thee; whatever I can suf|fer,
let me suffer for thee. O that I might say before
I go hence, My beloved is mine, and I am his! Oh
that what I have begged on Earth, might be ratifi|ed
in Heaven! My Spirit within me saith, Amen.
Lord Jesus, say thou. Amen.
FINIS.








