



Christian Directions,
SHEWING
How to walk with GOD
All the Day long.
Drawn up for the use and benefit of the In|habitants
of SEPULCHRES Parish,
By THO: GOUGE, Pastor thereof.
1 Sam. 12. 23, 24.
I will teach you the good and the right way: only fear
the Lord, and serve him with all your heart, considering how great
things hee hath done for you.
2 Pet. 1. 12.
I will not bee negligent to put you alwayes in remembrance
of these things, though yee know them, and bee established in the present
truth.
Luke 17. 10.
When yee shall have done all these things which are com|manded
you, say, wee are unprofitable servants, wee have done that which
was our duty to do.
LONDON,
Printed by R. Ibbitson, and M. Wright, at
the Kings-head in the Old Bayley.
MDCLXI.




TO
My dearly beloved Friends and Neigh|bours,
the Inhabitants of Sepulchres Parish.
Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father of Mer|cies,
and the God of all Consolation.
My Dear Friends,
_COnsidering with my self, how besides my
Lords-daies Preaching, and Week-daies
Catechizing, I might be further serviceable
to your souls, in promoting their spiritual
welfare; It pleased God to put it into my
heart, to draw up some practical Directions for your
better guidance in the way to Heaven, and to give to e|very
Family in my Parish a Copy of them. Accordingly
I set upon the work with all readiness and alacrity, being
much perswaded in my self that some spiritual advan|tage
might (through Gods blessing) accrew unto your
souls thereby. The Lord, who is the searcher of all
hearts, knoweth, that my only end and aim herein is the
advancement of your everlasting salvation, which if it
shall be any way furthered by this small Treatise, I shall
never repent of my pains and cost: But shall very much
rejoyce that the Lord hath inabled mee (in any measure)
to be serviceable to him in the furtherance of the Gos|pel
of his dear Son, especially among you my dear flock.
Two considerations, among others, have had some in|fluence

upon mee in this undertaking.
The one is of that mutual love which hath hitherto
been between us. As I have you in my heart, so am I
perswaded that you have mee in yours. During the
whole time of my abode with you (which is now above
two and twenty years) I do not remember that we have
had the least difference, no not about the point of Main|tenance,
the usual unhappy make-bate between Minister
and People. For though the value of the Living be not
so much by half as is generally reported abroad (being
no Parsonage, but a Vicaridge, endowed with a third
part of that Tithe which the Parson doth collect) yet I
cannot but with much thankfulness acknowledge, that
what I have had, hath been with much love and friend|liness.
For when you have made any composition with
mee for my part of the Tithe, you have alwaies given
mee more than I could demand or expect. If then the
blessed Apostle Paul were willing, and that with glad|ness,2 Cor. 12. 15.
to spend and to bee spent for his Corinthians, and that
although the more abundantly hee loved them, the less hee was
loved of them; Much more ought I to be like-minded to|wards
you, who have not at any time so ill requited my
love, but alwaies been ready to answer it with recipro|cal
affections. That therefore I might leave to posterity
some publick acknowledgement, and perpetual memo|ral
of your constant love and respect to mee, together
with my due resentment of it, was one consideration
which put mee upon this design.
Another was the gladsome reflexion upon your great
and godly care of your poor, which I look upon (even as
it is meet for mee so to do) as the fruit of the
Gospel preached among you, and an argument of your
profiting therein. And indeed it is such, as I willingly take
occasion to make publick mention of it for an example to
others. For though your poor bee many hundreds, yet, I

think, I may say truly, without offence to other Parishes,
they are in some respect better provided for than any
poor in the City; For by the voluntary contribution of
divers of you, with the assistance of some other chari|table
persons,
1 All the poor children in your Parish are taught to
read and write gratis, by such School-Masters and
School-Mistresses, who teach them their Catechize,
whereof my self sometimes take an account.
2 All the Antient poor who can either spin or knit,
may have Flax and Yarn for fetching, to set themselves
on work, an are well paid for the same, immediately
upon the return thereof. This consideration, as it hath
very much affected mee, so have I alwaies accounted my
self your debtor upon this score. And surely if our
Lord and Master doth take what is done unto the poor
for their relief, as done unto himself, then should wee
also, especially his Ministers, in some sort, be like-minded.
Your debtor therefore I have taken my self to bee, nor
could I bethink my self how to discharge this debt in a
way more suitable to the nature of it, and my relation
to you, than by indeavouring something extraordinary
for your good hereafter, as you have done extraordina|rily
for the present good of our poor; and as you have
put your selves to special pains and charge for the suc|cour
of their bodies, so to put my self upon some spe|cial
labour, and willingly be at some cost for the advan|tage
of your souls.
But the main Motive which hath put mee upon this
undertaking, is, the single sense of my Relation to you,
that it hath pleased God of his infinite goodness and free
grace to entrust mee a weak, frail, earthen vessel, with
that inestimable Treasure, the Mysteries of the Gospel, and
appointed mee to preach unto you in particular the Un|searchable
Riches of Christ. I account it the greatest ho|nour

a poor creature can be capable of, to be made di|rectly
subservient to the glorious counsel, and gracious
purpose of his Creator, for the recovery and restauration
of the world by Jesus Christ; and therefore that we Mi|nisters
of the Gospel, whom God hath vouchsafed this
honour, have the strongest ingagement and obligation
laid upon us to preach the Gospel, both in season and out
of season; and to lay out our selves all manner of waies,
if by any means we may gain souls unto Christ, and build
them up in him. Now this way I have here taken will
have this advantage above others, above my ordinary
preaching, and performance of other Ministerial duties
among you, that whereas by them I can minde you of
the things which belong unto your everlasting peace, on|ly
while I am in this Tabernacle: By this, as it is said of
Abel,Heb. 11. 4. I may still speak to you, even when dead. Accept there|fore
(my dear Friends and Neighbours) this little Trea|tise
from the hands of your loving Pastor, whose heart
is exceedingly inlarged towards you, greatly longing
after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. For what is
my hope,1 Thes. 2. 19. or joy, or crown of rejoycing? Are not even yee in
the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ at his coming? Ac|cept
it therefore, and testifie your acceptance by rea|ding
of it, and much more by a conscionable perfor|mance
of the Directions contained in it. I think they
will carry their own evidence with them, that they are
all agreeable to the Word of God: For I have not made
it my business to mint new Notions, but to press upon
you old Truths, and known duties. I have drawm them
up in a plain and familiar stile and Method, studying ra|ther
to be profitable, than accurate; They are of daily
use to an holy life,  therefore I hope you will daily per|use
them. They are of general use to all sorts of Chri|stians,
at all times, in their several places, Callings, con|ditions
and relations, and therefore I hope you will give

the more diligent heed to them. Such whose Callings
and Businesses will scarce afford them leisure on the
week-daies to look into such Treatises as this, I do ear|nestly
intreat them, that at least on the Lord-daies, af|ter
the performance of the publick duties of Piety in the
Congregation, and of private in their Families, they
would spend some time in reading a part of this book
with their Family. And the Lord make it abundantly
useful and profitable unto you.Heb. 13. 20, 21. Yea the God of peace that
brought again from the dead our Lord Iesus, that great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Iesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
Sepulchres,
London.
Decemb. 20. 1660.
Your Affectionate, though
most unworthy Minister,
THO. GOUGE.



A TABLE of the particular Points contained in this
TREATISE.

CHap. 1. Sheweth how to begin the day with God.
Chap. 2. Of Secret Prayer in the morning.
Chap. 3 Of Ejaculatory Prayers.
4 Of reading the Scriptures in private.
5 Of Christian watchfulnesse over our Thoughts.
6 Of watchfulnesse over our Words.
7 Of watchfulnesse over our Actions.
8 Of watchfulnesse against Sin.
9 Of our behaviour at Meals.
10 Of Sports and Recreations,  directions concerning the same.
11 Of the duties of our Callings.
12 Of our behaviour in secret, and directions concerning Divine
Meditation.
13 Of our behaviour both in good and bad company.
14 Directions to the rich, how to Improve their wealth, to the glory
of God, and the good of their own souls.
15 Directions to the poor, shewing how to carry themselves Christi|an
like, in their low and mean estate.
16 Of Christian-like carriage under reproaches.
17 Of our carriage under crosses and afflictions.
18 Of Dying well.
19 Directions to such as visit the sick.
20 Directions how to cloze the day with God.
21 Of the Morality of the Sabbath, with directions how to sanctify
the same.
23 Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, with directions for the
worthy receiving thereof.
23 Of the Common mutual Duties betwixt Husband and Wife.
24 Of Husbands Duties to their Wives.
25 Of the Duties of Wives to their Husbands.
26 Of the Duties of Parents to their children.
27 Of the Duties of Children to their Parents.
28 Of the Duties of Masters to their servants.
29 Of the Duties of Servants to their Masters.
30 Of resting upon Iesus Christ alone for life and salvation.






Christian Directions, shewing how to
walk with God all the day long.

CHAP. I.
How to begin the day with God.
I. _AT thy first awaking in the morning, consecrate un|to
God the freshest of thy thoughts by lifting up
thine heart to him in praises and thanksgivings
for that comfortable rest and refreshment hee
hath vouchsafed unto thee the night past. For
had not the Lord been the more gracious unto thee, thou mightest
have slept the sleep of death, yea, thou mightest have awaked with
hell flames about thine eas: what cause therefore hast thou to
blesse God, as for the mercies of the night, so for the renewing of
his mercies with the day? And then heartily beg of God his di|rection,
assistance, and blessing upon thy lawfull pains and endea|vours
that day.
II. Having thus consecrated thy first awaking unto God, by bles|sing
him for the mercies of the night, and for adding another day to
thy life, then steep thy thoughts in a serious meditation of God,
and of some or other of his glorious Attributes, as
1 Of the infinite Purity of God, who is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity, i. e.Hab. 1. 13. with the least approbation; but hates all sin with a
perfect hatred, as being contrary to his nature. A serious conside|ration
whereof would, through Gods blessing, prove very effectual
for the suppressing of those impure thoughts which are apt to arise
from thy corrupt heart.
2 Of the almighty Power of God, whereby he is able to strength|en
thee in all thy weaknesses, to support thee under all thy trials
and temptations, to supply all thy wants, to deliver thee out of all
thy dangers, to carry thee through all thy undertakings. In which
respect the Apostle calleth Gods Power, a mighty Power, and an
exceeding-greatnesse of Power, Ephes. 1. 19. A serious consideration
whereof, cannot but stir thee up, as to flie unto God by Prayer in

all thy wants, straights and dangers, so to cast thy self upon him and
his mighty Power, to rest and rely upon him for seasonable help,
succour, and deliverance, who never faileth those who put their
trust in him.
3 Of the Omnipresence of God, of his continual presence about
thee, and with thee, wheresoever thou art, and whatsoever thou
doest.Psal. 139. 3. For hee is about thy bed and thy path, and taketh notice of
all thy actions, and when no man seeth thee, yet hee seeth thee
before whose Tribunal thou must one day stand to give an ac|count
of all thy actions. Surely it would be a special preservative
against sin, and a singular means to make thee watchful over all
thy waies and actions, if thou didst seriously consider Gods All-seeing
presence about thee.
4 Of the Omnisciency of God, his knowing of all things, even the
secret thoughts of thine heart,. and the inward intenions of thy
mind, before whom all things are naked and unbowelled, as the A|postle
speaketh. Not an ambitions, worldly, lustful thought in
thine heart, but God is privy to it.Heb. 4. 13. And as the wise man speak|eth,
Hee will bring every secret thing into judgement.Eccles. 12. 14.
This, if it were seriously considered, how would it make thee
watchful over thy very heart? and careful to suppress all wicked,
lustful thoughts at their first rising? and to keep thee upright and
sincere in what thou doest, especially in the duties of Gods wor|ship
and service, as knowing there is no dissembling before
God.
III. Call to minde what sin it is whereunto thou findest thy
self most propense, and with which thou art oftenest and easiliest
overcome, as having least power to resist it; And every morning
furnish thy self with the strongest Arguments thou canst against it,
and then bring up thine heart to a firm resolution, as against that
sin, so against the occasions and allurements thereunto. For it is
not possible for thee to forbear any sin, to which thou hast a natu|ral
propensity, unless thou shun all the occasions and alluremens
thereunto.
IV. Every morning exercise thy Faith in Jesus Christ, and
thereby draw forth of his fulness grace sufficient for the day, and
the duties thereof. To this end
1 Meditate of that fulness which is in Jesus Christ, for the
thorow supply of all thy wants, needs, and necessities, as the A|postle
expresseth in Col. 1. 19. It pleased the Father, that in Christ

should all fulness dwell; Fulness of power, to strengthen us in all
our weaknesses; fulness of wisdome, to direct us in all our doubts;
yea, fulness of spirit, for the supply of his members with all need|ful,
necessary graces.
2 Beleeve that Christ is thus filled for the good of his Church
and Members, that hee may communicate unto them of his ful|ness
grace sufficient for the discharge of the duties both of their
general and particular callings. For in Christ there is not onely
a fulness of abundance,Plenitudo abun|dantiae,  ple|nitudo redun. danae. in regard whereof hee is sufficiently full
in himself, but also a fulness of redundance, an overflowing ful|ness
for the supply of all his members. In which respect wee
are said Iohn 1. 16. Of his fulness to receive grace for grace, or,
grace upon grace,, i. e. Gratiam gratiae additam, vel gratiam gratiae cumulatam. one grace of the Spirit heaped upon ano|ther.
3 Cast thy self upon Christ and his fulness, resting and rely|ing
thereupon for supply of all thy wants, for strength to carry
thee thorow all the duties both of thy general and particular cal|ling;
For by resting and relying upon the fulness that is in Jesus
Christ, thou wilt draw forth thereof for thy comfort and support,
and so make it thine own.
V. As thou art rising out of thy bed, take all occasions of holy
and heavenly meditations,
To give you some hints.
1 When thou seest the nakedness of thy body, let that minde
thee of thy sin, which caused thee first to be ashamed of it; For
our first Parents before they had sinned, were not ashamed of
their nakedness,Non quod iis sua auditas |set incognita, sed tupis nudi|tas nondum e|rat. August. de Civit. Dei. l. 14. cap. 17. as you have it, Gen. 2. 25. They were both na|ked,
the man and his wife, and were not ashamed, not because they
did not know themselves to bee naked, but because there was in
their nakedness nothing to be ashamed of, their bodies being
more comely than any apparel could make them; But after our
first Parents had sinned, then were they ashamed of their na|kedness.
And how should the consideration thereof stir thee up earnest|ly
to long after the Robe of Christs Righteousness, to be cloathed
therewith, which will make thee lovely and amiable in the sight
of God?
2 Let thy rising out of thy bed, minde thee, as of a resurrection
from the death of sin, unto the life of grace here: so likewise of
the resurrection of thy body out of the grave unto eternal life at the

last day, when thou and every one of us must appear before the
great Judge, to give an account of whatsoever wee have done
here.
3 Let the light of the day minde thee of Jesus Christ, who is
often in Scripture termed Light, yea the True Light.
4 When thou art putting on thine Apparel, let out thine heart
in a serious Meditation of the Robe of Christs Righteousness, which
alone can make thee amiable in the sight of God; And by Faith
apply Christ and his Righteousness unto thy self, resting, and re|lying
thereupon for the pardon and forgiveness of thy sins here, and
for eternal salvation hereafter.
Having thus shewed thee how to begin the day with God, I
shall adde a few Motives to quicken thee up to a conscionable use
of these fore-mentioned directions.
1 This will be a special means to keep out worldly, wanton,
and impure thoughts out of thine heart, so that either they will
not dare to come in, or shall the easier be kept out.
2 Hereby thine heart will be exceedingly fenced and guarded
against all the suggestions of Sathan: for the heart being first pos|sessed
with the thoughts of God, it will keep out the suggestions of
Sathan, who otherwise will not bee wanting to cast his hellish
fire-brands into thy soul.
3 Good and holy thoughts first let into the heart of a Christian
in the morning, will keep it in the better tune all the day after;
so that the heart seasoned with heavenly meditations, or spiritual
matter in the morning, will be the more savoury and spiritual all
the day after.Qu semeest imbuta recens servabit odrem Testa diu. For the heart retains all the day a tincture of its
first thoughts in the morning. As a vessel retains the favour of the
liquor first put into it.
Obj. Happily some will object, that to put in practice these rules
and directions will take up too much time, even more than their Cal|lings
and imployments will afford.
Ans. 1. True it is, some mens Callings and Imployments
doe not afford them so much time, as others doe, yet there is
none but may find some time for spiritual and heavenly medita|tions,
if it be but in their rising out of their beds, and putting on
their cloaths.
2 If thou hast not time to put in practice all these directions,
at least thou maist goe over some or other of them; yea I shall
give thee this as my special advice, If thou art straightned in time,

rather to fix upon one or two at one time, then in an overly and
perfunctory manner to ramble over them all every morning.
Thus much of morning Meditation.


CHAP. II.
Of secret Prayer in the morning.
SO soon as thou art up, goe into thy Closet, or into some pri|vate
place, and there offer up unto God a Morning Sacrifice
of prayer and thanksgiving, let any thing be omitted rather than
that; if thy business be urgent and great, rise the sooner, dare
not to attempt any thing, till thou hast commended thy self, and
thine affairs unto God by prayer; if thou take any little liberty
to omit this duty, the Devil will so work upon thee, that by little
and little thou wilt wax weary of it, if Gods grace bee not the
more powerful in thee. And truly the morning is the fittest time
for this duty of secret prayer, men being then freshest and freest
from worldly businesses and distractions. Wee have a saying a|mongst
us,Aurora Musis amica. that the morning is a friend to the Muses, as being the
best time for study. I am sure it is as true, that the morning is a
friend to the Graces, as being the best time for any holy service.
For reason and experience doe teach us, that in the morning
our memories and senses are the quickest, and all the faculties
of our souls at their best, having recovered fresh strength through
the sweet sleep, and comfortable rest we had the night past; and
in the morning the sooner the better, for if thou shalt enter upon
any worldly business, or discourse, before thou hast offered up thy
morning Sacrifice, thou shalt find it much harder to keep the world
out of thine head, and thine heart close unto the duty. But if
some extraordinary business have occasioned thee to delay it, doe
not thereupon wholly omit it, but be careful to take the first op|portunity
of retiring into thy Closet, there to offer up thy mor|ning
sacrifice unto God.
Thus duty of secret Prayer is expresly commanded, and the
practice of it, especially in the morning, wee find also very much
commended to us in the World of God.
First, The duty it self is expresly commanded by our Lord and
Saviour,Matth. 6. 6 When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou hast
shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father
which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly. Here you see is a po|sitive

command for the practice of secret Prayer, Enter into thy Clo|set,
or into some private place, and having shut the door, pray.
Secondly, The morning is commended to us for the choysest
time of practising this duty,
1 By the example of Christ, 2 By the practice of the faithful.
1 By the example of Christ himself, of whom it is recorded by
Saint Mark,Mark 1. 35. that he rose early in the morning a great while before
day, and went out into a solitary place, and there prayed. His rising
betimes shewed his earnest desire, and diligent care in the per|formance
of this duty, for when wee have a good mind to do a
thing, wee use to rise betimes and go about it.
2 For the practice of the Saints of God herein, the Scripture is
very plentiful.Job 1. 5. It is recorded of Iob, That hee rose early in the
morning, and offered burnt offerings before the Lord. Hee did not
onely rise in the morning, but early in the morning, giving unto
God the first fruits of the day. And Davids morning devotions
are often expressed in the book of Psalms;Psal. 5. 3. As, My voice shalt thou
hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer
unto thee, and will look up.Psal. 63. 1. And again, O God thou art my God,
early will I seek thee. And it is recorded of Daniel, That three times
a day hee kneeled upon his knees, and prayed, and gave thanks, viz.Dan. 6. 10.
in the morning, before hee entred upon any business; at noon,
before hee went to his dinner; and in the evening, before hee
went to bed. And that this was his usual practice appears from
the following expression, viz. As hee did aforetime, i. e. hee pray|ed
three times a day, as hee was formerly accustomed to do.
For the more profitable pressing of this duty of secret prayer,
1 I shall give you some motives to quicken you up to a con|scionable
performance thereof.
2 Answer some Objections.
3 Give you some Directions for the right manner of perform|ing
it.
The Motives may bee drawn to Three Heads.
1 The Excellency. 2 The Necessity. 3 The Utility thereof.
I. The Excellency of secret prayer appears in two particu|lars.
1 In that it increaseth our Communion and Fellowship with God,Qui vult cum Deo semper esse, frequeter de|bet rare. Aug. de Temp. Serm. 112.
bringing us into a familiar acquaintance with him. As the con|verses
of a Christian soul with God in secret prayer are sweet; so
oh how sweet are the discoveries that the Lord often makes of

himself to the soul of a Christian in his secret prayers? When Da|niel
was praying alone in secret,Dan. 9. 20, 23. it was said unto him, Thou art
greatly beloved.
2 The Excellency of secret prayer appears, in that it procures
a comfort and sweetness upon those mercies which it obtaineth:
For this is an experimental Truth, That those mercies which are
given in as answers and returns to our prayers, are the sweetest and
most comfortable. And certainly this is one reason, why many
finde so little comfort in their yoak-fellows, in their children, in
their estate, and the like, they did not seek them of God by secret
prayer, and so did not receive them as answers to their prayers, but
only from an hand of common providence, without any seeking
of theirs.
II. The Necessity of secret prayer, especially in the morning,
appeareth.
1 In that without it wee cannot with any confidence expect
Gods blessing upon our pains and indeavours; For, as the Psalmist
speaketh,Psal. 127. 1, 2. Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain
that build it. So except the Lord bless our pains and indeavours, it
is in vain to rise up early, to sit up late, and to eat the bread of
sorrow; and prayer is the means God hath sanctified for the ob|taining
his blessing.
2 In regard of manifold casualties whereunto we are subject; for
death lieth every where in wait for us, so that wee go every mo|ment
in danger of our lives: If wee walk in the streets, so many
tiles on the house top, so many deaths hang over our heads:Quem dies vi|dit veniens su|perbum, hunc di|es vidit fugiens, jacentem, Senec. if
wee walk in the fields, so many beasts as wee meet withall, so ma|ny
enemies to indanger our lives. Yea, how many have risen
well in the morning, who have been found dead before the even|ing?
And what hath befallen one may befall another. And how
sad a thing will it be to be Arrested by Death, and called to
the Bar of Gods Judgement, to plead Guilty or not Guilty, be|fore
we have  our selves at the Throne of Grace, to Sue
forth our pardon.
III. A third Motive may bee taken from the utility of this
duty; and indeed manifold are the benefits which usually follow
and accompany the same. As,
1 It is the proper means appointed by God himself, for the
obtaining of all sorts of good things at his hands; and therefore
where this duty is enjoyned, we very often finde it attended with

very excellent Promises annexed, to encourage us with faith and
confidence to call upon him;Matth. 7. 7 as, Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and yee shall finde; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
c.
2 By accustoming our selves to pray in our Closets, or private
Chambers, we shall be the better fitted to pray in the presence of
others. And such as are Parents, and Masters of Families will bee
thereby enabled to pray with their Families; for certainly one
special reason why many Parents and Masters of Families doe
neglect that necessary duty of praying with their Families, is,
their not accustoming themselves to pray in secret morning and
evening.1 Sam. 17. 39 What David said of Saul's armour, I cannot goe therein,
for I never proved it. The like may some say of Prayer, I cannot goe
thereto, for I never used it. The accustoming ourselves to pray a|lone
in secret, will fit us to pray in the presence of others.
Having given you some Motives to quicken you up to a con|scionable
performance of Secret Prayer, and that especially in
the morning.
I shall answer an objection or two.
Obj. 1. Some are apt to object their little leasure, and great im|ployment,
to excuse themselves from offering up their morning Sacri|fice
unto God?
Answ. 1. The greater your imployments are, the more need
you have to offer up your morning Sacrifice unto God, thereby
to seek his assistance, and blessing upon your pains and endea|vours,
it being the Ordinance he hath sanctified for that very end.
Time spent in prayer will bee no hinderance, but rather a
furtherance of our worldly businesses and imployments; this will
oyl the wheels for any work, making it more easie; yea and san|ctifie
all the things we take in hand, making them successful un|to
us; for those works which are sanctified by Prayer doe usually
speed best.
Obj. 2. Some object their great inability to prhey know not
how to pray, not having the spirit of prayer?
Ans. 1. Let such bewayl this their sad condition, and mourn un|der
the sense of it, remembring what our Saviour saith, Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.Matth. 5. 4
2 Goe unto Christ, and say unto him as the Disciples did,
Lord teach me to pray;Luke 11. 1 with an acknowledgement of thine own
inability,Rom. 8. 26 beg the assistance of Gods Spirit, and say, Lord, thou hast

promised thy Spirit to help the infirmities of thy Servants, O make
good this thy gracious promise to me thy poor, weak and unworthy Ser|vant,
let me feel and finde the assistance of thy Spirit strengthening
my weakness, and enabling me to pour out my soul before thee in some
acceptable manner.
3 Call to mind thy sins, with the aggravations of them, and
withall consider thy Spiritual wants, and then put thy self upon
the duty of Prayer; confess thy sins unto God, with all the ag|gravations
thereof, as well as thou canst, begge the pardon of
them, and be earnest with God for such Graces as thou standest in
most need of. By using and exercising that small ability to pray
that thou hast, thou shalt increase it, and grow more able to doe
it with comfort.
4 Know this, that a man may pray most effectually, and ac|ceptably,
even when he cannot express himself in any apt words;
for the work of the Spirit in Prayer consisteth not so much in the
expression of the tongue, as in the affection of the heart, wherein
the very life and soul of prayer doth consist.
Having answered the fore-mentioned Objections, I shall now
give you some directions for the right manner of performing this
duty of Prayer, so as it may be acceptable and pleasing unto God.
To this end,
1 Some things are required before Prayer.
2 Some things in Prayer. 3 Some things after Prayer.
1 Before Prayer there is required preparation; which consist|eth
in two things.
1 In a serious Meditation of the infinite Majesty and glory of
God on the one part, and of thine own Vileness and unworthi|ness
on the other.
2 In a sequestration of thy thoughts from earthly affairs, and
worldly businesses.
For thy better help thereunto observe these rules.
1 When thou art going to prayer, renew thy resolution against
wandring thoughts, saying with thy self, I have lost many a prayer
through the distractions of my thoughts, and wandrings of my mind
after worldly matters therein, and I am in danger to lose this prayer
also, if I be not the more watchful over my self: therefore I doe now
resolve, with the assistance of Gods grace, to be more watchful over
my thoughts, to keep my heart close unto the duty I am going about,
and not to suffer my mind to wander after other matters, as formerly

it hath done; if thou wouldst make trial hereof, thou wouldst find
there is great power in such a resolution, when it is fresh upon
thy heart, and spirit.
2 Beg of God, that he would by the assistance of his holy Spirit re|strain
all vain and wandring imaginations.
3 Vse thy voyce in prayer so often as conveniently thou maist,
provided it be not for oftentation to bee heard of others, which
thou wilt finde very effectual, as for the intention of thine affections,
by raising them to an higher pitch; so for the attention of thy mind,
in keeping it from wandring and roving after worldly thoughts
and imaginations.
4 But if notwithstanding thou findest, that in praying thy
mind and heart hath been sometimes taken up, and possessed
with worldly thoughts and distractions, it will be a good course,
in thy private prayers, to repeat that again which so coldly and
carelesly passed from thee, labouring in thy repetition to repel all
wandring thoughts, and to pour forth those petitions again after a
more hearty manner; For, by imposing this task upon thy self,
thou wilt become more wary and watchful over thy thoughts, lest
otherwise thou be enforced to continue long at that exercise, unto
which, through the depravation of thy nature, thou art so backward
and averse.
II. As preparation is necessary before Prayer, so in prayer di|vers
things are required; as,
1 Faith; Prayer must be made in faith; which our Savior plain|ly
expresseth,Mark 11. 24 where he saith, Whatsoever things yee desire, when yee
pray, beleeve that yee receive them, and yee shall have them. Beleeve,
that as God is able, so willing to grant whatsoever thou prayest
for, so far forth as in his wisdome he seeth it to be good for thee.
2 Fervency, that thou pour out thine heart and soul unto God,
with great ardency and earnestness of affection. For, the Apostle
Iames telleth us,Jam. 5. 16 that the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous
man availeth much; so that it is the fervent prayer only that is
effectual. And without doubt this is one special reason why our
prayers are so seldom answered, namely, because they are per|formed
with such deadness of heart,Oratio tepida frigescit pius|quam coelos ascendit. and dulness of spirit, for the
luke-warm prayer is cooled and frozen before it can ascend up to
heaven. As therefore thou desirest to have thy prayers effectual,
let them be fervent, and so thou shalt not need to doubt of a gra|cious
and happy issue. I grant, thou canst not always have a like

fervency, yet thou must always strive against deadness of heart,
and dulness of spirit; for God regards the manner of our actions
as much as the matter, how we pray, as well as what we pray for.
III. The Duties required after Prayer are these.
1 Diligently to look after thy prayers, observing what answer
and return the Lord giveth thereunto.Psal. 5. 3. Thus did David and Ha|bakkuk;
For hereby thou shalt bee the better fitted for thank|fulness,Hab. 2. 1.
being furnished with more abundant matter of praise:
And also bee the more provoked and stirred up thereunto.
2 Look back and consider the manifold weaknesses, infirmities,
and imperfections which have passed from thee in thy praying,
how dead and dull thine heart was, and how distracted thy
thoughts were therein, and let the apprehension thereof prevail
with thee, as to disclaim all thine own righteousness as filthy
raggs, so to drive thee unto Christ, to roul thy self upon him,
resting upon his perfect Righteousness alone for life and for sal|vation.
As this is one chief end why God suffers corruption to
remain in his children, even after their Regeneration, and to
have an influence into all their holy services; So it is the use
which wee should make thereof: And therefore so often as thou
findest thine heart dead and dull, and thy mind distracted with
worldly thoughts in prayer, say with thy self, Lord, what need
have I of a Saviour? I see thou mayest condemn mee for my most
holy services, and therefore I go wholly out of my self unto Iesus
Christ, resting upon his perfect Righteousness, and all-sufficient
Merits, for life and for salvation.


CHAP. III.
Of Ejaculatory Prayers.
BEsides thy solemn Morning Prayer, it will bee good to send
up Ejaculatory Prayers, and Praises unto God, and that fre|quently
upon all occasions.
By Ejaculatory Prayers and Praises, I mean, The sudden lif|ting
up of the heart unto God upon some present occasion, either
in way of Petition, or Thanksgiving.
Which kinde of Prayers wee finde commanded under those
general Precepts of praying alwaies,Luk. 18. 1. and praying without ceasing;1 Thes. 5. 17.
The meaning whereof is not that thou shouldest wholly and only
attend on prayer, so as to neglect the word, and other duties of

piety, or the ordinary works of thy calling: But that besides thine
ordinary and set times of prayer, thou shouldest alwaies have a
praying frame of spirit, bee ready upon all occasions to lift up
thine heart unto God in some short Ejaculations.
For the more profitable pressing of this kinde of prayer, I
shall
1 Give thee some Motives to quicken thee up to a frequent
performance thereof.
2 Add some Cautio
The Motives may bee drawn to three heads.
1 The Excellency. 2 The Necessity. 3 The Utility of this
kinde of Prayer.
I. The Excellency of Ejaculatory Prayer appeareth, In that
at all times, and in all places, even in our converses with men,
wee may thereby converse with God, and injoy an holy familiarity
with him, and yet others in our company take no notice thereof.
And when we are about the works of our Calling, we may with|out
any hinderance thereof, lift up our hearts to God in some
short Ejaculatory Prayer, for his assistance and blessing, which,
though they are but as Parentheses in our worldly imployments,
yet will prove very advantagious to us therein.
II. Another Motive may bee taken from the Necessity of these
Ejaculatory Prayers, and that
1 In regard of the sudden dangers and plunges whereunto the
people of God are many times brought, which will not afford time
for continued prayer.
2 In regard of the manifold slips and infirmities of the people
of God, which put them upon praying for the pardon and forgive|ness
of them.
3 In regard of the manifold mercies, blessings, and deliveran|ces,
which unexpectedly thou receivest from God, there is fre|quent
occasion of Ejaculatory Prayers and thanksgivings unto him.
III. A third Motive may bee taken from the Utility of those
Ejaculatory Prayers, which appeareth
1 From Gods gracious acceptation and remuneration of the
same whereof the Scripture giveth abundant instances and ex|amples;
As of Davids Ejaculatory Prayer against Achitophel, that
God would turn his counsel into foolishness,1 Sam. 17. 14. was graciously ac|ceped
and granted in defeating the same.Nehem. 2. 6. The like wee read of
Nehemiah's Ejaculatory Prayer unto God, to incline the heart of

the King to grant his request, which was graciously heard and an|swered.
So also the poor penitent Theef's Ejaculatory Prayer
unto Christ, Lord remember mee when thou comest into thy King|dome.
Holy Ejaculations are the Spiritual breathings of a gra|cious
heart, which as they are very pleasing unto God, so exceed|ingly
advantagious unto Christians; for though they are very short
and sudden, yet seldome do they return empty.
2 These Ejaculatory Prayers are a special means for the im|proving
of every opportunity and occurrence of Providence to thy
spiritual advantage.
Herein bee careful to observe these two Cautions.
1 Content not thy self with these Ejaculatory Prayers and
Praises, as if they were sufficient at thy lying down, and rising
up, and that thou needest not to trouble thy self with any longer
prayers. Oh let not thy Ejaculatory Prayers justle out either
thy closet or family prayers; but as God in his Word requireth the
one as well as the other, do thou make conscience of every one of
them in their time and place.
2 Beware of formal and prophane Ejaculations, which come
from the lip, but not from the heart; as Good Lord, and Good
God, or, The Lord bless mee, and Lord have mercy upon mee,
with such like, which can bee no better than a taking of the name
of God in vain, in that they are uttered customarily in a way of
form, meerly from the teeth outward, for which, without true
and unfeigned repentance, God will not hold thee guiltless.


CHAP. IV.
Of Reading the Scriptures in private.
ANother duty to be performed alone, is Reading of the Scrip|tures
And indeed the Word and Prayer should go hand in hand
together,1 Tim. 4. 5. as the Christians daily exercise, For every thing is san|ctifed
by the Word of God and Prayer.
Appoint therefore some set time in every day for the reading of
the Word; The morning is the freest, when our spirits and wits
are freshest.Per Scriptuas solas potes ple|nam D intel|ligere volunta|tem. Hier. ad Dmet. By reading three chapters a day, the whole Bible
may bee read over in a year. But I would not so strictly tye any to
this, as still to go on in reading some part of the Scriptures every
day. And if extraordinary occasion hinder thine ordinary task,
double it another time; For by the holy Scriptures onely wee may

attain to the knowledge of the whole will of God.
For the more profitable pressing this duty, I shall
1 Give you some Rules and Directions to bee observed,

1 Before the reading of the Scriptures.
2 In reading of the Scriptures.
3 After the reading of them.

2 Give you some Motives to quicken you to a frequent reading
of them.
I. The Rules and Directions to be observed before reading are
these.
1 Go about it with all holy reverence, as in the sight and pre|sence
of God,1 Pet. 1. 21. beleeving it to bee the Word of God written by ho|ly
men, as they were moved and inspired by the Holy Ghost, as the
Apostle Peter expresseth it; when therefore thou settest thy self
to read the Word, say to thy self. I will hearken what the Lord
will speak unto mee therein.
2 Lift up thine heart in prayer unto God, as for the Spirit of
Illumination, to open the eyes of thine understanding, that thou
mayest rightly conceive his Word: so for wisdome to apply, me|mory
to retain, faith to beleeve, and grace to practise what thou
shalt read.
II. The Rules and Directions to bee observed in reading of the
Word, are these,
1 Read the holy lives and actions of Gods Children, not onely
as matters of history, but as patterns of imitation: for, for this end are
they recorded unto us,Rom. 15. 4. as St. Paul testifieth, Whatsoever things
were written aforetime, were written for our learning.
2 In reading the Promises and Threatnings, the Exhortations
and Admonitions, and other parts of the Scripture, so apply them
to thy self, as if God by name had delivered the same unto thee;
whereby the Word will become very profitable unto thee: For
thus will promises to others incourage thee, threatnings against
others restrain thee from sin, exhortations to others stir thee up to
thy duty, and admonitions to others make thee wary; yea thus,
whatsoever things were written aforetime,Sint divinae Scrpurae sem|per ia maaibus,  jugit men|te volvanur. Hier. ad Ce|lant. will prove good in|structions
unto thee.
III. Rules to bee observed after the reading of the Word.
1 Seriously meditate of what thou hast read, that so thou
mayest the better remember and understand the same.
2 Labour to work something of that thou hast read upon thine

heart, and give not over till thou findest the affections of thy
soul warmed thereby.
To quicken you up to a frequent reading of the Scriptures,
consider these two Motives.
1 The first may be taken from those treasures that are contained
therein, such treasures as men never heard of. The subject matter of
the Word, are such mysteries as were hidden in God, and by his
Spirit revealed unto men. All the abstruse learning, and myste|ries
of other books and writings, are but straw and stubble, yea
dross and dung in comparison of the precious pearls in this.
2 Another Motive may bee taken from the many sweet and
precious promises which are scattered up and down in the Word.
For as there is not a condition into which a Childe of God can
fall, but there is a Direction and Rule in the Word, in some
measure suitable thereunto: so there is not an affliction into
which a childe of God can fall, but there is a promise in the
Word in some measure suitable thereunto.


CHAP. V.
Of Christian Watchfulness over our Thoughts.
DO not think, that having saluted God by prayer, and reading
his Word in the morning,Prov. 4. 23. Mark 13. 33. 37, 38. thou mayest take thy leave of him
all the day after. But second thy prayes and reading with Chri|stian
Watchfulness,2 Tim. 4. 5. which is a duty incumbent upon all, being
much pressed upon us in Scripture.
For the profitable handling whereof, I shall shew you

1 The Nature of Christian Watchfulness.
2 The Extent thereof, or the particulars wherein we are to
manifest the same.

I. For the Nature of Christian Watchfulness; It is an heedful
Observation of our selves in all things, and a diligent circum|spection
over all our waies, courses, and actions, that wee may
not displease God in any thing, but rather please him in all things.
II. For the Extent of this duty, The Apostle sets it down in
general Terms,2 Tim. 4. 5. Watch thou in all things, which I shall branch in|to
several particulars.
1 Over thy Thoughts, Words and Actions.
2 Against Sin in general, and the several kinds thereof.
1 Thou must be watchful over thy Thoughts,Jer. 4. 14. that vain Thoughts
may not lodge in thine heart.

For the profitable pressing of this, I shall

1 Give you some Motives to quicken you up thereunto.
2 Some Directions and helps thereunto.

I. For Motives, first consider, that vain and evil thoughts,
though they break not forth into acts, yet are they actual sins; for
thoughts, though they are inward, yet are they the acts of the
soul, and in that they are evil, they are sinful.
2 Evil thoughts are not onely sinful in themselves, but they are
likewise the cause of all sins, the plotters of all treasons against
God, the Panders of all other lusts; so much the Apostle Iames
expresseth,Jam. 1. 15 When lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin; lustful
thoughts being conceived in the heart, they soon bring forth sin,
breaking forth into acts of filthiness and uncleanness.
3 Consider, that by our thoughts especially, will the Lord judge
us at the last day,1 Cor. 4. 5 When hee will make manifest the counsel of the
heart, as the Apostle expresseth it. And Rom. 2. 16. God hath ap|pointed
a day wherein he will judge the secrets of men by Iesus Christ.
Then the swarms of our vain and evil thoughts shall be discover|ed,
and laid open, to our eternal shame, before God, Angels, and
men, without true and unfeigned repentance.
4 Evil and vain thoughts without true and unfeigned repen|tance,
will sink our souls to Hell; such of you therefore as make
no conscience of your thoughts, but delight your selves in vain
and wicked thoughts, in lustful and unclean thoughts, and that
impenitently, how can you escape the vengeance of hell?
I deny not but the best men, through the remainder of corruption
in them, are subject to vain and wicked thoughts; but these are
their grief and their burden against which they strive, and for
which they earnestly begge pardon, and therefore shall not bee
said to their condemnation.
The helps and directions are these.
1 Consider, That the Lord doth as strictly observe all inward sinful
thoughts, as he doth the outward acts of sin; Hee is Omniscient, and
knoweth all things, yea he is the trier and searcher of our hearts, and
so is privy to every vain and wicked,Psal. 139. 1, 2. to every wanton and lustful
thought in our hearts; So that howsoever men discern not our
thoughts, yet God doth.
2 Make not too much of those vain and wicked thoughts which
doe either arise from thine own corrupt heart, or are cast in by Sa|tan;
I mean, thou must not revolve them in thy mind, by musing

and meditating on them with any delight; for if so, thou art in
danger to be ensnared by them.
3 With detestation speedily reject, and cast all vain and wicked
thoughts out of thine heart; As in thy judgement thou canst not but
condemn them as base and wicked, so in thy affections abhor and
defest them, yea reject and cast them away as abominable.
4 So soon as any vain or wicked thoughts begin to arise in thine
heart, fix thy meditation upon good thoughts, and upon such especial|ly
as are contrary thereunto. Thus when vain thoughts begin to a|rise
in thine heart, strive to put them out, by fixing thy medita|tion
upon some serious matter; when earthly, worldly thoughts
begin to arise in thine heart, fix thy meditation upon some spiri|tual
and heavenly thoughts; when any lustful and impure
thoughts begin to arise in thine heart, fix thy meditation upon
some holy and good thoughts, think of the excellency and neces|sitie
of holiness,Heb. 12. 14 without which no man shall see the Lord.
5 Humble thy self for all thy sinful and vain thoughts, of what sort or
kind soever. For know assuredly, that unless thou humble thy self
for thy sinful and vain thoughts, thou shalt bee called to an ac|count
for them at the Day of Judgement,1 Cor. 4. 5 when the Lord will bring
to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the heart.
6 And that which sanctifies all other means, is earnest and
hearty prayer unto God that he would be pleased, as to suppress
and keep down all vain, wicked, wanton thoughts from rising in
thy heart, so that he would rebuke Satan, and restrain his malice,
that he may not cast his hellish thoughts into thine heart; or at
least, that he would enable thee to quench them at their first en|trance.
This course did the Apostle Pau take in the like case, as we
read in 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8.


CHAP. VI.
Of watchfulness over our Words.
AS thou must be watchful over thy Thoughts, so likewise over
thy Words, according to the counsel of the Prophet David
Keep thy tongue from evil,Psal. 34. 13 and thy lips from speaking gue.
For the profitable handling of this part of Christian watchful|ness,
I shall give you,
1 Some Helps and directions thereunto.

2 Some Motives to quicken you up to a conscionable use of
those helps and directions,
The helps and directions are these.
I Avoyd all corrupt and rotten communication;Ephes. 4 29 which direction
the Apostle Paul giveth, Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of your mouth.
The corrupt speeches we ought carefully to avoyd are of several
sorts, which may be reduced to these Heads.

1 Such as tend to the dishonour of God.
2 Such as tend to mans disgrace and hurt.

Those which tend to Gods dishonour are especially these.
I, Unlawful Swearing, which is in three respects especially.
1 When men swear falsly, or as wee speak, forswear them|selves.
2 When they swear impiously. 3 When they swear rashly.
1 They who swear falsly, whom we call perjured persons, are
such as confirm any thing by Oath against their knowledge, or
swear to doe a thing which they intend not; or intending at first
to doe it, yet afterwards are careless and negligent in the perfor|mance
of it.
These false Swearers doe not only sin themselves, but as much
as in them is, bring God in compass of their sin, and make him
partaker thereof; he is made a witness, and an approver of a
Lye, and therein made like unto the Devil, who is the Father of
Lies, which is a most abominable dishonour done to the holy
name of God.
2 To swear impiously, is an unlawful Oath, either in regard of
the matter, or of the form.
An impious oath in respect of the matter, is by oath to bind a
mans self to doe some wicked thing, as those Iews who bound
themselves with an oath to kill Paul;Acts 23. 14 and Iezabel, who took an
oath to slay Elijah.1 King. 19. 2 This kind of Oath maketh God a Patron, and
approver of wickedness.
An impious oath in respect of the form of it, is, when we swear by
other things besides Gods holy name, as by any Creature, as Io|seph
by the life of Pharaoh.
3 To swear rahly is to swear lightly, and frequently, in our fa|miliar
talk and discourse; this, though it be a common and ordi|nary
sin, indeed too too common and ordinary, yet it is a most
grievous Sin, and a sin that crieth loud in the ears of God for ven|geance.

The hainousness of this sin appeareth,
1 In that Gods name is thereby taken in vain, which is a direct
breach of the third Commandement, for that forbiddeth us to
take the name of God in vain.Exod. 20. 7 Now then is Gods name taken in
vain, when needlesly, without any just cause, it is used by any, a|gainst
which there is a judgement threatned in the next words, The
Lord will not hold him guiltless; i. e. hee shall not goe unpu|nished.
2 Swearing in our ordinary discourse is the very Livery of the
Devil, and badge of prophaneness, which the Wise man hinteth un|to
us, Eccles. 9. 2. where, as he maketh it a sure sign of a godly
man, to fear an oath, so of a wicked and prophane person, not to
fear an oath, but to make no conscience of it. And truly, ordina|ry
swearing may well be a badge and note of a prophane person,
for such an one will make little or no conscience of any sin, who
maketh no conscience of this sin of swearing, which is so vain and
unprofitable a sin: for the excuse whereof the swearer cannot
plead any outward good, neither profit, as the covetous world|ling;
nor honour and preferment, as the ambitious person; nor
pleasure, as the voluptuous; and therefore wee may well con|clude,
that he who makes no conscience of swearing, will make
little conscience of any other sin; for hee that will sin for nothing,
as the swearer doth, certainly will sin for something. Nay, what sin
will not he commit for profit, pleasure, or preferment, who sticks
not to prophane the holy name of God for nothing?Mat. 5. 37 . Our blessed
Saviour speaking of this sin, saith expresly, it cometh of evil, mea|ning
the Devil, Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for what|soever
is more than these cometh of evil; i. e. that evil one the De|vil,
who is the author of all vain oathes. Which me thinks should
be a powerful argument to prevail with men, to avoyd in their
ordinary communication all vain oathes, yea and needless pro|testations,
considering they come from the Devil, who is the
School-master that teacheth men to use them, and therefore by a
frequent use of them, they shew themselves to be the Scholars, if
not the children, of the Devil.
II. Another kind of corrupt speech is, when Gods holy titles
are upon every light occasion used, and so plainly abused; as when
any thing suddenly happens out, then we presently say, O Lord,
O God, O Iesus. Again, when we would have any thing, then we
are apt to say, for Gods sake doe this, for Christs sake doe that,

and yet with no reverence doe wee think of God, or of Jesus, if
we think of them at all; for commonly it is but a phrase of course.
to say the least of this, it is a direct taking of Gods name in vain,
and so maketh us liable to that curse, God will not hold him guilt|less,
that taketh his name in vain.
These are some of those corrupt words and speeches which tend
to the dishonour of God.
Come we now to such as tend to mans disgrace, or hurt; and
they are such as are against our selves directly, or against others.
The corrupt speeches that are against our selves are Imprecations.
It is usual with many, by imprecating some mischief against them|selves,
to confirm their speeches; methinks such should be afraid
lest God in judgement should hear them, and justly cause the
vengeance they call for, to fall upon themselves; let such remem|ber
the Iewes, who cried out, His bloud be upon us, and our chil|dren,
and from that day to this hath it lain heavily upon them.
Of corrupt speeches against others, there are many kinds; as,
1 Imprecations, for it is usual, if not much more usual, to
make fearful imprecations against others, as well as against our
selves, which as they are corrupt speeches, so are they ill-beseem+ing
Christians.
2 Unclean and unchaste speeches are another kind of corrupt
communication. Some mens mouthes are always full of them;
which plainly sheweth the pollution of their hearts, and how their
minds are wholly set on lust.
3 Idle and vain discourses whch tend to no good, are another
kind of corrupt speeches; as old Wives fables, talking of mat|ters
not belonging to us, pratling of any thing that comes into ones
head.Mat. 12. 36 Our Saviour saith, That every idle word that men shall speak,
hey shall give accont thereof in the day of Iudgement. Here our
Saviour sheweth that at the Day of Judgement we must give an
account, not only for filthy, unclean, and unchast speeches, but
likewise for idle words, yea for every idle word; and therefore
how doth it concern us to bee watchful over our selves, as a|gainst
all filthy and unclean speeches, so likewise against all idle
words?
These are the kinds of corrupt Speeches, and communication,
which we ought the more carefully to avoyd, in regard of the hai|nousness
thereof.
II. Accustome your selves to holy conrences, and good communica|tion;

It is not sufficient to abstain from corrupt communication,
except you accustome your selves to good communication; for it
is good and gracious speech which commendeth a good and a sound
heart, even as its good fruit which commends a good tree.
III. In all your conferences,. forbear to speak evil of others; This
direction the Apostle Iames giveth, Speak not, saith he, evl one of
another; the word in the original properly signifieth, a speaking one
against another, and forbids all manner of words tending to the
disgrace and disparagemen: of your Neighbour, whether that you
speak be for the matter of it true or false; for a man may bee said
to speak evil of his Neighbour two ways, viz.
1 By raising false reports.
2 By a divulging of their secret evils.
This God did expresly forbid his own people the Jewes,Levit. 19. 16 Thou
shalt not goe up and down as a Tale-bearer among the people; like un|to
a Pedler, which carrieth his Pack from house to house, venting
here a little, and there a little, until at length he hath uttered all
his Wares. Thus there are too too many who goe up and down,
from house to house,. uttering slanders and reproaches as Wares,
which indeed is the Devils proper sin, who is stiled, the accuser of his
brethren. Oh consider, that God will surely recompence this into
your bosomes;Rev. 12. 10 Mat 7 1 for as our Saviour speaketh, Iudge not, that yee bee
not judged, for with what judgement yee judge yee shall be judged; and
with what measure yee mete, it shall be measured to you again. So
that thou shalt be sure to find others that will be as ready to judge
thee, and to speak evil of thee, as thou hast of thy brother, who
will have as little care of thy credit as thou hast had of thy
brothers; so farre shouldst thou be from wronging thy neighbour,
by being the author and spreader of evil reports, that thou shouldst
not lend thine ear to them that spread them, for thine ears may
be as guilty as thy tongue; therefore such evil speaking should
not be heard without some expression of dislike: which would bee
a special means for the suppressing of them.
IV. Be not lavish in your words,Quicquid in bucam veneri profundunt, hinc studium mentiendi um vera desun. but sparing in your speech; ut|ter
not all that you hear, or know. Which rule the Apostle Iames
giveth, in Chap. 1. 19. Let every man, saith he, be swift to hear,
but slow to speak.
V. Be well advised before you speak; for oftentimes many mens
tongues doe over-run,Ludov. Viv. de Christia. Foem. l. 1. and out-strip their wits. But doe you fore|think,
whether that you are about to speak be suitable, and season|able,

and let not thy tongue run before thy mind., ne lingua prae|currat menti.
VI. Let your ordinary speech be plain, without oathes and im|precations,
yea without all vain asseverations and protestations. This
direction our Saviour giveth, Let your communication bee yea, yea,
nay, nay; i. e. let your ordinary speech be plain, and naked, with|out
any oathes, imprecations, asseverations and protestations.
For,Matth. 5. 37  whatsoever is more than these, i. e. whatsoever exceedeth a sim|ple
affirmation, or negation, cometh of evil; i. e. of the evil one the
Devil.
VII. In all your Conferences speak nothing but the truth; This
direction the Apostle giveth,Ephes. 4. 25 Wherefore putting away lying, speak
every man truth with his neighbour. Though lying be a sin common a|mongst
all sorts of people, not only children, but also grown
men and women as in their ordinary discourse, so especially in
their trading, wherein what more ordinary than lying and dis|sembling,
yet is it a most hainous sin, as will appear by due consi|deration
of these particulars.
1 It is a Sin against knowledge and conscience; it cannot be ig|norantly
committed,Mentiri est contra mentem ire. for ignorance is against the nature of a lye;
the word in Latine to lye, is as much as to speak against ones
mind and knowledge.
2 It is most agreeable to the Devils nature; so that a lying spi|rit
is a Diabolical spirit, and a Lyar carrieth the very image and
picture of the Devil,Joh. 8. 44 who is the father of lyes.
3 It pulleth down Gods fearful Iudgement and Vengeance, and
that both temporal in this world and eternal in the world to come;
for proof whereof, observe in general what David saith, Psal. 5. 6.
God will destroy all that speak lyes. More particularly for Tempo|ral
Judgements in this world,Hos. 4. 2 the Prophet Hosea reckons up this
Sin amongst those gross sins which caused God to send Famine,
Plague, Sword, Captivity, and other like Judgements on the Is|raelites.
For eternal Judgements, we find them likwise threat|ned
against this Sin, as in Revel. 21. 27. we find Lying reckoned
amongst those sins which bar us out of heaven; and Revel. 21. 8.
we find it reckoned amongst those sins which thrust us into Hell;
But the fearful, and unbeleeving, and Murtherers, and Whoremon|gers,
and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and Lyars, shall have their part
in the Lake whch burneth with fire and brimstone; here lying is
reckoned amongst those sins which thrust us into Hell. And wee
may further observe amongst what hainous and capital Sins Lyars

are reckoned, even amongst Murtherrs, Whoremongers, c. which
further shews the hainousness of this sin.
VIII. Pray unto God to sanctifie your speech, and so to direct it by
his holy Spirit, that it may tend, as to the glory of his name, so to the
good both of the speaker and hearer. All our endeavours are nothing
without God, and therefore we had need goe unto him by prayer,
so to sanctifie our words and speeches, that they may tend to
the good of others, and minister grace to the hearers.


CHAP. VII.
Of Watchfulness over our Actions.
AS we must be watchful over our thoughts and words, so like|wise
over our actions.
For the more profitable pressing of this part of Christian watch|fulness,
I shall give you some helps to direct you therein.
I. Make Gods Word the rule of all thy actions. This direction the
Apostle hinteth, in Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this
rul, peace be on them, and mercy. Where the Apostle terms the
Word of God the rule whereby we must walk, and square all our
actions.
Quest. What is to be done in such cases, wherein we are doubtful,
and uncertain of the will and mind of God, and what is most agree|able
thereunto?
Ans. 1. In doubful cases, where the reasons on both sides
seem to be equally ballanced, observe which side seems most to
tend to the glory of God, the good of thy Neighbour, and thine
own Spiritual welfare, and incline rather thereunto; and know,
that when thou shalt propound these things as thine end, and aym,
and make them thy Bias, God will then delight to make known
his good pleasure to thee.
2 Seek advice from others whom thou conceivest to bee godly,
and judicious; and amidst their counsels observe what it is thine
own spirit doth best approve of, and most cloze with.
3 Prayer being the means sanctified by God for the obtaining
of every good thing, bee earnest with God in Prayer, that hee
would direct thee in the right way and course; that he would cause
thee to hear a voyce behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk
in it.

4 Having prayed unto God, and commended thy case unto
him, hearken and wait for the return of thy prayer, diligently ob|serving
to what course thine heart is most inclined after prayer; and
conclude that to be the way he would have thee to walk in.
II. Another help and direction is, to propound Gods glory as the
chief end and aim of all thine actions;1 Cor. 10. 31 which direction the Apostle
Paul giveth us in express terms, Whatsoever yee doe, doe all to the
glory of God; i. e. that God may be thereby glorified. For,
1 Without this thy best actions, thy most religious exercises
are neither acceptable nor pleasing unto God; let any action bee
in it self never so specious and glorious, yet if Gods glory bee not
the end of it, there is a woe to such works, instead of an Euge, or
Well done.
2 This puts a value and price upon all our actions, the more
they am at this end the better they be. As therefore thou desirest
to have thine actions and services acceptable and pleasing unto
God, let his glory be thy chief and principal aym therein, doing
what thou dost in obedience to the Command of God, that hee
thereby may be glorified.
I deny not but other ends may creep into thine heart, and steal
into the performance of thy best actions, as thine own profit, ap|plause,
and the like; but know for thy comfort, that the Lord look|eth
more to the general bent of thine heart, and frame of thy spirit,
in what thou dost, then upon any particular base and by end,
which sometimes creepeth and stealeth into thine heart, and will
reckon with thee according to the general purpose and aym of
thine heart, and not according to some particular end and aym,
which hath crept in unawares through the corruption of thine
heart.
III. Another help and direction to Christian watchfulness over
thine actions is, To commend all thine actions and businesses unto
God by Prayer, not enterprising any thing without seeking directi|on,
assistance, and a blessing from God; for as the Psalmist speak|eth,Psal. 127. 2
It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of
sorrows, unless the Lord put to his helping hand, and come in with a
blessing; which is obtained chiefly by prayer; farre be it there|fore
from thee to enterprise any thing without first commending it
unto God by Prayer; for questionless one special reason why ma|ny
find not that success in their businesses which they desire, is, be|cause
they have not first commended them unto God by Prayer,

they have not sought unto him for his direction, assistance, and
blessing.
IV. Set God always before thee, and ever walk as in his sight and
presence;In omnibus qu agis, Deum praesentem cogi|tes, Ber. Med Gen. 17. 1 which direction the Lord himself giveth to Abraham,
for the better ordering of the whole course of his life, saying, Walk
before me, and be thou perfect; i. e. walk as in my sight and pre|sence,
setting me ever before thee; which will be a special means
to keep and restrain thee from many sins; this we read kept Ioseph
from yeelding to the wanton solicitations of his Mistris, though he
had the opportunity of privacy,Gen. 39. 9 How can I, saith he, doe this great
wickedness and sin against God? It was the apprehension of Gods
ll-seeing presence that preserved him from closing with the inor|dinate
affection of his Mistris.


CHAP. VIII.
Of Watchfulness against Sin.
AS thou must watch over thy Thoughts, Words, and Actions, so
likewise against Sin.
Both against Sin in general, and likewise against the several
kinds of Sin.
I. First, thou must watch against Sin in general, not bearing
with thy self in the willing practice of any known Sin; for in vain
dost thou expect any true peace in thy soul, so long as thou reai|nest,
and favourest any one Sin in thy self against thy Conscience.
For the more profitable pressing of this part of Christian watch|fulness,
I shall give thee some helps to direct thee therein.
1 Carefully avoyd all the occasions and means which may allure and
draw thee unto sin; for it is impossible to eschew the one without
the other; it is not possible that he who is inclined to drunkenness
should contain himself from it, if he avoyd not the places and com|pany
of drunkards; neither is it possible for him that is wanton and
lascivious, to abstain from filthiness and uncleanness, if he fre|quent
unchast company, and pamper himself in gluttony and drun|kenness.Peccata non sant nenda coalescere c. sed in exordiis stati enecand sunt c. Hilar. Enarrat. in Psal. 36
2 If thou art assaulted, resist sin in the beginning; Doe not dally
with temptations, as the Fly with the flame of a Candle, lest thou
be burnt before thou be aware; neither doe thou suffer Sin to grow
and increase, but rather withstand the first beginnings thereof, and
if possibly nip it in the bud.

3 If thou beest overtaken with any sin, labour to recover thy self
with all possible speed, by true and unfeigned repentance. Be sure
thou doe not live, nor lye impenitently in the practice of any Sin
against thy Conscience, for so long thou wearest the Devils Live|ry,
and art a stranger to true peace.
4 Being recovered, take heed of relapsing; A relapse is dangerous
in bodily diseases, much more in spiritual; Christ saw this to bee
a needful caveat, therefore he gave this advice to a Woman ta|ken
in Adultery,Joh, 8. 11 and forgiven, Goe and sin no more; yea the same
advice he gave to the poor Cripple, whom he healed at the Pool of
Bethesda,Joh. 5. 14 backt with a strong reason, saying to him, Sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee. Which doth not imply, that a
man may keep himself pure, and free from all sin; but that hee
ought with the best care, and greatest watchfulness that hee can,
endeavour to keep himself pure and free from all sin, especially
from enormous sins which in an high manner provoke the Wrath
of God. Though therefore thou hast obtained the pardon and for|giveness
of thy former sins, it concerns thee to be watchful against
sin for the time to come, otherwise thou art in great danger of re|lapsing
into the same sins, if not worse; whereby thy last state
will be worse than the first.
5 Often have recourse unto God by fervent prayer, as against sin
in general, that hee would bee pleased to keep thee from falling
thereunto, so espeially against those particular sins which thou fin|dest
working and stirring in thee, and with which thou art most mo|lested,
earnestly begging power and strength from God, that thou
maist be enabled to stand in the day of temptation.
II. As thou must watch against Sin in general, so likewise a|gainst
the several sorts and kinds of sin. A,
I. Against thy beloved Sin;Peccatum in deliciis, as Aug. calls it. for there is none of us all but wee
have in us our darling and beloved Sin, our own Idol (as I may
say) whereunto we many times doe service, to the great offence
of Almighty God.
For the better discovery whereof take these few directions.
1 Observe which way the stream of thy thoughts run, especially
thy morning thoughts, whether after the world, or this or that lust,
for Where the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together;
whatsoever thy beloved Sin is, upon that will thy morning thoughts
most hover; so that if worldness and covetousness bee thy beloved
Sin, thy morning thoughts for the most part will bee upon the

world, and the things thereof, how thou maist grow great and
rich in the world; if pride and ambition be thy darling and beloved
Sin, then thy morning thoughts will be upon thine advancement,
how thou maist ie in the world, and if clearlness be thy belo|ved
Sin, then thy thoughts, especially thy morning thoughts, will
be unean, thy ead will be taken up with speculative filthiness,
how thou maist satisfie thy iust; for this is a sure rule, Every man
is what ee is most in the morning. As hee that is spiritual hath his
morning thoughts upon God, or upon some spiritual and heavenly
subje so hee that is worldly and unclean, hath his morning
thoughts upon the world, and about the satisfying of his carnal
lusts.
2 Observe seriously what Sin it is thy Conscience doth most
and chiefly check thee for, especially in time of affliction, for
Conscience being then awakened will most of all check thee for
thy beloved Sin.
3 Observe what it is wherewith thine enemies doe most up|braid
thee for others many times can sooner discern our beloved
Sin than we our selves, which like a stinking breath is sooner sen|ted
by a stander by, than by him that hath it; and thus maist thou
make a good improvement of the bitterest objections of thine ad|versaries
against thee.
4 Observe what Sin it is thou hast least power to resist and
with which thou art oftnest and easiliest overcome, notwithstan|ding
thy Conscience checks thee for the same; thou hast hereup|on
good ground to conclude that to be thy beloved Sin.
Having found out thy bosome Sin, thou must especially watch
against that, lest thou bee surprised by it; and that for these
reasons.
1 Because this Sin is so sweet and delightful to a Sinner, that
he doth very hardly part with it; hee will forsake all that he pos|sesseth,
yea and adventure life it self, rather than forsake his be|loved
Sin;. Heb. 12. 1 and therefore it may fitly be called the Sin that hang|eth
so fast on, as being not easily cast off.
2 One beloved Sin in the bosome so alienates the heart, that it
cannot love Christ as it should; as one stranger in the bosome of
the Wife, so takes up her affection, that she cannot love her Hus|band
as she ought.
II. Thou must with as great care and circumspection watch a|gainst
the sins of the times, and places of thine abde. So long as thou

livest in this world thou canst not be freed from the society and
neighbourhood of wicked and ungodly men, but thy care must bee
to keep thee as free from their wickedness as thou canst. This ad|vice
the Apostle Paul giveth in these words,Ephes. 5, 15 See that yee walk cir|cumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise, because the days are evil; inti|mating,
the more evil the times are, the more any sin doth abound
in the time and places of our abode, the more watchful should we
be over our selves against those Sins, that we may not be infected
nor poysoned by them:
And truely, as it is an high pitch of impiety for a man to be bad
amongst good men; so it is an high pitch of piety, for a man to bee
good amongst bad men, to retain his goodness in wicked times and
places. Singularity I know is charged upon Gods children as their
disgrace, but certainly it is their glory that they are a peculiar peo|ple,
separated from the sinful vanities and courses of the world; for
we read, that the Spirit of God in setting forth the height of mens
misery in their Natural state, describeth it by their living according
to the common course of the world,Ephes. 2. 2 and the sinful practices thereof.
III. Thou must with as great care and circumspection watch
against secret sins, as against open and publick sins, making consci|ence
of sinning in secret, even when thou hast the opportunity of
privacy for the acting and committing thereof, and that for these
reasons.
1 Because we are more apt to fall into secret than into open
and publick sins. For if we can hide our sins from the eyes and
knowledge of men, we are apt to think all is well and safe, and
thereupon encourage our selves to sin in secret. The fear of
shame and discredit with men, hath great force to restrain men
from committing sin in the publick view, but in secret few care
what they doe; and therefore the Murtherer and Adulterer are
brought in by Iob emboldning themselves,Job. 24. 14 saying, No eye seeth us.
2 Howsoever we may hide our secret sins from the eyes of men,
yet it is impossible to hide them from the all-seeing Eye of God,. Eu|rip.
who seeth all, himself unseen of any, being present in all places,
beholding both the evil and the good, Proverbs 15. 3. If then
thou wilt sin securely, saith Augustine, seek out a place where he seeth
thee not, and there doe what thou wilt;Quare si pec|care vi, quaere bi t non vide at,  fac quod vis. Aug. But seeing God is present
in all places, it is impossible thou shouldest hide thy sins from his
all-seeing Eye; and therefore never be encouraged to sin in hope
of secrecy.

3 As God here seeth and taketh notice of our most secret sins,
so he will one time or other discover those deeds of darkness to
our great confusion, without true and unfeigned repentance; if
not here in this life, yet at the Day of Judgement, when our most
secret Sins shall be discovered to the view of all;Eccles. 12. 14 for as the Wise
man speaketh, God will bring every work into Iudgement, with e|very
secret thing, whether it be good, or wheher it be evil, There is
never a wicked man almost in the world, though never so formal,
but he hath at some time or other committed that wickedness in
secret which he would not have known for all the world; but
know for certain, that at the Day of Judgement all the world shall
hear thereof, for then all thy secret sins shall be discovered to An|gels,
Men, and Devils, thy secret uncleanness, and close adultery,
thy pilferings and stealings, thy false weights and measures shall
be brought to the view of all, to thine eternal shame and confusi|on.
Were our hearts thorowly possessed herewith, oh how watch|ful
would it make us over our selves in secret, and fearful to ad|venture
upon any Sin, though we have the opportunity of privacy
for the acting of it?
IV. Thou must be watchful against the least sin, not esteeming
any Sin so small and venial, as that thou maist safely give it en|tertainment,
and continue in it without true and unfeigned re|pentance,
and that for these reasons.
1 By the least Sin the Law of God is transgressed, his Justice
violated,Ne consideres quod parva  peccata, sed quod magnus sit Deus eui displicent. and his Wrth provoked; and therefore farre be it from
us to account that Sin little, which is committed against a God of
infinite Majesty; whereupon saith Saint Augustine, Doe not consi|der
the smalness of thy sins,Aug. de Poei|tent. vera  falsa, cap. 8. but the greatness of God, who is displea|sed
and provoked by them.
2 Little Sins are apt to make way for greater; as a little Boy
let in at the window, will open the door, that the stoutest Thief
may enter in, and rob and spoyl the house; so little Sins being
once admitted, will in time set wide open the door of our hearts,
that the greatest and grossest may enter in, and so rob and spoyl
us of all grace and goodness; and therefore despise not the smal|lest
Sin, for even that is a step to a greater: for who sees not by
daily experience, that unclean thoughts, and filhy words, draw
many on to unclean actions;Quae sequen|tis victoriae causa uit. yea as Iustin reports of Nius his
Victories,Iustin. lib. 1. how every Victory was a means of another conquest. So e|very
small Sin is a means and way to a greater.

And this must needs be so. Because God in his Judgement doth
usually punish Sin with Sin, I mean, God doth many times punish
some mens lesser Sins, by leaving them so to themselves, and to
the corruptions of their own wicked hearts, that they break forth
into the acting and committing of grosser Sins. The best means
therefore fo a man to keep himself from great and hainous Sins,
is, to be watchful against smaller Sins, and to make conscience of
them; for though at the present thou abhorrest the very thought
of Murther, and such like hainous Sin, yet if thou givest way to
uncleaneness, or livest impenitently in any other Sin, the Lord in
his Justice may leave thee so to thy self, as that thou shalt break
forth into actual Murther for the covering of thine uncleanness.
Thus it fell out with David, who questionless abhorred the thought
of Murther,2 Sam. 12. 9 yet having committed uncleanness with bathsheba,
soon after murthered Uriah (though an innocent man, and one of
his Worthies) for the covering of his Adultery. And how many
Women in these our days, who abominated the very thought of
Murther, yet have most cruelly slaugheed their tender Infants,
for the concealing and covering of their unleanness? As therefore
thou wouldst avoyd Murther, or such like hainous Sins, be watch|ful
against, and careful to avoyd lesser Sins, lest they make way
for the other.
3 The least Sin cannot be expiated, nor pardoned, without the
precious blood of the Son of God. That expression of the Apostle
is observable, Christ was delivered to death for our offences; the
word in the Greek translated Offences,. Rom. 4. 25 signifieth properly our slips,
implying, that our smallest Sins could not be expiated without the
bloody death of Iesus Christ. Oh let not us overlightly account
of that, for which Christ paid so dear a price as his own most
precious blood.


CHAP. IX.
Of our behaviour at Meals.
AS thou must be watchful against all kind of Sin, so likewise
over the things which in their own nature are lawful; for it
is in the use of things lawful wherewith the Devil doth most pre|vail,
at least with those who are not grosly wicked and prophane
I shall shew thee some instances of things lawful, over which thou

oughtest to be watchful, viz. Eating and Drinking, Recreation, thy
Calling, c.
Considering our Adversary the Devil layeth in every place
baits and sares to entrap us, so especially at our Tables; there|fore
it concerns us in a special manner to bee watchful over our
selves at our Meals.
For your better help therein take these Directions.
I. Forget not to pray unto God for a blessing on the creatures where|of
thou art to partake, for as the Apostle speaketh, Every Creature
of God is good,1 Tim. 4. 4, 5 being sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer.
It was the usuall practice of our Saviour to lift up his eyes
to Heaven, and crave a blessing upon the Creatures before hee
did partake thereof;1 Sam. 9. 13 and this hath been the usual practice of the
Saints,Acts 27. 35 and people of God before, and since Christs time. Ha|ving
therefore such worthy Patterns and Presidents, follow them,
not daring to partake of any of Gods good Creatures, till thou
hast lifted up thine heart to God, and craved his blessing upon
them; for otherwise, how justly mightest thou expect from God a
curse, rather than a blessing?
II. Eat as in the presence of God; God is ever present with us
wheresoever we are,. Greg. Naz. as in our Beds, so at our Boards, eying and
observing all our actions, like a well drawn Picture, that eyeth each
one in the room; so God eyeth each one in the word, as if his eye
were upon him alone. It will be therefoe thy wisdom wheresoe|ver
thou art, to carry thy self as in the sight and presence of God,
more particularly at thy Meals, when thou art most apt to forget
God, and to give out thy self to the Creature, and to the satisfy|ing
of thy carnal lust and appetite.
III. Season and sanctifie thy Meals with spiritual communication, and
holy, at least useful discourses, that thy oul as well as thy body may be fed
and nourished. And in regard of your great backwardness un|to,
and barrenness in spiritual discourses, that you cannot sud|denly
find out any fit matter for it, it will be a point of spiritual
wisdome in you, before-hand to think of some seasonable, savoury
Heads whereon to discourse at Meals, which may tend to the
good and edification of others; and resolve to embrace every op|portunity
that is by any offered to you for good discourse. Yet I
deny not but you may lawfully at Meals discourse as of Newes, so
of Civil matters, or of your own affairs, and the like, especially
hen you perceive that your company is unfit, or unwilling to fall

upon any spiritual discourse; yet you shall doe well  season your
Civil and Moral discourses with some spiritual and savoury expres|sions.
IV. Fail not to give thanks after meals, for that comfortable re|freshment
you have found from the creature. As yee ought to begin
your Meals with Prayer unto God for his blessing, so yee ought to
end them with praises and thanksgivings unto God; which the
Lord gave in special command unto his people,Deut. 8. 10 saying, When thou
hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God; and
saith the Prophet Ioel to Gods People,Joel 2. 26 Yee shall eat and be satis|fied,
and praise the name of the Lord your God; yea we read that
the Heathenish Idolaters at their feasts were accustomed to praise
their false gods,Dan. 5. 4 for it is said, They drank Wine, and praised the
gods of gold, and of silver, and of brass, of iron, of wood, and of
stones. Is it not then a wonderful shame for Christians after their
Meals not to praise the true God, from whom we receive all the
good things we doe enjoy? yea what is it but brutish and swinish
ingratitude, if when God openeth his hand, and filleth us with
plenty of good things, we doe not open our mouthes in praises and
thanksgivings unto God, giving unto him the glory thereof?


CHAP. X.
Of Sports and Recreations.
AS you ought to be watchful over your felves at your Meals,
so likewise at your Recreations; for though some recreati|ons
are lawful, yet are we generally apt to abuse them unto li|centiousness,
and to adventure upon all manner of sports and
recreations without any difference; therefore I shall shew you,
1 What kind of Sports which are used for recreations are
lawful.
2 How those which are in their kind lawful are abused, and so
made unlawful.
Unlawful Sports and Recreations may bee brought to these
Heads.
1 All such wherein neither wit of mind, nor exercise of body
is used, as Dice-play, and some Games at Cards, for in them is
nothing but an expectation of an uncertain event, wherein neither
wit of mind, nor exercise of body is used, which are the main ends
of Sports and Recreations, either for the refreshing of our minds,

or bodies, that we may thereby bee the better enabled for the
honouring of God in the discharge of the duties of our place and
calling.
2 Such as bring danger to men, as of old was fighting with
Beasts, and now Matches at Foot-bal, fighting at Cudgels, espe|cially
fighting with sharp Weapons,2 Sam. 14. 15, 16. much like the playing of
Ioabs and Abners men, who at length killed one another.
3 Such as declare Gods punishment on the Creatures for mans
Sin, as Bear-baiting, Cock-fighting, and the like; the enmity that
is in one Creature against another, is a punishment on the poor
Creatures for mans Sin, and therefore ought no to bee a ground
or matter of sport and rejoycing unto us, but rather of sorrow and
humiliation.
4 Such as are forbidden by the Laws of the Land, or place
where we live; for Sports and Recreations being among indiffe|rent
things, the Magistrates authority is especially of force in
them; and in this respect our ordinary Stage-Playes in this City
are unlawful.
II. The next thing to be considered is, how those Sports which
are in themselves lawful, are made unlawful by mens manner of
using them.
1 When too much time is spent in them. Recreations should bee
as sauces to your meat, to sharpen your appetite unto the duties
of your Calling, and not to glut your selves with them, so as to
make your selves the more unfit, both for the duties of your Cal|lings,
and of Gods service; you must know, that the main and
principal end of Gods sending you into the world, was not to fol|low
your pleasures, but that you should spend your time and
strength in the duties of Gods service and in the means whereby
you may be fitted thereunto.
2 When your Recreations are made a trade of Merchandise, as
when men Play meerly to get mony; that which a man gains by
this traick, he cannot with a good conscience possesse and enjoy;
it is not by God given him,Zeck. 5. 3, 4 because he cometh not to it by lawful
means, but is rather as stolen goods, over which Gods curse hang|eth;
and as for the party that loseth, he also is guilty of Theft,
for that which he loseth he purloyneth from his Wife, Children
and Family, if he have any; or if not, from Church, Common|wealth,
and poor. Oh that all our Gamesters would consider what
a fearful reckoning they are to make at the Day of Judgement, not

only of their precious time lavishly mis-spent, but also of their e|states
for the most part wickedly lost; when in their account there
shall be found so much wasted in Gaming, and so little given to
the Poor, and charitable uses.
Q. Is it altogether unlawful to play for mony?
A. I will not say it is altogether unlawful to play for money,
provided that what you play for be but a small matter, of little va|lue;
which is to be measured according to the estate and quality
of those who play.
3 Lawful Recreations are made unlawful, when they are used at
unseasonable times; as on days of Humiliation, and on the Sab|bath
Day, in which time the Lord forbiddeth all men to seek their
own pleasure.Isa. 58. 13.
4 When they are so used as they raise a mans Passion unto anger,
fury, and the like; or that they cause swearing, cursing, brawl|ing,
quarrelling, with the like evil effects. Hee that cannot
moderate his Passion, nor rule his Tongue at Play, is not fit
for it.
5 When in your Recreations you forget God, who is present with
you as at all times, so in all your actions; and therefore respect
ought to be had to God, as in all your actions, so in your recreati|ons:
Then you are to remember, that you are in the presence of
God, who seeth and observeth every thing. Which would bee a
special means to keep and retrain you from many uncivil and un|comly
actions.


CHAP. XI.
Of the Duties of our Callings.
EVery one ought to have special regard to the duties of that
particular Calling wherein he is placed by Gods Providence;
in a conscionable discharge whereof consists the very life and
power of religion.
For the more profitable handling of this Branch of Christian
watchfulness, viz. over our particular Callings,

1 I shall premise a few things.
2 Give you some directions to help you therein.
The things to be premised are these.

I. That every man ought to have a certain Calling, wherein hee

may exercise himself to the glory of God, and good of others
which will appear from these reasons.
1 It is the Ordinance of God,Gen. 3. 19 that in the sweat of his face every
man should eat his bread; which words are to bee understood not
only as a Curse but also as a Cond; yea Adam in the state
of Innocency had a Calling appointed him by God, namely, to
dress the Garden.Gen. 2. 15
2 Whosoever hath no Calling whereby hee may bee profitable
to Human society,2 Thes. 3. 11 is said to live disorderly, and walk inordi|nately.
3 Manifold mischiefs and evils are avoyded by following a lawful
Calling. For idleness is the cause of many evils, hee that giveth
himself up to sloathfulness is a fit subject for the Devil to work
upon; yea an idle person is the Devils Shop, there he works, ever
busie when men are most idle.
II. That our Calling ought to be honest and lawful; that is, such
an one as our labour in it may tend to the glory of God, the good
of our neighbour, and the furthering not only of our own tempo|ral,
but also of our spiritual welfare.
These things premised, come we now to the Directions.
I. Begin with God, by seeking unto him by Prayer, as for the par|don
of thy sin, and supply of all needful graces, so for his blessing
upon thy lawful pains and endeavours, for as the Apostle speaketh,
By the Word of God and Prayer all things are sanctified,1 Tim. 4. 5 and there|fore
it must needs be an unsanctified way and course to begin any
thing without first seeking unto God by Prayer for a blessing; for
indeed it is his blessing alone that maketh rich, and that causeth
any thing we take in hand to thrive and prosper; which Moses ac|knowledgeth,
where speaking to the people of Israel,Deut. 8. 18 he saith, It
is the Lord that giveth thee power to get wealth.
II. Be painful and industrious in the duties of thy Calling. Which
direction the Wise man giveth in these words,Eccl. 9. 10 Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to doe, doe it with all thy might; i. e. whatsoever works or
duties belong unto thee by vertue of thy Calling, doe them with
all thy might; i. e. doe them vigorously, diligently, and industri|ously.
For your encouragement thereunto know, that diligence
in your Calling is usually crowned with riches and plenty, accor|ding
to that of the Wise man,Prov. 10. 4 The hand of the diligent maketh
rich; and again,Prov. 13. 4 the soul of the diligent shall be made fat; i. e. shall
be enriched with outward blessings. And truly it is very rare, but

that a blessing doth accompany a diligent hand; the Greeks say,
that plentifulness follows painfulness,. Strpb. and that all things are made
servants to care and industry.Caution 1.
I shall give you two Cautions.
1 Bee not so diligent in  thy particular Calling, that
thou neglect the Duties of thy general calling as a Christian; I mean,
be not so eager in folowing thy worldly businesses and imploy|ments,
that thou neglect thy spiritual businesses, as thy morning
and evening devotions unto God, c.
2 Labour to bee heavenly-minded in earthly imployments;Caution 2. to
follow worldly businesses with spiritual affections, often lifting
up thine heart unto God in some heavenly ejaculations; As thou
art eagerly following thy worldly businesses, oft meditate on that
excellent saying of our Saviour,Mark 8. 36. What will it profit a man, if hee shall
gain the whole world, and loe his own soul?
III. Resolve and strive to be faithful and sincere in all the works
of thy calling; and with a kind of disdain abhor to get any
thing by wicked and deceitful courses, as knowing that a little ill
got may empoyson a mans whole estate, and bring a curse upon all
that hee possesseth; let there bee therefore truth, equity, and
plainness in all thy dealing with men; circumvent no man, ac|cording
to that of the Apostle,1 Thes. 4. 6 Let no man goe beyond, and defrad
his brother in ay matter, because the Lord is the avenger of all such.
Where the Apostle disswadeth us from all fraudulent and deceit|ful
dealing, by an Argument taken from the dangerous and
dreadful consequence of such Sins, laying us open to the venge|ance
of that God who is in his wrath a consuming fire.Heb. 12. 29 In all thy
dealings with men observe that royal law, and standard of all
equity,Mat. 7, 12 which is, to doe as thou wouldest bee done by, for as
our Saviour speaketh, This is the Law and the Prophets, i. e.
the summe of that which in the Law, and by the Prophets is
delivered concerning our carriage towards our Neighbour, and
dealing with him.
IV. As often as thou receivest any blessing from God,. forget not
to return unto him the praise and the glory thereof, acknowledg|ing
that whatsoever the means hath been, that hee is the chief
cause, and principal author of all those benefits and blessings
which thou enjoyest for, the truth is, There is nothing more acceptable
to God than a grateful mind,Chrysost. Hom. 52. in Gen. it being one of the sacrifices where|with
hee is well pleased.



CHAP. XII.
Of our Behaviour in Secret.
IN regard of the manifold temptations whereunto wee are sub|ject,
both when we are by our selves alone, and also when wee
are in company with others; It is our duty, and will bee our wis|dome
to keep a narrow watch over our selves, both in our solua|riness,
and also in company.
First, When wee are alone, our care must bee, that wee be nei|ther
ill imployed, nor idle and unfruitful, but that wee be taken
up with spiritual and heavenly Meditations.
1 For Solitariness is the Devils opportunity, which hee hath
alwaies been careful to imbrace,2 Sam. 12. 2. and improve to the utmost ad|vantage;
as wee see in David, who when hee was walking alone
upon the roof of his house, then the Devil set upon him, tempted
him unto lust, and prevailed with him. And therefore how doth
it concern us to be then especially watchful over our selves?
2 Because wee are then in most danger to be overtaken and foi|led
with out own sinful lusts; then are wee most apt to let out
our hearts in speculative wantonness, and contemplative wicked|ness,
by feeding our fancies, and pleasing our selves in lascivious,
ambitious, revengeful, and other wicked thoughts. In which re|spect
wee ought in our solitariness carefully to watch over our
hearts, being then in greatest danger of these spiritual rapes.
To this end I shall commend that excellent, but too much neg|lected
duty of Divine Meditation, which is twofold.

1 Sudden and occasional.
2 Set and deliberate. Of which severally. And first of sudden
and occasional Meditation.

For the better clearing whereof I shall shew

1 The nature therof, what it is.
2 Add some Motives to quicken thee up to a frequent use
thereof.

I. For the nature of occasional Meditation; It is a sudden fix|ing
of the mind upon some profitable subject, occasioned by some
thing that wee see or hear. The which may bee done at all times,
and in all places, when thou art at home about the works of thy
Calling, or walking abroad. Of this sudden and occasional Me|ditation
there may be much use, by reason of the riety of Ob|jects,

which present themselves to our view; for every creature
that wee behold, doth afford unto us plentiful matter of spiritual
and heavenly Meditation; from each of them thou mayest take
occasion to meditate of God, and of his Attributes shining in
them, as the Power, Wisdome, Goodness, and other Attributes
of God.
II. For Motives, take these three.
1 It will be a special means to keep worldly, wanton, frivolous
thoughts, and idle motions out of thine heart; for if thou give up
thy self to idleness, not labouring to possess thy minde with some
good and profitable Meditation, thou art sure to bee pestred with
vain and wicked cogitations.
2 A frequent use of occasional Meditations, will fit thee for
set and solemn Meditation, in that it will both furnish thee with
matter, and prepare thine heart to commune with God.
3 Hereby thou shalt make a right use of the creatures; the crea|tures
are half lost unto thee, if thou only imploy them, and not
take out some spiritual lesson from them.
Thus much of sudden and occasional Meditation.
Come wee now to the set, solemn, and deliberate Meditation,
For the profitable handling whereof, I shall shew thee

1 The Nature thereof.
2 Some Rules and Directions to be observed therein.
3 An Example or Pattern thereof according to the Rules.

1 For the first, viz. the Nature of it, what it is? I answer, a
set and deliberate Meditation,Meditari nil a|liud est quam muloties rem aliquam consi|derare. Th. A|quia. is a serious applying of the mind to
some spiritual or heavenly subject, discoursing thereof with thy self,
to the end thine heart may bee warmed, thine affections quickened,
and thy resolutions heightned to a greater love of God, hatred of sin,
c.
Come we now to the Rules and Directions for the right man|ner
of performing the same. To this end I shall treat

1 Of the Time, when this duty is to be performed,
2 Of the Place where.
Of the Manner of setting about it, and performing it.

1 Touching the Time when this duty is to be performed, and
how often, it is hard to give any set or certain Rule. For diffe|rence
must bee made between such as are rich, and wealthy, who
have much spare ime; and poor men who live by their daily la|bour,
and have ittle time to spare from the same, for the perfor|mance

of holy and religious duties. Now such as have time and
leisure, and are at their own dispose, ought to bee frequent in the
exercise of this duty. How frequent such should be, I will not un|dertake
to determine,Psal. 1. 2. Psal. 119. 97. 148. because mens several occasions may vary
it. But in general, that it be frequent, the Scripture requireth. And
truly the more frequently it is performed, the more easie and de|lightful
will it be unto thee.
Questionless every one, whether hee be rich or poor, Master
or Servant, ought to make conscience of performing this duty on
the Lords day, which being appropriated to spiritual duties, doth
especially challenge this, which is so eminently spiritual.
For the choice of other daies, and set times therein, it must be
left to Christian prudence, which will teach thee what time thou
canst best spare from thine ordinary imployments, and when thou
art best disposed and fitted for the performance of the same.
II. The next thing to bee considered is the Place, for this duty
ought to be private, in some private, retired place, where thou mayst
be free from company, and whatsoever may distract thee. For
when thou art most retired from the world, then art thou most fit
to have communion with God. Therefore Isaac when hee would
meditate, and by Meditation converse with God,Gen. 24. 63. Psal. 63. 6. walked alone
into the fields. And David meditated upon his bed, as himself tells
us.
III. For the Manner of setting upon this duty.
I. Having with-drawn thy self from worldly company, thou
must for the time wholly lay aside all worldly thoughts, for other|wise
it may and will fall out, that when thou art separated from
the company and society of men; thou mayest be in a croud of
worldly businesses through thy worldly and wandring thoughts.
II. In the entrance upon this duty, lift up thine heart in some
short prayer unto God for his direction, assistance, and blessing
thereon.
III. Having thus prepared thy self in some measure, then pitch
upon the subject matter whereupon thou intendest to meditate;
such as may be fit for thy souls nourishment; Herein observe these
Directions.
1 Let the subject matter of thy Meditation bee wholly spiritual and
divine. Thus any part of the Scripture is a fit subject for thy Medi|tation,
as also God, or any of his Attributes, as  Omnipotency,
Eternity, Immutability, Omipresence, Omnisciency, , Wis|dome,

Mercy, Iustice, Love, Faithfulness, and other excellencies
of God: As also the blessed and happy estate wherein our first Pa|rents
were created by God, and that miserable estate whereinto
they implunged themselves, and all their posterity, by their dis|obedience
against God in eating the forbidden fruit; and the
state of Redemption by Jesus Christ, and the transcendent love of
Christ in undergoing a bitter cursed death for us.
2 Let the particular subject thou pitchest upon for thy Medi|tation,
be suitable to thy present state and condition; and to that
end in setting upon this duty, it will be thy wisdome to observe the
frame and temper of thy heart. If thou findest thine heart sad and
heavy, then fix thy Meditation upon thy sins, that so thou mayest
turn thy sorrow and sadness for outward things, into a sorrow for
thy sins. But if thou findest thine heart lightsome and chearful, then
fix thy Meditations on the incomprehensible love of God, or on
the freeness of his grace, or on the bounty of God, especially to|wards
thy self.
3 Having pitched thy thoughts upon some particular subject
suitable to the present frame and temper of thine heart, continue
thy thoughts upon it, till thou hast found thy heart warmed, and
thine affections quickened therewith, which indeed is the main
and principal end of this exercise.
4 Having spoken of preparation to the work, come wee now to
the work it self, which consists of three particular heads.
1 The first I may call Cogitation, whereby I mean a discoursing
of the understanding about the subject matter pitched upon, a cal|ling
to minde of several truths that belong thereunto. As if the
subject of thy Meditation be Death, then call to mind, and se|riously
think, as of the certainty of Death, so also of the uncertainty
thereof, both in regard of the Place where, the Manner how, and
the Time when. And then to argue the necessity of a continual
expectation of and preparation for Death.
2 The second is Application, to make some close application to
thy self of those truths thou hast called to mind, for the warming
of thine heart, and quickning of thine affections.
3 The third and last particular is Resolution; a resolved purpose
of heart to do this or that, or to leave this or that. As if the subject
of thy Meditation hath been Death, and finding thine heart tho|rowly
affect with the apprehension thereof, especially of the
uncertain of the time of thy death, resolve thereupon to be the

more careful in imbracing every opportunity of doing good, think|ing
it may be the last that will be afforded unto thee; as also to
live in a continual expectation of, and preparation for death, by
a daily renewing thy peace with God.
Having thus given some Rules and Directions for the better
helping thee in this heavenly exercise of Divine Meditation:
III. I shall now give thee an Example and Pattern thereof, ac|cording
to the former Rules and Directions, for the better clearing
it to thee.
Suppose the subject thou propoundest for thy Meditation be Sin,
then having lifted up thine heart unto God in prayer for his Di|rection
and Assistance,
First, Fall upon the duty of Cogitation, calling to minde some
plain truths which apperain thereunto. As
I. Think of the nature of sin; How it is a transgression of the
Law of God.1 John 3. 4.
II. Of the kinds of sin, viz. Original and Actual.
1 Let out thine heart in a serious Meditation of that corrup|tion
of nature, which thou and every man brought with him into the
world; and how it is not onely a sin, but an heinous sin, compre|hending
in it the seeds of all sins, even of the most abominable
that can be imagined.
2 Let out thine heart in a serious Meditation of thine actual
sins, and of the several kinds of them, viz. Evil Thoughts, evil
Words, and evil Actions.
III. Think of the evil qualities of sin. As
1 That it is most foul and filthy, yea far more filthy than a
conluence of all the most filthy, nasty, loathsome things in the
world. And therefore in the Scriptures it is not onely called fil|thy,
but filthiness it self.2 Cor. 7. 1.
3 Think how it is most infectious, having a pestilential quality,
that pollutes every thing, turning all our spiritual services, even
our Prayers, Hearing, Meditation, c. into abomination.
4 Think how sin is most deceitful, which though it appear at first
with a Syrens face most delightful, yet it will prove at last to have a
Serpents sting, and to wound mortally. And though for the present
the way of sin may bee very pleasant and delightful, yet the end
and issue thereof will be very bitter, if not fearful nd doleful.
IV. Think of the fearful effects, and cursed uents of
sin; As

1 How it makes a separation between God and our souls; so
that there can bee no sweet communion between God and us,
whereby sin appeareth to be a greater evil than poverty, imprison|ment,
flame of fire, or the like, for a man may lye under all these
evils, and yet lye in Gods bosome.
2 Think how in exposeth thee to all the miseries and calami|ties
that can befall man both here and hereafter: For it brings
upon him hardness of heart, horrour of conscience, vexation
and anguish of soul, and all kinde of spiritual evils, the least of
which is far worse than all the plagues of Egypt.
4 It likewise subjecteth his body to weaknesses, sicknesses and
diseases. Yea sin, while it remaineth unpardoned, subjects a man
to all the dreadful fruits and effects of Gods wrath, which are all
judgements and plagues here, and eternal torture and torments
in that everlasting lake, where is nothing but weeping, and will|ing,
and gnashing of teeth.
Having thus done with the work of Cogitation, Then fall upon
the work of Application, to apply these fore-mentioned truths un|to
thy self, for the warming of thine heart, and quickening of thine
affections.
1 Make this application to thy self, to look after Jesus Christ,
and to value him above all things. Let the consideration of thy
manifold sins drive thee unto Jesus Christ, who alone can free
thee from the guilt of them, and punishments due unto them.
Happy is hee whom the sense of his sins makes to long in his soul
for Christ, and to count all things but dross and dung in compa|rison
of him;Zech. 13. 1. and that rejoyceth in that fountain of grace which the
Lord hath opened for sin, and for uncleanness; and triumphs in his
spirit, because of the hope to be discharged by another, of that, for
which himself cannot satisfie.
2 Admire the wonderful patience of God, in bearing with thee
so long, notwithstanding thy manifold provocations. It may bee
thou hast been a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, an unclean person
for many years, and yet God hath spared thee; Oh thence take
occasion to admire the long-suffering and forbearance of God to|wards
thee.
3 Let the consideration of the hainous nature of sin, and fear|ful
punishments due unto thee for the same, ravish thy soul with
an admirat of the love of Christ, yea and inflame thy heart
with a , who hath born thy sins for thee, and by his

death satisfied Gods justice for the same.
Having thus done with the work of Cogitation and Applica|tion,
then proceed to Resolution against sin for the time to come
Resolve therefore to give sin a Bill of divorse, to be more watch|ful
against sin, that it may not rule nor reign in thee, as formerly
it hath done; say with thy self, Though I cannot utterly destroy
sin, but that it will remain and abide in mee, yet I am resolved,
with the assistance of Gods grace, so to keep it under, that it
shall not reign in mee; that though it do keep possession in mee, yet
that it shall not have dominion over mee. To this end I will care|fully
shun and avoid all the occasions and means which may allure
and draw mee unto sin.
And then for a conclusion, begge of God, that as hee hath
been pleased to put any good purpose and resolution into thine
heart, so hee would inable thee by his holy Spirit to bring it to act
and execution that hee would strengthen thee to perform what
thou hast promised. With an acknowledgement of thine own weak|ness
and inability, beg power and strength from God: for it is his
power that must strengthen thee against the power of thy lusts and
corruptions.


CHAP. XIII.
Of our Behaviour in Company.
AS thou must be watchful over thy self when thou art alone, so
likewise when thou art in company, looking unto thy beha|viour
therein; and the rather, because wee are generally more
apt to transgress in company, than when wee are alone; experience
teacheth us, that many who in secret are watchful over their
thoughts, labouring to improve their privacy by some heavenly me|ditation,
and sweet communion with God, are in company very
apt to forget God, and themselves too, by giving too much way to
the satisfying of their carnal lusts and pleasures, whereby they
fall into many sins. And therefore it will not be amiss to set down
some directions to guide thee when thou art in company.
But before I lay down these Directions, I shall premise an Ar|gument
or two to perswade thee to make choice of the good, and
godly, and by no means of wicked and ungodly sons for thine
ordinary converse. As also a preparatory advice or  for the bet|ter

fitting and preparing of thee to improve thy converse with men
to the best spiritual advantage.
1 Therefore highly prize, and earnestly seek the company of such
as are godly, because thou wilt finde a greater increase in thy
Piety, Knowledge, Faith, Zeal, and all other graces thereby; if
you look into the Primitive times, you shall finde, that when the
Christians did most frequently associate themselves together, de|lighting
in the communion of each other, then did they most of all
thrive and increase, as in Piety, so in Knowledge, Faith, Love Zeal,
and all other graces. And it may be observed, that where the peo|ple
of God do not associate themselves in holy communion, there
is little thriving in grace and godliness, though they live under
never so powerful a Ministery.
2 Avoid as much as may bee the society of wicked and prophane
persons, especially such as are scoffers at Godliness and Religion.
Because wee are very apt to be perverted by evil company, and
corrupted with the contagion of their sins; such pitch will defile
our garments.
3 Avoid the society of wicked men, because wee are thereby in dan|ger
to bee involved in their temporal plagues. All prophane men
being liable every moment to those fearful plagues, and judge|ments,
which their sins justly deserve, and earnestly call for; If
God should showre them down upon them, while the godly are in
their company, how can they expect immunity from the same?
4 Avoid their company, because wee shall thereby incourage and
imbolden them in their wicked and prophane courses. For it is a
great incouragement unto wicked men to go on in their wicked and
sinful courses, when as they are countenanced with the society of
the godly.
Now for the better fitting and preparing thy self for profitable
converse when thou art in company, I shall onely give thee these
two advises.
1 That thou mayest bee the better furnished with matter for
useful discourse, often, and seriously meditate with thy self on
some general head of Divinity; as of our wretched and miserable
condition by nature, of the all-sufficiency of Christs sacrifice, of
the vanity and uncertainty of all earthly things; of the short|ness
of this life; of the day of judgement. By often contem|plating
of the things, or the like, with thy self in secret, thou
wilt be bett abled to talk and discourse of them 

of others, and that to their good and edification, as well as to
thine own.
2 Before thou goest into company, bee earnest with God in
prayer for grace so to order thy conversation, and discourses, that
they may tend, as to the glory of his name, so to thine own and o|thers
good, and spiritual advantage.
These things thus premised, come wee now to the Directions
for the good government of thy self when thou art in company;
which I shall lay down

1 More generally.
2 More particularly.

1 In reference to thy behaviour in good company.
2 In reference to thy behaviour in bad.
The general Directions for thy behaviour in company are these.
I. Let thy carriage and conversation bee humble, willing to com|municate
thy counsels, comforts and experiences to the poorest
and meanest Christians, and to partake of their counsels, com|forts,
and experiences; not disdaining to learn any good thing of
those, who in several respects are much thine inferiours.
II. In all thy conversings with men, labour to bee fruitful and pro|fitable,
both to thy self, and others, by receiving and doing all the
good thou canst.
1 To thy self, by receiving all the good thou canst from others. To
this end, when thou art in the company of others, diligently ob|serve
in what gifts and graces any doth excel (for God hath
dispensed various gifts unto his people,2 Cor. 12. 4, 8, 9, 10. all are not alike qualified)
and then labour to draw forth those gifts and graces to thine own
spiritual good and advantage.
2 To others, by communicating unto them such good things as
thou conceivest most suitable unto their present state and condition.
The more good thou communicarest unto others, the more will
God communicate unto thee.
III. Often lift up thine heart unto God in some short ejaculatory
prayer, that hee would open thy lips, that thy mouth may shew forth
his prayse,Psal. 51. 15. that hee would inable thee so to speak, that thy words
and discourses may tend to the good and edification of others,
ministring grace to the hearers.Ephes 4. 29.
Having thus given thee general Directions for thy behaviour in
com; come wee now to the more particular directions  good company.

I. When thou art in good company,Nihil de Scrip|turis, nihil de salute agitur a|nimarum, sed nug,  risus,  verba prose|runtur in ven|turs. Bernard. trifle not away thy time
with worldly conferences and discourses, as the common fault of
too too many is, whereof Saint Bernard complained in his time.
But let the subject of thy discourse rather be some spiritual matter.
II. Labour to turn the current of worldly discourses into spiritual;
to that end watch every opportunity which may occasion any di|gression
from worldly matters, into some spiritual and heavenly
subject.
III. Bee ready to communicate and impart such spiritual gifts
and graces as thou hast received. Hast thou any competent mea|sure
of saving knowledge? communicate thy knowledge unto o|thers,
by acquainting them with the mysteries of salvation. Hast
thou found comfort after thy spiritual troubles and desertions?
Hast thou found support under thy trials and temptations? Hast
thou found gracious answers and returns to thy prayers? Hast thou
got the victory over any lust or corruption? freely and willingly
communicate and impart unto others the experiences thou hast had
of Gods Mercy, Power, and Goodness in thy several straights,
and exigencies, directing them to such waies and courses wherein
thy self hast found much good and benefit. This wee finde expres|ly
commanded.1 Per. 4. 10.
The particular directions referring to our behaviour in bad com|pany,
are these.
I. When by reason of some common occasion thou art in bad compa|ny
(for otherwise, as wee shewed before, thou art by all means to a|void
it) see that thy conversation bee with a Dove-like innocency,
blameless and harmless, according to that exhortation of the
Apostle, in Philip. 2. 15. The truth is, there is scarce a better
means to propagate the Gospel, and to fasten it on the affections
of natural men, than the fair carriage, and honest conversation
of the Professors thereof. It is as the odout of Christs oyntment,
the fragrancy whereof draws the affections of others.
II. Be careful that thou partake not of their sins; Which Direction
the Apostle giveth,Ephes. 5. 11. saying, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness: Hee meaneth, that they should no way com|municate,
or be partakers with their sins, which hee calleth works
of darkness.
Quest. How may wee bee said to partake with others in their
sins?
Answ. en partake of others sins, as by provoking them to sin,

so by approving their sin. Men approve others sins openly, or covert|ly
 Openly, by Word, or Deed.
By Word.Prov. 24. 24. 1 When they commend others for their sins.Prov. 17. 15.
2 When they patronize and defend them in their sins.Isa. 5. 20.
3 When they soothe them up,Acts 8. 1. and 22. 20. and flatter them therein. Men
approve others sins by Deed,Lev. 5. 1. when they be companions and agents
with them in the same sins. Covertly men approve others sins,Deut. 13. 6, 7, 8. and 21. 7.
when they tacitly consent unto them. Hee may be said tacitly
to consent, that either revealeth not the sin hee knows, when hee
ought;ut malus scrmo in ducit in pec|catum, sic ma|lum silentium relinquit in pec|cato. Augustin. or shews no dislike of it, when hee beholds it. And this
oftentimes is as hurtful, in respect of the offender, as ill counsel;
for as evil speech moveth men to sin, so evil silence leaveth men
in sin.
III. Grieve and mourn for the sins thou discernest amongst them.
It is noted oft,Deut. 9. 18, 19. and commended as a special grace in sundry of
Gods Saints,Neh. 1. 4. that they have been greatly troubled in themselves
at the dishonour done to God even by the sins of others;Psa. 119. 158. as Mo|ses,
Nehemiah, David, Ieremiah,Jer. 13. 17. and others.
IV. When thou observest any wickedness committed by thy neigh|bour,
reprove him for the same;Levit. 19. 17. which duty wee finde much pres|sed
upon Gods people in the Scriptures. Thou shalt not hate thy
brother in thine heart, thou shalt in any wie rebuke thy brother, and
not suffer sin upon him. Wherein are implied two things.
1 That hee who doth not reprove his brother when hee seeth
him do amiss, doth indeed hate him, and not love him; for there
is no love like the love of reproof.
2 That by not reproving thy brother, thou sufferest him to run
on and continue in his course of sin, which will at last prove his
destruction.
For the right manner of performing this duty, both certain
General Rules must be observed, and also Particular, according to
diverse circumstances. General Rules are these.
1 Hee that reproveth another, must lift up his heart in prayer
unto God, that hee would so guide his tongue, and move the o|thers
heart, that his reproof may bee profitable unto him.
For without Gods blessing, all our admonitions and reproofs will
prove but words spoken in the air.
2 Our reproof must bee done in love, aiming therein at our
brothers good, and not at all at his disgrace. For  the Apostle
speaketh,1 Cor. 16. 14. All things must bee done in love; And as  things, so

especially this of reproof. Concerning Particular Rules, both
the state of the party reproving, and of the party reproved and
the quality of the sin, together with time and place must bee
observed.
1 The state and condition of the party reproving must bee
observed. As they who have authority over others have greater
liberty to reprove, so if they have to deal with notorious scan|dalous
offenders, they then may and must do it.
1 With authority,Tit. 2. 15. as the Apostle exhorteth,Tt. 1. 13.  Rebuke with authority.
2 Sharply, So the Apostle commandeth, Rebuke them sharply. The
word in the Greek translated sharply, properly signifieth cuttingly,
or to the quick. Ely failed herein; though hee reproved his sons
for their wickedness, yet it was not sharply, and to the quick, but
with too much gentleness and mildness.
2 The mind and isposition of the party reproved must be obser|ved:
For if hee bee flexible and ingenuous,Gal. 6. 1. hee must with mild|ness
bee reproved, even with the spirit of meekness, as the A|postle
Paul expresseth it. But yet severity must bee used when
lenity prevails not.
3 The state and condition of the party reproved is to bee observed.
For
1 If it bee our Superiour, it must be done with all reverence
and humility, rather beseeching and exhorting, than plainly re|buking,
as Naamans servants did their Master.2 King. 5. 11, 13.
2 If the party to be reproved be our equal, then it must bee
done without all bitterness, even with all love. Reproof is a bit|ter
pill, and therefore it must alwaies be rolled with Sugar, ex|pressing
much meekness of spirit, and compassion of heart; shew|ing
in the hatred of our brothers sin, our love of his person.
4 The quality of the sin reproved must likewise bee observed.
1 Private offences must bee privately reproved; For saith our Sa|viour,Mat. 18. 15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone. But open and scandalous offences must
be reproved openly. For saith the Apostle,1 Tim. 5. 20. Them that sin, viz. o|penly,
and with scandal, rebuke before all, i. e. before the whole
assembly of the Church, that others also may fear.
2 Sins directly tending to Gods dishonour, must bee reproved with
an holy zeal and indignation. Christ thus often reproved the Scribes
and Pharisees. And thus Peter reproved Simon Magus.Act. 8. 20.
5 The seonableness of the time must with great wisdome bee ob|served.

To rebuke a drunkard in his drunkenness is folly;
Abigal knew as much,2 Sam. 25. 26. and therefore said nothing to Nabal in
his drunken fit, but in the morning, when the wine was gone out
of him. So neither is it seasonable to reprove a man for his pas|sion
in his passion; wait rather for a fit time, till a mans fit and
passion bee over.
6 The seasonableness of the place must likewise bee observed. Un|less
it bee for due and just censure, let it not bee in publick As|semblies,
open streets, with the like. But if by the way thou ob|servest
a man sin, whom thou knowest not whether ever thou
shalt see him again, or no, then as privily as thou canst, thou
maist meekly rebuke him. Thus shalt thou manifest thy Zeal for
Gods glory, thine hatred of sin, and thy care for thy brothers sal|vation.


CHAP. XIV.
Directions to the Rich.
AS the Apostle Paul knew how to bee abased,Phil. 4. 12. and how to
abound, how to bee full, and how to bee hungry, i. e. hee had
learned in the School of Christ, how to carry himself Christian-like,
in a rich and in a poor estate. So it will bee a point of special
wisdome in us, to know how to carry our selves Christian-like
through variety of conditions, how to mannage every estate. For
your better help herein, I shall give you some Directions.
1 How to carry your selves Christian-like in a rich and full e|state.
2 How to carry your selves Christian-like in a poor and mean
estate.
I. Look up unto God, and often think of him as the author and
donor of all the good things thou dost injoy. When thou hast gotten
wealth, say not, This I have gotten by my own wisdome and policy,
by mine own travel, pains and indeavour. But say with Iob, This
the Lord hath given;Job 1. 21. acknowledge his hand of providence in what
thou hast. This direction the Lord giveth his own people by Mo|ses,
When thou art grown rich,Deut. 8. 17, 18. say not in thine heart, my power, and
the might of my hand hath gotten mee this wealth; but thou shalt re|member
the Lord thy God, for it is hee that giveth thee power to get
wealth. Noting wealth and riches to bee the special gift of God.

II. Bless God for what thou hast. This duty likewise the Lord
required of his own people.Deut. 8. 10. When thou hast eaten, and art full, then
thou shalt bless the Lord thy God.
III. Labour to see Gods special love to thee in common mercies.
For what good will the injoyment of any thing do thee, unless
thou canst see Gods love, as well as his bounty, therein?
Quest. How may I know that these outward mercies which I do
injoy are bestowed upon mee in love and favour?
Answ. 1 If they inflame thy heart with a love to God, causing
thee to love him the more, because hee hath been so bountiful
unto thee.
2 If thou findest in thy self a willingness to honour God in the
use of those good things thou hast received from him, by laying out
a portion thereof towards the maintenance of Gods worship, or
the releef of Gods poor, then thou hast a comfortable evidence
that they are bestowed upon thee in love.
3 If it bee the grief of thine heart that thou dost not answer the
loving kindness of the Lord towards thee; that thy conversation is
so unsuitable to his gracious dispensations towards thee. This
is an evident sign, that what thou hast received from God, was
bestowed upon thee in love.
IV. Beware of being puffed up with Pride.. For wealth and riches
are very apt to make men proud, as the Apostle intimateth,
1 Tim. 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they
bee not high minded, implying, that riches are very apt to make
men high-minded, to think of themselves above what is meet, e|specially
such as are raised out of nothing unto a great estate.
V. Therefore labour to bee humble under thine abundance; to be
low in thine own thoughts, when thou art high in the world; which
indeed will prove thy glory: for humility is an ornament, as the A|postle
Peter implieth under that phrase,. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Bee cloathed or decked with
humility as with an ornament. Many men think humility a de|basement,
but the Spirit of God counteth it an ornament.
VI. Labour for the true spiritual Riches,Animas homi|nis dives, non arca appellari solet, quamvis illa fit plena, dum te inanem videbo, divitem non putabo. Cic. namely, saving,
sanctifying graces, that thy self may bee rich, and not thy chest
onely. And truly, rich men, of all others, stand in most need of
sanctifying graces; in regard their riches are great snares unto
them, and occasions of sin, as a long coat is in greater danger to
be dagled, than a short one. Oh therefore beg of God that hee
would not  thee off with the things of this world, but that to|gether

with his outward blessings, hee would give thee his inward
blessings, true, saving, sanctifying graces, especially the grace
of spiritual poverty, which is the foundation of blessedness; for,
saith our Saviour,Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdome of Heaven. It was an excellent speech of Luther,Valde protesta|tus sum, me nol|le sic ab eo sati|ari. Luther. when
the Princes of Germany sent him in great presents, I profess, saith
hee, the Lord shall not put mee off so. Do thou in like manner, take
up the same resolution.
VII. Communicate out of thy store towards the relief of others;
Giving to the poor, as it is a duty incumbent upon all that are
able, so especially upon the rich.1 Tim. 6. 17, 18. The Apostle Paul therefore
willeth Timothy, to charge such as are rich in this world, that they
do good, that they bee rich in good works, c. Iob is a worthy pat|tern
herein for rich men,Job 31. 19 he having abundance would not see any pe|rish
for want of cloathing,Lev. 19. 9, c. nor any Poor without covering;Deut. 14. 19 the Law
which enjoyns such as had Harvest and Vintage, to leave gleanings
and after-gatherings for the Poor, sheweth, that of mens abundance
the poor must have a part.
The better to quicken you up to this Duty, consider these two
Arguments.
1 This is an especial end of Gods giving more to some than to
others, that they who have more abundance should thereout give
to them that need. This inference doth Saint Paul make (2 Cor.
8. 14, 15) from the distribution of Manna, Exod. 16. 18. for
they that gathered more than was needful for themselves, and
their Housholds, gave of their abundance to such as had not e|nough.
2 Rich men are not Lords of the abundance which they have,
but Stewards,Luke 16. 2 and therefore must dispose it according to the mind
of the Lord; and that is, some part thereof to the poor, hereof
they shall give an account.
And therefore of all unmerciful men, such as are rich, and have
enough for themselves, and others too, are worthy of most blame;
such an one was that rich man in the Parable,Luk. 16. 19, c. of whom it is said,
that he was cloathed in Purple, and fine Linnen, and fared sumptuously
every day, and yet it is implied, that he afforded not to poor La|zarus
the crumbs that fell from his table. Let such unmerciful rich
men well weigh the end of that rich man, and bee henceforward
stirred up to take due notice of a main duty that lieth upon them,
which is, to be free and forward, liberal and bountil in distribu|ti

to the necessities of the poor. Knowing Hee that soweth boun|tifully
shall reap bountifully; though God reward none by way of
merit for their works sake,2 Cor 9. 6. yet he will render to every one according
to his deeds;Rom. 2. 6 so as rich men shall lose nothing by being rich in
good works, but rather gain very much thereby.


CHAP. XV.
Directions to the Poor.
HAving given Directions to the Rich, I come now to give Di|rections
to the Poorer sort, who stand in as much need
as the former.
I. Labour to be content with thine estate, as being that portion
God hath allotted unto thee; and repine not against his Provi|dence,
because thou hast not a larger allowance; which is the
counsel of the Apostle Paul,1 Tim. 6. 8 Having food and raiment, let us bee
therewith content.
Q. Wherein doth this contentedness consist?
A. In bringing down your minds to your present state and con|dition.
It is the great mistake of many, to think that contentedness
consisteth in abundance, in raising up their estates to such a pitch,
conceiving they should then be contented; whereas indeed true
contentedness consists rather in an evenness, suitableness, and pro|portion
between a mans estate and his mind.
The better to perswade the Poorer sort to this Duty of Conten|tedness,
I shall propound some few considerations.
1 That such as have convenient food and raiment injoy as much as
the richest men on earth; whereupon saith the Apostle in the fore|mentioned
place, Having food and raiment, let us be therewith con|tent.
Though a man possess never so much of this worlds goods,1 Tim, 6. 8
yet doth he enjoy no more thereof than himself eateth, and wear|eth,
for the rest goeth to others, and is nothing to him.
Obj. Happily thou wilt say, that though his belly can hold no more
than thine, yet his fare is better, and more delicious?
Ans. Though his fare may be much better, and more delicious,
yet his delight therein may be less than thine in thy courser diet;
and his delicious fare doth usually prove hurtful to him, as the
Wise man noteth, Eccles. 5. 12.
2 A little with the fear of God is much better than great treasures

with trouble and vexation of spirit, as the Wise man expresseth it,
Prov. 15. 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great
treasures and trouble therewith; intimating, that a small estate with
the fear of God is farre more comfortable than a great and plen|tiful
estate without the fear of God, which is usually accompanied
with much trouble and vexation of spirit.
3 That every mans estate is ordered by God, who as hee is the
soveraign Lord of Heaven and Earth, and may doe with us as hee
pleases; so he is infinite in Wisdome, and thereby knoweth what
estate is best and most convenient for us, even better than we
our selves; yea, and is rich in mercy and goodness, and thereby
willing and ready to doe that which in his wisdome he knoweth to
be best and most convenient for us; which if it were seriously
considered, would be a special means to work up our hearts to
some measure of contentedness in our meanest estate and con|dition.
4 That our blessed Saviour Iesus Christ,2 Cor. 8 9 though he was rich, yea
Heir of all things,Mat. 8. 20 yet for our sakes became so poor, that as himself
expresseth it, he had not where to ly his head. And we read that
Women ministred unto his necessities.Luk. 8. 3 Christ became thus poor
for gracious ends; as,
1 That hee might sanctifie Poverty to all his members: for
Christ by undertaking it, sanctified it.
2 That he might minister comfort to his poor members: for in
his example it is evident, that Gods dear Children may live here
in a poor and mean estate.
3 That he might by his example teach us to submit our selves to
the Divine providence, resting contented with our poor and mean
estate, if God shall call us thereunto.
II. Labour to be humble; Humility is commendable in all, but
especially it becometh such whom the Lord hath brought into a
low condition, that so they may walk suitably and answerably to
their condition; so much the Wise man intimateth, when he saith,
It is better to bee of an humble spirit with the lowly;Prov. 16. 19 implying that
with a low condition there should bee an humble mind and
spirit.
III Labour to bee rich in grace; yea the poorer thou art in purse,
labour to bee the richer in grace, and then thy worldly Poverty
will be no hinderance to thy spiritual preferment, but rather a
furtherance, in that it puts thee into a better capacity, seeing they

are the Poor of this world,Jam. 2. 5 whom the Lord usually makes rich in
faith, and heirs of his kingdom; stirre up thy self therefore by
fervent praying, diligent reading, and frequent hearing of the
Word, to grow in grace, yea to grow rich in grace, that though
thou art poor here, yet thou maist be an heir of Heaven, and when
thou dyest, with Lazarus be received into Abrahams bosome.
IV. In thy greatest wants and exigencies labour to live by faith in
Gods Providence, resting confidently upon him for a comfortable
supply of all needful temporal good things. For thine encourage|ment
hereunto take notice of that gracious promise, The young
Lions doe lack and suffer hunger,Psal. 34. 10 but they that seek the Lord shall
not want any good thing; he doth not say, they shall have abun|dance,
but they shall want nothing that is good for them; and there|fore
said our Saviour to his poor Disciples, Take no thought for
your life,Mat. 6. 25, 26 what yee shall eat, or what yee shall drink, nor yet, for your
bodies, what yee shall put on; Is not the life more than meat? and the
body than raiment? Behold the Fowls of the air, for they sow not, nei|ther
doe they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feed|eth
them; are yee not much better than they? Here our Saviour by
several Arguments labours to disswade his Disciples from all dis|trustful
thoughts and cares about their food and raiment, and
to perswade them to live by faith in Gods Providence for the
same.
1 The first Argument is taken from the greater to the less,Argumentum  majori ad mi|nus. as
thus; God hath given you the greater thing, therefore hee will
give you the less; he hath given you life, therefore hee will not
deny food; he hath given you a body, therefore hee will not with|hold
raiment. This argument our Saviour expresseth in these words,
Is not the life more than meat? and the body than raiment?
2 The second Argument is taken from the less to the greater,Argumentum a minori ad ma|jus.
and may be thus framed; Hee that provideth for Fowls will much
more provide for men; But God provideth for the Fowls of the
air, therefore much more will he provide for men; which argu|ment
is here amplified and confirmed by two reasons.
1 First from the means of provision afforded to men, which the fowls
of the air want; for whereas men Plow, and Sow, and Reap, and ga|ther
their Corn into Barns, and thereby have means of provision
which the Fowls of the air want, for they sow not, neither doe they
reap, nor gather into barns; i. e. they have not, neither doe they
use the means of provision which men doe, yet are they not un|provided

of convenient food, for God feedeth them; Why then
should men, who have such means of provision, distrust Gods Pro|vidence?
2 From the excellency of Man above Fowls, expressed in these
words, Are yee not much better than they? intimating, that men
are much better than the Fowls of the air; and therefore seeing
God provideth for the Fowls of the air, much more will hee pro|vide
for men, especially for his own children; for who is there
that feeds his Hawks, and his Hounds, that will suffer his Children
to starve for want of convenient food? and therefore you have
good cause in all your straights and exigencies to live by faith in
Gods providence.


CHAP. XVI.
Of Christian-like carriage under Reproaches.
I. BEware of manifesting any Distemper or Passion under your Re|proaches.
I deny not but you may, and ought to be sensible
of the wrong done to your name,Cant. 1. 3 for as a good name is a precious
oyntment, so to have an evil name is a great judgement: and
therefore you ought not to be insensible of the wrong done to your
name by slanders and reproaches, saying, Let men speak of me what
they please, I care not, so long as I know mine own innocency; for
though the testimony of your own innocency be a ground of com|fort
unto you, yet your care must bee not only to approve your
selves unto God, but also unto men, to be as careful of your good
names as possibly yee can; but yet you are not to manifest any
distemper or passion upon the reproachful speeches of others a|gainst
you. For,
1 That will give others just occasion to conclude, that you are
verily guilty of those things whereof you are reproached; so: in
truth there is no greater symptome of guiltiness than your falling
into passion, and being exasperated when you are reproached.
2 Your distemper and passion will much disquiet your spirits,
and indispose you to the right manner of performing any good du|ty.
II. Beware of returning reproach for reproach, or raiing for
railing, which is very unbeseeming a Christian, being therein so
unlike unto Christ,Pet. 2. 23 who as the Apostle Peter speaketh, When hee

was reviled, reviled not again. If therefore you profess your selves
to be Christians, farre be it from you to return reproach for re|proach,
for by seeking to right your selves by raising speeches, you
take the cause into your own hands; whereas if you would with
patience commit your cause to God,Tu sile, tu tace, tu contemn, c. Bernard. he would clear up your in|nocency
and thereby take off the reproaches which are cast upon
your names; therefore Bernard adviseth his Friend to be dumb and
silent at the reproaches of his enemies.Serm. 42. de+mod .
III. Seem to take little or no notice of those reproaches that are
cast upon you.Prov. 19. 11 The Wiseman saith, It is the glory of a man to pass
over a transgression; i. e. to seem to take no notice thereof. And
truly, it is the best kind of revenge you can take of your reproa|chers;
for there can be no greater vexation to your malicious re|proacher,Nec prudciae quic quam in se ess  otendet, qui  sen.
than to see you take little or no notice of his reproaches
against you, and whosoever will make trial, shall find that his
Adversary is more vexed with his silence, than if he should return
like for like.
IV When an evil report is raised of you, be not so much inquisi|tive
who raised it, as to make a good use and sanctified improvement
thereof. To this end know, and consider, that the report raised of
you is either true or false; if true, then you may discern the Finger
of God at your enemies tongues end, pointing unto you your sins,
and calling upon you to humble your selves for the same. But if
the report raised of you be false, yet you may hearken to it as to
a Call from God, to look more narrowly over your selves, lest you
be overtaken with that sin wherewith at the present you are falsly
charged; for God knowing your temper and disposition, happily
seeth that you are inclinable thereunto, and therefore suffereth o|thers
to charge you therewith, though falsly, meerly for the preven|ting
thereof, that you may not bee overtaken therewith; and thus
may you make a good use of the falsest and bitterest objections of
your adversaries against you.
V Labour to walk contrary to what is charged upon you, though
falsly. As for instance If you are charged with Hypocrisie, that
you are no better than Hipocrites; labour the more for sincerity,
and resolve to perform all you doe out of respect to God, more
than unto men; if you are charged with Pride, carry your selves
the more humbly and lowly, that your humility may appear unto
all, and so your conversation give your enemies the lye.
VI. Goe and spread your reproaches before God in Prayer, as good

Hezekiah did the reproaches of Rabshekah, and make known your
case unto him,Isa. 37. 14 desiring help and strength from him, to bear them
Christian like, and then you shall not need to doubt of his graci|ous
comfort and support.


CHAP. XVII.
Of our Carriage in reference to Crosses and Afflictions.
IN regard that all men so long as they live here in this world are
subject to manifold Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions; therefore it is
necessary that I should give you some directions how to carry your
selves in reference thereunto.
The Directions are these.
I. Fore-cast what Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions may befall you.
When you abound in plenty,Quic quid fieri potest quasi fu|turum cogite|mus, Sen. Epist. 24 think a time may come when
your plenty may be turned into penury; when you enjoy health
and ease, think a time may come when your health may bee turned
into sickness, your ease into pain; when you are taking your grea|test
delight in your Yoke-fellow, Children, or Friends, even then
consider they are mortal, and may suddenly bee snatched from
you; look upon all Creature comforts, as indeed they are, muta|ble,
and moveable; thus did Anaxagoras,Anaxagoras apud Plutarch, de tranquil. animi. of whom it is recorded,
that when tidings was brought him of the death of his Son hee
meekly replied, I always looked upon him as mortal. In like man|ner
should we look upon all our Creature comforts as mortal, and
moveable. This likewise was Iobs practice, as appears from that
expression of his,Job 3. 25 The thing which I greatly feared is come upon me,
and that which I was afraid of is come unto me; intimating, that in
his greatest prosperity he had thoughts and fears of a change, yea
of those loses and crosses wherewith he was now exercised.
II. Prepare for Losses, Crosses, and Afflictions; the former with|out
this will be of little or no use, a fore-sight of Afflictions will
little avayl us, unless we likewise prepare for them.
Q. How may wee prepare our selves for Losses, Crosses, and Af|flictions?
Ans. I. Earnestly desire, and seriously labour in the use of all
means for an interest in Jesus Christ; for,
1 Though the condition of man at all times is very sad without
in interest in Jesus Christ, yet the condition of a man in and un|der

his afflictions, without an interest in Christ is more sad, in that
his Conscience is then most usually awakened with the sence and
apprehension of his sins and fearful Judgements due unto him for
the same, of which there is no hope or possibility of escaping with|out
an interest in Christ.
2 On the other side, the man that hath an interest in Christ,
hath abundant ground of comfort in the greatest troubles and af|flictions,
in that Christ by his Sufferings hath taken away the sting
of them, which is Sin, and changed the nature of them, by turning
them from punishments into fatherly chastisements, for our profit
and amendment.
2 As you would be prepared for Afflictions, be careful to get and
keep a good conscience: for assuredly, the testimony of your own
consciences, that you have walked as in the sight and presence of
God, endeavouring to have your consciences voyd of offence both
towards God,Mus aeneus esto, il conscire sibi. and towards men, will be as a wall of brass, yea as
armour of proof unto you in the day of trouble and distress; so that
your hearts shall not shrink at any affliction.
Though in the time of health and prosperity you may seem to bee
rather losers than gainers, by keeping a good conscience in all
things, yet in times of trouble and affliction (next to an interest in
Jesus Christ) nothing will bee more available to you than a good
conscience; therefore let your main care bee to keep your consci|ences
pure and clean from sin, not maintaining peace with any sin.
3 Our preparation for affliction consisteth in a frequent resigna|tion
of our selves, and of all our comforts, into the hands of God, and
to his will, for disposal as he pleaseth. By this means we shall be the
more willing to part with them, when God shall bee pleased to
call for any of them, especially it this resignation of all unto God
be fresh upon our hearts and spirits.
4 Our preparation for afflictions consisteth in casting all
our cares, fears, and troubles of mind about those evils which may be|fall
us, upon God, who hath promised to sustain us under the same,
according to that of the Psalmist,Psal. 55. 22 Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he will sustain thee; i. e. he will comfort and support thee;
To this the Apostle Peter likewise exhorteth,1 Pet. 5. 7 Cast all your care
upon him, for hee careth for you and truly Gods caring for us may
well take us off from all inordinate, excessive, and distrustful care
about our afflictions; and move us to lay the stress of our afflicti|ons

upon him, considering hee careth for us.
5 Would you be prepared for afflictions, then be often putting
cases to your selves of such straights and troubles, of such trials and
afflictions as probably may fall out, and then return into your own souls
to search and try what strength you have to hold out, if you should fall
into such trials and afflictions? When you enjoy abundance of this
worlds goods, say to thy self, It may be before I dye I may bee
stripped of all these, and reduced to great straights, what shall I
then doe? Will not my faith then fail? Now I am at liberty, and
enjoy the comfort of my relations, my friends and acquaintance,
happily I may shortly be cast into Prison, and be deprived of all
my outward comforts, what shall I then doe? how shall I be a|ble
to bear up under these sad changes? it is good to put such cases
to your selves, which will bee an excellent means to strengthen
your faith against the evil day, against the day of trouble and di|stress,
and to make you with the greater confidence to trust in
God. Thus the Saints of old were wont to put the hardest cases to
themselves for the better strengthening of their hearts and faith,
as Psal. 6. 2, 3.
III. When God shall exercise you with any losses, crosses, or
afflictions, labour to bear them Christianlike; to that end observe
these rules.
1 Bear them sensibly; the Lord expects we should be sensible of
the waight of our afflictions; hee would not have us as Stoicks, or
Stocks, which are not affected with his stripes; but like Children,
he would have us sensible of the smart of the rod.Job 1. 20 Thus was Iob.
There are two Extreams whereunto we are very prone to run
in times of afflictions, the one is a despising of afflictions, the other
is a fainting under them, both which are hinted to us by the Au|thor
to the Hebrews,Heb. 12. 5 My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the
Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; these are the two
extreans we are carefully to avoyd in times of afflictions.
1 Not to despise or slight the chastisement of the Lord saying,
If God will have my estate, let him have it; if hee will have my
Husband, or Wife, or Child, let him have them; this is a despi|sing
of the chastening of the Lord,. a little regarding, yea a con|temning
thereof, as the Greek word implieth, which is very dis|pleasing
unto God.
2 Not to faint under our losses, crosses, and afflictions, as when
Children dye, then the spirit of the Parent to dye also; or when

the Husband dyeth, then the spirit of the Wife to dye also; this
is a fainting under the burthen of our afflictions,. as if they were
unsupportable, not to be indured, as the notation of the Greek
word implieth.
2 If you would bear your afflictions Christian-like, bear them
with patience and silence, according to the example of David, who
when God laid his hand upon his back, he presently laid his hand
upon his mouth, as appeareth by his own expression, I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because thou didst it.Psal. 39. 9
This patient silent bearing of Afflictions is opposed to two
things.

1 To an inward repining at the Dispensations of God to|wards
you.
2 To an outward complaining and murmuring at them, both
which you must carefully avoyd.

1 You must carefully avoyd all inward repinings at the dispen|sations
of Gods Providence towards you: whatsoever storms are
without you, yea and blow upon you, yet your hearts within you
should be calm and quiet; what though the Lords dealings with
you be very sharp? yet you ought not to repine at them, but quiet|ly
and silently to submit thereunto, acknowledging the equity of
Gods proceeding with you, that as he is righteous in all his ways,
so in particular towards you, and thereupon to say with good old
Ely,1 Sam. 3. 18 Luke 22. 42 It is the Lord, let him doe what seemeth him good; and with
our blessed Saviour, Father, not my will, but thy will be done. And
if you bear your afflictions thus quietly, you shall bear them with
much more ease at present, and find them more profitable in the
end.
2 As you must carefully avoyd all inward repining, so likewise
all outward complaining, and murmuring under the sad dispensati|ons
of Gods providence. As you must not entertain any hard
thoughts of God, as if he punished you above your deservings, or
more than you are able to bear, so neither must you express any
discontented words against the Lords dealings with you; for though
a Christian may mourn under sad Providences, yet may hee not
murme at them; though he may groan, yet not grumble; but
quietly bear all losses, crosses, and afflictions, both in opposition to
all inward repining, and outward murmuring.
3 If you would bear your afflictions Christian-like, you must bear
them willingly and cheerfully.

To help you herein, take these few considerations.
1 That no afflictions befall any without the wise ordering Provi|dence
of God,Job 5. 6. as Eliphas implieth, when he saith, That affliction
cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth evil spring out of the ground;
Truly, there is not a Warrant comes to Arrest thy Body with Pain
or Sickness, but it comes under the Hand and Seal of thy heaven|ly
Father; there is not a Habeas Corpus comes to remove thy
Yoke-fellow, Child, or Friend, but it is signed by thy heavenly
Father. This consideration hath been a ground of comfort unto
the people of God in all their afflictions;Job 1. 21 The Lord, said Iob, hath
given, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. And this must needs be a ground of comfort, yea and joy
unto all the people of God, especially if you shall consider in the
next place,
2 That the end God aims at in your afflictions is to doe you good,
yea some special good. that could not be done so well in any other way:
The Lord chasteneth us for our profit,Heb. 12. 10 saith the Apostle; every Cross
will bring with it some blessing or other, if the fault be not in our
selves; yea the greatest cross will bring the greatest blessing.
3 As God doth intend our good threby, so when it hath ef|fected
that good which God intended thereby, hee will soon remove
your affliction from you, for the Lord taketh no delight or pleasure
in your pains or sufferings, but delighteth in mercy;Mich. 7. 8 and therefore
will not, neither can he suffer his afflicting hand to lye longer
upon you, than in his wisdome he seeth to be needful and neces|sary,
for the effecting of that good which he intends you thereby;
and therefore if your afflictions seem long unto you, know it is no
longer than needs must, and that that good for which God sent it, is
not yet effected.
4 That God will either proportion your afflictions to the measure of
your strength, or your strength. to the measure of your affliction, laying
no more upon you than he will enable you to bear, according to
that of the Apostle,1 Cor. 10. 13 God is faithful, and will not suffer you to bee
tempted above what you are able to bear.
IV. If you would bear you afflictions Christian-like, you must
bear them fruitfully, by labouring to make a sanctified use and
improvement of them, whereby they will become comfortable
blessings unto you; for a sanctified affliction is a great blessing.
Q. What course should I take to have my afflictions so sanctified un|to
me, that I may be able to say with David,Psal. 119. 71 It is good for me that I
have been afflicted?

A. I. In every Affliction take notice of the displeasure of God a|gainst
thee; for though the Lord doth sometimes afflict his Chil|dren
for the trial and exercise of their Graces, rather than for any
displeasure he hath conceived against them, as in Iobs case it was,
yet usually he strikes not till he be provoked by our Sins, and there|fore
it will be thy wisedome in every affliction to take notice of the
displeasure of God against thee.
II. Search into thine own heart, and labour to find out the cause
of Gods displeasure against thee; for it is not for nought that God
afflicts thee, something or other is amiss in thee which God would
have amended and reformed, and considering that the Lord doth
not only in general correct us for Sin, but visiteth our special
Sins with special Judgements and Afflictions, therefore whenso|ever
the Lord visiteth thee with Sickness, or exerciseth thee with
any affliction, know it is thy duty to make a strict search, and dili|gent
enquiry into thine own heart, for the special Sin, or Sins, God
aims at therein, to find out the plague of thine own heart. Thus
did the people of God under their sad affliction, yea they called
upon one another to the practice of this duty; Let us search and
try our wayes;, said they, Lam. 3. 40. for as a Disease can never be
well cured till the cause thereof be first found out and discovered:
so neither can any affliction bee sanctified and removed, till that
which hath occasioned it be in some sort found out and disco|vered.
For the better discovery of the particular Sin or Sins God aims
at in thine afflictions, take these few rules and directions.
1 When God visiteth thee, or any of thy dear relations with Sick|ness,
or exerciseth thee with any Affliction, or doth but shake his Rod
over thee, set thy self as in his sight and presence, and then examine
thy Soul and Conscience thorowly, make an exact survey and search
into every corner thereof, to find out the particular Sin God aym|eth
at.
2 Take notice what sin thy Conscience doth first bring to thy
remembrance: for Conscience is Gods Deputy to convince thee,Nihil sic pec|cata in memo|riam revocare consueit, ut pna,  casti|gatio. Et hoc mnifestum est ex fratribus Ioseph.
and to tell thee, that by living in the practice of such and such a
Sin, or in the omission of such a Duty, thou hast justly brought up|on
thee such a Judgement; as thou mayst see in the example of
Iosephs brethren, who for their cruelty towards their brother, ad|judged
themselves worthy of all the iseries which they suffered; for
their Consciences it seems in their distress chiefly checked them

for that, therefore they had good ground to suspect that to bee the
cause of their present distress; under every Cross and Affliction
therefore listen to the voyce of Conscience, which will deal im|partially
with thee.
3 Take special notice of the kind of thine affliction: for it is
Gods usual manner to punish Sin in kind, by way of retaliation,
observing an analogie, proportion, and similitude between the qua|lity
of the Sin, and the punishment which hee inflicteth, and so
leadeth us as it were by the hand, that we may come to find and
feel it by his guidance and direction, for mens punishment often bears
the image and superscription of their sin upon it. Thus God oftentimes
punisheth Drunkards with Dropsies,In quibus pee|camus, in is|dem plectimur. and Covetous men with
Theeves, who rob them as they have robbed others. Thus God
often punisheth our prophaning of his Sabbaths, by inflicting some
judgement upon us on that day; and our careless neglect of Fa|mily-Duties,
by taking away a Family-relation. Thus there is of|tentimes
a proportion between mens Practices, and Gods Punish|ments,
by comparing whereof we may many times come to find out
the particular Sin, or Sins, for which God afflicts us.
4 When Gods afflicting hand is upon thee, consider for what
Sin especially thou hast often been reproved, either by the moti|ons
of Gods Spirit, or by the admonitions of his Ministers, or by
the checks of thine own Conscience, and yet hast refused to re|form
the same; thereupon suspect that Sin in special to be the sin
at which the Lord aymeth in thy present affliction;A verbis ad verbera pro re|ditur Deus. for it is usual
with God to proceed from words to blows, to make us give more
diligen  thereunto.
5 Be earnest with God in Prayer, that hee would help thee in
this search, that he would discover and make known unto thee the
Sin,Job 10. 2 or Sins at which he especially aymeth; thus did Iob, Shew
me, saith he, wherefore thou contendest with me; i. e. for what Sin
or Sins thou dost thus afflict me. And afterwards he cries out in his
afflictions, Make me to know my transgression, and my sin.Job 13. 23 In like
manner doe thou in thine affliction fly unto God by Prayer, be|seeching
him to shew unto thee wherefore he doth so contend with
thee, and to make known unto thee what is thy transgression, and
thy sin, that hath provoked his displeasure against thee.
III. Having fond out the particular Sin God amed at in thine
affliction, then goe and confesse it unto God in Prayer, with the ag|gravating
cicumstances thereof; freely judging and condemning

thy self before God for the same,1 Joh. 1. 9 with a broken and contrite heart.
And to such as confess their sins there is a promise of forgiveness
made. To thy confessions adde earnest and fervent Prayer unto God
for the pardon and forgiveness of thy sins, for and through the
merits of Jesus Christ.
IV. Wherein soever upon thine examination thou findest thy self to
have been faulty,Lam. 3. 40 Vera paeniten|tia est, quando sic paenitet ho|minem pcasse, ut rimen non repetat. Bern. thou must endeavour to amend and reform; for as
the end of thy search is to discover what is amiss in thee, so the
end of thy discovery is to amend and reform what hath been amiss
in thee. And truely without this it will little avail thee to pray
unto God for the removal of thine Affliction, for the Lord himself
noteh continuance in sin to be the chief cause of the continuance
of his hand of affliction upon his people. Isa. 9. 12, 13.
V. Though Afflictions are special opportunities for Spiritual advan|tages,
yet seeing they are not of themselves able to work any good in
thee, without the special assistance of Gods Spirit working together
with them; be earnest with God in Prayer for a sanctified use and im|provement
of them; that as he doth afflict thee, so he would teach
and instruct thee by his holy Spirit, how to make a good use there|of,
to the spiritual advantage of thine own soul. In all thy ad|dresses
unto God in Prayer, begge of him, that no affliction may
pass away unsanctified; and pray more for the sanctification of
them, than for their removal.
VI. In the time of thy affliction vow and promise unto God better
obedience for the time to come; that thou wilt bee more careful in
the avoyding of those sins, for the commission whereof, and in the
performing of those Duties, for the omission whereof thy Consci|ence
checks thee.Psal. 66. 14 David speaks of Vowes which he had made unto
God in the day of his trouble and distress; and truly this vowing
unto God newness of life, better obedience, and a greater watch|fulness
over our selves for the time to come, is a necessary duty to
be oft performed by us, especially in the time of our Sickness, and
that in regard of the weakness of our flesh; for howsoever in our
sicknesses and afflictions there may be good motions,Per votum im|mobiliter vo|luntas firmaur in bonum, Aqui. Su. 2. 2. q. 88. art. 6. purposes, and
intentions in our minds, yet through the weakness of our flesh, we
are apt to start from them. Now a Promise and Vow is a special
means to keep us from starting from our good motions and pur|poses
VII. Be careful to perform the Vowes ad Promises thou makest
unto God in the day of thy trouble and distress, for by thy Vow thou

hast bound thy self to performance; and therefore saith the Wise
man,Quia jam vo|visti, jam e ob|strinxisti. Aug. Epist. 45. an Arment. When thou vowest a vow unto God, deferre not to pay it, for hee
hath no pleasure in fools; noting it to be egregious folly in any to
be forward in making Vowes unto God, and then afterwards to
be backward in performing what they vowed.Eccl. 5. 4, 5


CHAP. XVIII.
Of Dying well.
IF thou apprehendest thy Disease to be mortal, and that it is like
to be thy last Sickness, then it will be thy wisdom to prepare thy
self after the best manner thou canst for death.
For thy better help herein, take these Directions.
I. Set thine House in order; I mean, settle thine outward estate, by
making thy Will; which will no way hasten thy death (as many
foolishly doe imagine) but rather put thee into a better capacity,
to set thy Soul in order for a blessed departure. And as God hath
blest thee with an estate, so fayl not to give some proportionable
part thereof for the relief of the poor members of Jesus Christ.
Though that charity which is exercised in a mans life-time is que|stionless
the best, and the most acceptable unto God,Beneficium est quod quis dedi, um posset  non dare. Sen. de Benif. l. 3. cap. 19 when wee
make our own Hands our Executors, and our own Eyes our Over|seers;
yet I condemn not that Charity which is shewed at the last,
for better late than never.
II. Send for some godly Minister, or experienced Christian, to ad|vise
thee about setting thy Soul in order, in reference to thy great
change. This direction the Apostle Iames giveth, for saith he, Is
any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him.Jam. 5. 14 And this I would advise thee to doe in the first
place, not putting it off to the last, when thine understanding and
memory begin to fayl thee, as the practice of the most is, who
when the Physician hath done with them, and in a manner given
them over, then send for the Divine to begin with them, as if a
short Prayer, and a few words of Ghostly counsel, were enough
to send them to Heaven.
III. Labour to make, or rather to renew, thy peace with God; for
though the making of thy peace with God ought not to be put off
to thy Death-bed, yet must it then be renewed in an especial man|ner,
as being the last time of doing it. In order thereunto,
I Look back into thy former course of life, and call to mind the

manifold aberations thereof; as the vanity of thy thoughts, how
vain and empty how carnal and prophane they have been; as al|so
the unsavouriness of thy words and speeches, how Godless, and
Christless, yea how unprofitable they have been for the most part;
as also the wickedness of thine actions. And in examining thy self
concerning thine actions, call to mind, as thy sinful Omissions, and
Commissions, I mean, as what Duties thou hast omitted, and what
Sin thou hast committed; so likewise thy sinful manner of per|forming
holy Duties, how thy most religious Services have had a
mixture of Sin in them. Likewise run over the several Ages of thy
life, and consider what Sins thou committedst in thy Childhood,
what in thy Youth, and what in thy riper years.
And together with the number of thy Sins, conside
the aggravating circumstances of them; as how thou hast sin|ned
against a gracious God, a loving Faher, and bountiful
Lord and Master; how thou hast sinned against the admonitions of
Gods Ministers, the motions of his Spirit, and the checks of thine
own Conscience; against the patience and long-suffering of God,
which should have lead thee to repentance; against the manifold
vowes and promises thou hast made unto God for newness of life,
and better obedience; and how thou hast sinned out of a presump|tuous
hope of mercy, making the mercy of God an occasion of
Sin, and thereby turned the very grace of God into wantonness.
Thus goe on aggravating thy sins, till thou find thine heart in
some measure affected with grief and sorrow for the same; and
then,
2 Confess thy sins unto God in Prayer; spread them before him
in a true and unfeigned acknowledgement and confession of
them, freely judging and condemning thy self before God for
the same.
That thy Confession may be performed after a right manner, it
must have these properties,
1 It must be particular; and of special Sins; I mean, in thy
confession thou must descend to thy special and particular Sins;
the prophanest wretch in the world may in a general manner con|fess,
and say, I acknowledge my self to be a Sinner. But if thou wilt
make a true confession of Sin, thou must lay open thy Sins in par|ticular
before God; and for thine encouragement thereunto,
know, that the more particular thou shalt be in thy confession, the
more comfort thou shalt find therein.

 Thy Confession must be as particular in respect of Sins, so like|wise
full in regard of the aggravations of them. This did David in
his confession of that Sin of numbring the People, I have sinned
greatly, saith he,2 Sam. 24. 10 in that I have done, and now I beseech thee, O
Lord, take away the iniquity of thy Servant, for I have done very
foolishly; see what terms of aggravation he heapeth up. 1 I have
sinned; 2 I have sinned greatly; 3 I have done foolishly;
4 Very foolishly. And as thou desirest pardon of thy Sins, set them
forth to the full, let no circumstance of aggravation be wanting,
by which they may appear the more foul and filthy.
3 Thy confession must be with inward remorse, and sorrow of
heart, that thou hast sinned against so good, and so gracious a God;
Thou must not content thy self with a meer verbal acknowledge|ment
of thy Sins and Transgressions, being affected with no more
grief in the confessing of them, than thou wast in the commit|ting
of them. But every Sin confessed should be as a Dagger pier|cing
thee to the very heart; at least thou shouldest grieve that
thou canst no more grieve for thy Sins; thine heart should bleed,
because thine eyes cannot weep.
3 Having thus confessed thy Sins, as thou desirest to renew thy
peace with God; earnestly begge of him the pardon, and the for|giveness
of them in and through the merits of Iesus Christ; for thou
canst look for it only through the Free Grace and Mercy of God
in Jesus Christ.1 Joh. 1, 9 And as there is a promise of forgiveness to such as
unfeignedly confess their Sins, so there is likewise a promise of
forgiveness to such who heartily pray for the same; for saith the
Lord in answer to Salomons Prayer,2 Chro. 7. 14 If my People which are called
by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face,
then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sins; and there|fore
if thou canst pray heartily unto God for the pardon of thy
Sins, thou hast thereby some comfortable evidence of their for|giveness;
for as the Lord in the Parable forgave his Servant that
was indebted to him,Mat. 18. 27 and had nothing to pay, even because hee
prayed him; so if thou canst pour out thy Soul in a true and hear|ty
Prayer unto God for the pardon of thy Sins, he will question|less
forgive thee, even because thou prayest unto him; for as Da|vid
speaketh, The Lord is not only ready to forgive,Psal. 86, 5 but plenteous in
mercy to all them that call upon him.
4 Sprinkle thy Soul with the blood of Iesus Christ.Ephes 2. 4 Christ is our
peace, as the Apostle calls him; neither canst thou (by all that

thou art able to doe) make thy peace with God, but only thugh
faith in his blood.Exod. 12. 23 When the destroying Angel saw the blood of
the Lamb sprinkled on the Posts of any Door, hee passed by that
House, and they within were safe; so that Soul which is sprinkled
with the blood of Jesus Christ, is so safe from the destroying An|gel
of God, that he shall not doe it hurt; for death is an ad|vantage
to that Soul which is sprinkled with the blood of Christ,
being the door of Life,Ianua vitae. Cyprian. and a gate to Heaven, as Cyprian calls it.
Though the blood of Christ be the means of our peace and reconci|liation
with God, yet unless that blood be sprinkled on thy Soul,
thou canst find little peace there; and therefore the Apostle Peter
speaks not only of the blood of Christ,1 Pet. 1. 2 but of the sprinkling of the
blood of Christ. It is not enough that Christ hath shed his blood,
but there must be besides the shedding of it, the sprinkling of it.
Christs blood was shed upon the Cross, yet all men are not recon|ciled
unto God thereby. And what is the reason? Surely because
that blood is not sprinkled upon their souls; and peace and recon|ciliation
with God must be had, not only from Christs blood poured
out, but from his blood sprinkled.
Quest. How is Christs blood sprinkled upon our souls?
Ans. By Faith, applying the blood of Christ unto our own souls
comfort; Faith is the hand of the Soul, and the soul by faith puts
her hand into the Wounds of Christ, takes of his blood, and be|sprinkles
her self therewith, applying the merits and the vertue
thereof unto it self, and thence follows peace, and reconciliation
with God.
Obj. I would willingly apply the Merits of Christs Death and
Passion unto my self, but oh, I am conscious of so much unworthi|ness,
seeing nothing in my self why the Merits of Christs death should
belong unto me, that I cannot, yea I dare not apply them to my
self.
Ans. 1. It is good to be conscious to thy self of thine own un|worthiness,
but not so as to bee kept thereby from applying of
Christ, and the Merits of his Death and Passion unto thy souls
comfort. And truly, if thou wouldst but consider, that God re|specteth
his own goodness, and not ours, in the offering of his Son,
and that his grace is everyway most free, this conceit of thine un|worthiness
can be no just plea against the applying of Christ, with
the benefits of his Death and Passion unto thine own souls comfort;
it should rather be an incouragement unto thee, because the more

unworthy thou art in thine own sight and sense, the more worthy
thou art in the account of Christ. The greatest worthiness that
any Christian can here attain unto is, to be sensible of his own un|worthiness.
2 Thou who complainest of thine unworthiness, I would ask
thee, Whether any man before he made application of Christ, and
of his Merits unto himself, did see any thing in himself why Christ
should belong unto him rather than to any other? The Scripture
saith, There is no difference, for all have sinned.
Obj. 2 My Sins are so many for number,Rom. 3. 23 and so hainous in their
quality, that I cannot imagine that Christ should belong unto me, and
therefore dare not apply him, nor the benefits of his Death and Passion
unto my self.
Ans. The more sinful thou art in thine own sense and appre|hension,
the fitter thou art to close with Jesus Christ, and to ap|ply
the Merits of his Death unto thy self; for in that gracious in|vitation
of Christ,Mat. 11. 28 we find no other qualification put in, but a sense
of sin, Come unto me all yee that labour and are heavie laden, and I
will give you rest; where the Parties invited to come unto Christ,
are such as are sensible of, and thereupon groan under the weight
and burden of their sins,. as the words in the Greek there properly
signifie; and Luke 5. 32. Christ professeth, He came not to call
the righteous, but sinners; not such as were righteous in their owne
conceit, but such as were Sinners, in their own sense and apprehen|sion,
truly sensible of their sins; so that sense of sin is the only qua|lification
requisite to an application of Jesus Christ.
Obj. 3 I have often sinned against knowledge and conscience, and
therefore fear I have committed that unpardonable Sin, the Sin a|gainst
the Holy Ghost, and so dare not apply Christs blood unto my
self.
Ans. Though the Sin against the Holy Ghost bee a Sin against
knowledge and conscience, yet every Sin (yea every grievous
Sin) against knowledge and conscience, is not the Sin against the
Holy Ghost; for they may be without malice of heart, which this
cannot be; and therefore though thou hast often sinned against
knowledge and conscience. yet if thou hast not sinned with a ma|licious
heart, i. e. thou hast not sinned meerly because thou woul|dest
displease God, and grieve his Spirit, thou hast not committed
the Sin against the Holy Ghost.
IV. Having made thy peace with God, then make thy peace with

men, by an hearty forgiving of all who have wronged thee. This is a
duty to be perormed by thee in the whole course of thy life, as any
occasion thereof is given, without which the Lord will not accept
of any Christian service, and sacrifice that thou offerest unto him;
and therefore saith our Saviour,Mark 11. 25 When thou standest praying, forgive,
if thou hast ought against any; for indeed, how canst thou ask God
forgiveness of thy sins, when thou wilt not forgive man his offen|ces
against thee? How canst thou begg peace and reconciliation
with thy heavenly Father, when thou wilt not be reconciled on
earth to thy Brother? As therefore this Duty is to be performed
by thee in the whole course of thy life, so especially in thy last
Sickness, for thereby thou maist gain some assurance in thine own
Soul of the forgiveness of thy Sins committed against God; which
our Saviour implieth in that expression of his, If yee forgive
men their trespasses,Mat. 6. 14 your heavenly Father will also forgive you;
wouldst thou therefore be assured of Gods mercy towards thee in
the forgiveness of thy sins committed against him? search nar|rowly
into thine own soul, and if thou canst find thou dost as
heartily forgive thy Brother, as thou dost desire forgiveness of
God, then maist thou assure thy self of Gods mercy to thee in
the forgiveness of thy sins committed against him; so much is hinted
to us in the fifth Petition of the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our
trespasses,Mat. 6. 12 as we forgive them that trespass against us; which latter
clause is added, partly to stir us up, readily to forgive those who
have wronged us; and partly to strengthen our faith in the assu|rance
of the forgiveness of our sins committed against God, from
our readiness to forgive those who have wronged us; in that our
forgiving of our Brother is a fruit proceeding from Gods for|giving
of us.
V. Labour to clear up thine Evidences for Heaven, that thou
maist upon good ground be able to say with the Apostle Paul,2 Cor. 5. 1 I
know that when the earthly house of this tabernacle is dissolved, I shall
have a building with God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens. The Scripture layeth down sundry clear evidences
of a true right and title unto Heaven, which who so finds in him|self,
may rest assured of a blessed life after this; I shall instance
only in one, which indeed is the principal of all, and a very com|prehensive
one, viz. Faith in Iesus Christ, which we find often set
down in Scripture,Joh. 3. 16 as a sure evidence for Heaven, for saith our
Saviour, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotton Son,

that whosoever beleeveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life; and saith Iohn Baptist,Vers. 36. He that beleeveth on the Son hath ever|lasting
life; i. e. he is as sure of it, as if he were in actual possession
of it.
Q. How may I know whether I have a true sving faith?
A. Most Divines doe hold forth the fruis and effects of faith,
as the only signs thereof, and means whereby men should try and
examine their faith; but the truth is, the fruits of a saving faith
in many Christians are often times so weak that if they should
examine their faith only by them, they would bee apt to question
the truth thereof, yea to conclude against themselves that they
have no true faith at all, therefore I shall briefly shew thee the
Antecedents of Faith, by declaring the ordinary method o Gods
Spirit in working true faith in the soul, which is this,
1 God by his Spirit in the Ministery of the Word, doth awaken
a mans Conscience, and maketh him to see and discern, as, his
manifold sins and transgressions, so, his misery by them, in regard
of the dreadful punishments due unto him for the same. This me|thod
the Lord observed in those three thousand Converts mentio|ned,
Acts. 2. 37. Examine therefore whether thou hast by the Mi|nistery
or the Word been convinced of thy Sins, and of thy mise|rable
condition thereby; how thou art liable to the Wrath of God,
to all Judgements and Plagues here, and to Eternal Death and Con|demnation
hereafter; for till thou beest convinced of thy sins
and misery, thou canst see no need, nor want of Jesus Christ. Hence
the Law is said to be our School-master, to bring us to Christ, be|cause
it doth discover, as our sins, and our misery by reason of
them; so our need of Christ.
2 The next Work of Gods Spirit, is to make the soul sensible
of its wretched, miserable condition, affecting it with some mea|sure
of grief and sorrow for the same. This method likewise the
Lord observed in those three thousand Converts, mentioned Acts
2. 37. where it is said, When they heard this, i. e. when they were
convinced of that horrible Sin of theirs, in Crucifying the Lord of
life, they were pricked in their hearts, viz. with the sence and ap|prehension
of their wretched, miserable condition. Examine there|fore
whether thou hast been truly sensible of thy wretched, misera|ble
condition, and whether the sence thereof hath affected thee
with true grief and sorrow for the same. Though all men are no
alike afflicted with a sence of their wretched, miserable condition,

but some much more deeply than others; yet few pass through the
pangs of their New Birth, without some throws, some grief and sor|row
for their sins; neither can I conceive how any should cloze
with Jesus Christ as their Saviour, till they have been so sensi|ble
of their sins, as that they are sensible of their need of a Sa|viour.
3 Another Work of the Spirit is to convince the Soul of its own
unrighteousness, that so it may the more willingly seek out after
the righteousness of Christ, to be cloathed therewith; for so long as
a man is conceited of any righteousness of his own, he will never
be beholding unto Jesus Christ for life and for salvation: for as our
Saviour saith,Mat. 9. 12 The whole need not a Physician, they need neither
Physick, nor Physician, and therefore care for neither. In like
manner, such as are strongly possessed with a good conceit of their
own estate and condition, of their own righteousness, see no need
they have of Christ and his Righteousness, and so regard him not.
Examine thy self therefore, whether thou hast ever been truly and
thorowly convinced of thine own unrighteousness, whether thou
hast discerned the Sins of thy holy services, whether thou hast
cried out with the Church,Isa. 64. 6 All my righteousness is as filthy
raggs? c.
4 The next Work of the Spirit, is to convince the soul of the
perfection of Christs Righteousness, and of the All-sufficiency of
his Sacrifice; that his righteousness is a most perfect and exact
righteousness; that his sacrifice upon the Cross was a full satis|faction
to Gods Justice, for the sins of all the Elect, it being the
sacrifice of the Son of God, even of him that was God, as well as
Man; which indeed added an infinite value to all which Christ
did, and suffered for mans Redemption, in which respect the re|demption
wrought by Christ is called plenteous redemption;Psal. 130. 7 enough
and enough for all the sins of his people, how many or how hainous
soever they were. Now, examine whether thou hast found this
work of the Spirit upon thy soul, so that thou art convinced tho|rowly,
as of thine own unrighteousness, so of the perfection of
Christs righteousness, and of the all-sufficiency of his Sacrifice,
which far exceedeth the merits of thy sins.
5 The next Work of the Spirit is to convince the soul of Christs
willingness to receive all poor Sinners, sensible of their sins, who
will come unto him, and cast themselves and the burden of their
sins upon him, by affecting them with a serious apprehension of the

manifold gracious invitations of Christ unto poor Sinners,Isa. 55. 1 as that
in Isaiah, H, every one that thirsteth come yee to the waters, he that
hath no money, i. e. no goodness nor righteousness of his own, let him
come; and that fore-mentioned place, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me
all yee that labour and are heavie laden, and I will give you rest.
Examine thy self therefore whether thou hast been thorowly con|vinced
of Christs willingness to receive all poor Sinners that will
come unto him, and cast the burden of their sins upon him.
6 The next Work of the Spirit is, to stirre up in the soul some
earnest longing desire after Jesus Christ, so that the soul cries out,
Oh that Christ were mine, oh that upon any terms my soul might enjoy
him; which desires are the lifting up of the doors and gates of the soul
for the receiving of Jesus Christ.
7 The Spirit of God having thus prepared the soul to a closing
with Jesus Christ, then he works the grace of faith in it, whereby
it throwes it self into the armes of Christ, rolls it self upon him,
and rests upon his perfect righteousness, and all-sufficient Sacri|fice,
for the pardon and forgiveness of its Sins here, and for eter|nal
life and salvation hereafter. Thus have I shewed thee the or|dinary
way and method which the Lord useth for the working of
true saving faith in the hearts of his people.
Wouldst thou then know whether that faith thou pretendest to,
be a true saving faith, try  examine it by the fore-mentioned par|ticulars;
consider whether it was thus kindly wrought in thee, ac|cording
to the ordinary method of Gods Spirit; if so, then though
the fruits of faith are very weak in thee, yet thou hast a comfortable
evidence of the truth thereof, and so consequently hast a sure evi|dence
for heaven.
Obj. Though I cannot deny these fore-mentioned particulars to bee
wrought in me, yet notwithstanding I have no comfortable evi|dence
and assurance of Heaven, nor of my interest in Iesus
Christ.
Ans. For answer hereunto, I shall lay down three comfortable
considerations.
1 A man may have the faith of adherence and dependence, though
he hath not the faith of evidence and assurance, For the better un|derstanding
whereof you must know, there is a two-fold faith, as
Divines distinguish, viz. The faith of adherence, whereby we roul
our selves upon Christ, and rest upon him and his Merits alone, for
ife, and for salvation; and the faith of evidence and assurane,

whereby wee know and are assured of our interest in Christ, and
consequently of our right and title unto Heaven. This latter is the
refle act of the soul, by which a Christian clearly seeth his own
happiness, whereas the former is the direct act of the soul. Now, a
man may have the faith of adherence, which is true justifying faith,
that giveth him an interest in Christ, and a right to Heaven, and yet
may want the faith of evidence and assurance, so that he knowert
not his own happiness. As the child may truly hang about the mothers
neck, or cast it self into her armes, and yet receive neither kiss nor
smile from her, so a poor soul may truly roul it self upon Christ,
cast it self into his armes, and rest in his bosome (which is true
faith) and yet have neither kiss nor smile from him; therefore far
be it from thee to question the truth of thy faith meerly for want of
Christs smiling upon thee, or to question thy faith of adhe|rence,
because thou hast not the faith of evidence and assu|rance.
2 Assurance of our interest in Christ, and of our future happiness,
though it be requisite to the consolation of a Christian, yet not to his sal|vation;
though to his comfort, yet not to his safety; his conditi|on
may be safe, though not very comfortable at present: for a Chri|stians
safety doth not at all depend upon his assurance, but upon
his faith. That Christian that can by faith roul himself upon
Christ, cast himself into his armes, resting upon his merits alone
for life, and for salvation, his state and condition is safe, though he
hath not that assurance which he doth desire: for the promise of life
and salvation is made to faith, and not to assurance; the tenour of
the Gospel is, Beleeve and thou shalt be saved, as Ioh. 3. 16. God so
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be|leeveth
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. It is not
said, that whosoever hath assurance of his interest in Christ, and of
eternal life and salvation, but whosoever beleeveth in Christ shall be
saved. This consideration may revive many drooping souls, who
though they doe renounce all confidence in themselves, and in
any righteousness of their own, and place their whole confidence
upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the merits of his Death
and Passion, yet have no comfortable assurance in their own souls
of their interest in Christ, or of their eternal life and salvation;
let such know, that their condition may bee good and safe for
all that.
3 Assurance of Salvation is not so ordinary as many Christians doe

imagine, for indeed they are but for Christians who doe here at|tain
to a clear evidence and full assurance of their salvation;
such whom the Lord here calleth forth to hard services, or great
sufferings, to them he is pleased many times to give some clear e|vidence
and assurance of their eternal life and salvation, for their
better comfort and support. Thus many Martyrs have expressed their
full assurance of a better life after this, whereas such a measure is not
usually granted to ordinary Christians, their trials being but
flea-bites in comparison of the others.
VI. Then especially act the graces of Gods Spirit in thee;
as,
1 Thy Falth, which is a grace of special use to thee so long as
thou livest in this world, but most of all at thy last Sickness, and in
the time of Death; therefore then especially bee often actuating,
and exercising thy faith in Jesus Christ; with the eye of faith look
upon Christ hanging upon the Cross, there offering up his life as an
all-sufficient Sacrifice, and full satisfaction to Gods Justice for thy
Sins, and cast thy self into the armes of Jesus Christ, resting upon
his Merits alone for life and for salvation: with a disclaiming of
all confidence in thy self, or any righteousness of thine own, place
thy whole confidence upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and
upon the merits of his death and passion.
2 Then especially act thy zeal for Gods glory, by giving good
counsel to those who are about thee, or come to visit thee; it is the
last time thou canst doe any thing for God in this world, therefore
then shew thy love to him, and zeal for his glory, by calling upon
others to fear him, and serve him, by a conscionable discharge of
the duties of their places, callings, and relations; perswade them to
minde the things of this world less, and the things of Heaven more;
to prize health, and improve it for the good of their souls; to lay
up a stock of graces and comforts against the evil day, and to get
their evidences for Heaven clear, before they be cast upon their
Death-beds. Words of dying men are of most efficacy and autho|rity,
and therefore improve thy dying speeches to the glory of God,
and the good of thy neighbour.Joh. 13. 14, 15, 16, 17 Thus our blessed Saviour, when he
was to leave the world, shewed his zeal for Gods glory, and love to
his Disciples, in leaving with them many precious counsels, com|forts,
and exhortations;Acts 20. 18, c. and the Apostle Paul being aged, and
knowing the time of his departure was at hand, called for the Elders
of the Church of Ephesus, and leaves with them many excellent and
weighty exhortations.

3 Act thine obedience, by resigning up thy self unto the Will of
God,Culpaiest nolle mori, culpa velle mori. to be at his dispose, either for life or death; As thou must not
be unwilling to dye when God calleth thee, so neither must thou
be over eager to dye before hee call thee; thou maist not desire
Death out of discontentment of mind, because of some present mi|series
and afflictions which lye upon thee; nay, thou maist not ab|solutely
wish to dye out of a desire to be rid of thy sins, and to bee
with Christ, but it must be with a submission to the Will of God, if
he see it meet and convenient for thee; though Paul knew it were
far better for him to dye than to live,Phil. 1. 23 yet did he not desire death ab|solutely,
but with a submission to the Will of God.
VII. Be frequent in reading the holy Scriptures, or cause them to
be frequently read unto thee, for there thou shalt find,
1 Examples of Gods mercy shewed to the afflicted.
2 Instructions how to bear, and improve thy present Visita|tion.
3 Comfortable promises of support under the sorest trials. And
know for certain, that one Promise in the Book of God will bee
more effectual to yeeld thee comfort on thy Death-bed, than all
the counsel of thy friends that shall be then about thee.
VIII. Be often lifting up thine heart to God in Prayer. And when
through weakness of body, and faintness of spirit, thou art not able
to pour our thy soul in any set and solemn Prayer, send up some
short ejaculatory Prayer unto God, as that of the poor Publican,
Lord be merciful to me a Sinner;Luke 18. 13 and also that of the poor man,
Lord I beleeve,Mark 9. 24 help thou my unbelief; and that of the Apostles,
Lord increase my faith;Luke 17. 5 and that of Stephen, Lord Iesus receive
my spirit.Acts 7. 59 These ejaculations going from the heart, they are accep|table
and pleasing unto God; let us therefore as Austine adviseth
us, endeavour to dye praying,Demus operam ut moriamu in precatione. by a frequent breathing forth of
these or such like ejaculatory Prayers.
Aug. de vra . cap. 33 IX. Be often resigning up thy soul into the hands of God, saying
with our blessed Saviour, Father, into thy hands I commend my spi|rit.Luke 23. 46
Little Children for the most part desire to dye in their Fa|thers
bosome, or upon their Mothers lap; even so shouldst thou
in the hour of death, cast thy soul into the arms of thy heavenly
Father, and rest in the bosome of Jesus Christ.
If thy Disease be painful, turn to those Direction; in the
fore-going chapter How to bear afflictions
willingly and cheerfully.



CHAP. XIX.
Directions to such as visit the Sick.
VIsiting the Sick being a work of Mercy, it will be thy wisdom
so to manage and improve the same, that thou maist both
benefit thine own soul thereby, and likewise doe good to the sick
Party.
I. That thou maist benefit thy self thereby, take these few di|rections.
1 In visiting thy sick Neighbour take occasion to think of thine own
mortality,Scito omnem conditionem versabilem esse  quicquid in alium incurrit, posse in te quo ineurrere. Sen. de tranq. and proneness to fall into Sicknesses and Diseases: for
that which befalls one man may befall another, in that we all car|ry
about us, as mortal, so frayl bodies, subject to the like calami|ties;
which the Lord knows how soon may befall any of us.
2 Lift up thine heart in thankfulness unto God, for that health and
strength of body he is pleased still to continue unto thee. Health is a
greater mercy than most doe imagine. Ask the sick man what hee
thinks of health, and he will tell thee, it is the greatest of Tem|poral
mercies,Carendo magis quam habendo. Sol nisi cum de|ficit spectato|rem non habet. Seneca, and in it self a mercy not to be valued; the truth is,
all Mercies are prized by the wanting of them, more than by the ha|ving
and enjoying them. As no body admires the Sun but when it is
eclipsed; so neither doth any esteem health, but when by sickness
they are deprived thereof,
3 Labour to be compassionately affected with the miseries and affli|ctions
of thy brother,Job 6. 14 for as Iob speaketh, To him that is afflicted pity
should be shewed from his friend. Which duty is often urged and
pressed in Scripture,Rom. 12. 15. as by the Apostle Paul, Rejoyce with them that
rejoyce, and weep with them that weep; and by the Apostle Peter, in this
phrase,1 Pet. 3. 8 , i. e. estoe mu|uo molestiarum sensu ffecti. Beza. Having compassion one of another which Beza Paraphrasti|cally
well turns, Be touched with the sence and feeling of one anothers
griefs. And truly that communion and nearness of conjunction
that sincere Christians have one with another, doth call for this
duty; for as they are all sons of one Father, so are they members
of one body, in respect whereof there should, nay there ought to
be such a compassion and sympathy in the members of the Mysti|cal
body, I mean among Christians, as there is in the members
of the Natural body. Now, you know that in the Natural body
if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; as the Apostle

expresseth it, 1 Cor. 12. 26. which place Saint Augustine in his
Works often expounding,Aug. in Ps. 130  Tract. in soar. most excellently shewes the mutual
compassion betwixt the members of a Natural body; Behold, saith
he, the foot treadeth on a thorn, and see how all the members condole
it; the Back bends it self, the Head stoopeth; the Eye, though re|mote
in place, diligently searcheth it out; the Tongue complaineth, as
if it self were pricked; and the Hands doe their best to pluck it out; and
yet neither Back, nor Head, nor Tongue, nor Eye, nor Hand, nor
any member but the Foot was touched with the thorn; and surely such
a sympathy and fellow-feeling there ought to bee amongst true
Christians, who are all members of one body, whereof Christ Iesus
is the head.Rom. 12. 5
II. As in visiting the Sick, thou must be careful to benefit thine
own soul thereby, so likewise to doe what good thou canst to the
sick Party.
To that end observe these few Directions.
1 Forbear to talk of any vain, worldly, or needless matter before
him; but let thy discourse be as savoury and Spiritual, so in some
measure suitable to his condition; as of Death, and prepara|tion
thereunto; of the Day of Judgement, of the happiness of
those who have an interest in Christ, and his Righteousness, and
the like.
2 Perswade the sick Party to settle his estate, by making his Will,
(if he have not done it before) that so hee may with more free|dome
wholly mind the spiritual good and welfare of his soul. This
counsel did the Prophet Isaiah give unto King Hezekiah,Isa. 38. 1 when hee
was first struck with sickness.
3 If thou apprehendest his Disease to be dangerous, flatter him
not with a hope of recovery, lest thereby thou betray his soul to
eternal death; but deal faithfully with him, by declaring unto
him his weak and dangerous condition, and advising him, as to think
of death, so to prepare for it, telling him, that the fitter hee is to
dye, the fitter he will be to live, if the Lord should adde more
days to his life.
4 If thou perceive him to be ignorant, instruct him in the Prin|ciples
of Religion, especially touching mans miserable condition
by Nature, and the state of redemption by Jesus Christ.
5 If thou perceivest that he hath not a due sence of his Sins, en|deavour
to affect him with a sence and apprehension of his Sins,
and the hainousness of them; as also of his miserable condition in

regard of the punishments due unto him for the same, which are
all Judgements and Plagues here, and eternal death and damna|tion
with the Devils and damned in Hell.
6 Question him concerning his willingness to dye, and his hope
of a better life after this, and upon what foundation he builds his
hope of salvation; whether upon his good meaning and desires? or
upon his just and honest dealing with men? or upon his frequent
performance of holy duties? If thou perceivest that hee builds his
hope of Salvation upon any of these, or upon any thing besides
Jesus Christ, labour to take him off from those false bottoms, by
shewing him the insufficiency of his good meaning and desires, yea
of his civil and religious righteousness to salvation, how they are
but rotten foundations whereon to build the hope of his Salva|tion.
7 Having taken him off from his false bottoms, and rotten foun|dations,
then instruct him in the only true ground of Salvation,
whereon hee may safely bottom his hope of Salvation, viz. Christ
and his righteousness, with the Merits of his Death and Passion.
8 Labour to convince him that there is no way or means of Sal|vation,
but only by beleeving in Jesus Christ, by receiving him as
his Priest and King, by resting upon his all-sufficient Sacrifice for
the pardon and forgiveness of his sins here, and for eternal life
and salvation hereafter.
9 Perswade him thereupon to goe out of himself unto Christ,
to adventure his soul upon him, with a disclaiming of all his own
righteousness as filthy raggs, to place his whole confidence upon
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and upon the merits of his Death
and Passion. To this end set forth unto him the perfection of
Christs righteousness, the all-sufficiency of Christs Sacrifice, with
his willingness to receive and embrace all poor Sinners that will
but come unto him, and cast themselves, and the burden of their
sins upon him.
10 Perswade him from his heart to forgive those who have wron|ged
him, as he expects forgiveness at the hand of God; and if he
hath wronged any by acts of injustice,Non remittitur peccatum nisi restitatur abla|tu Aug. . 54 1 Cor. 11. 3 perswade him to make what
restitution and satisfaction he is able, telling him, that goods ill
gotten will prove a moath to consume, and a fire to burn his
whole estate.
11 Because, as the Apostle speaketh, If we judge our selves, we
shall not be judged of the Lord. Perswade him to keep a Day of

Judgement in his own Soul, by calling to mind his Sins, together
with the aggravating circumstances of them, and then to arraign
and condemn himself for the same, judging himself guilty, as of all
Judgements and Plagues here, so of eternal torments in Hell
hereafter; and then to fly unto Jesus Christ for the pardon and
forgiveness of his Sins, who is a true City of refuge to all those
who fly unto him, against the Hue and Cry of their Sins,Joh. 6. 37 and will
in no wise cast out any who come unto him.


CHAP. XX.
How to cloze the Day with God.
HAving shewed you how to walk with God all the day long, I
come now to shew you how to cloze the day, and lye down
with God in the evening.
The Directions may be brought to these two Heads.
1 Such as concern our behaviour in the Evening, before our go|ing
to bed.
2 Such as concern our behaviour at our going to bed.
I. The Directions which concern our behaviour in the Evening
before we goe to bed, are these.
1 With-draw thy self into some secret and retired place, and there
look back, and call to mind how thou hast spent the day; consider
how thou hast performed the fore-mentioned Duties, belonging to
the several parts of the day; call to mind what thy carriage hath
been in secret, and what in company; how thou hast improved the
one and the other;Optimus ille trapezita est qui quotidie vespere lucrum ac de|trimentum com|putat. Climac. and whether thou hast discharged the duties
of thy place, calling, and relations. As he is the best Trades-man,
that every day in the evening taketh an account of his worldly
losses and gains; so he is the best Christian, that every day in the
evening taketh an account of his Spiritual losses and gains, whether
he goe forward, or backward, in the ways of godliness. And there|fore,
as many Shop-keepers have their Day-books, where into they
enter all their buyings and sellings, even all their worldly trans|actions,
which they usually review in the evening: so will it be a
point of Spiritual husbandry in us, every evening to review the
passages of the day, and our transactions therein, which would
tend exceedingly to the good and welfare of our souls. History tells
us of many Heathens who were wont every evening to review the

transactions of the day;Faciebat hoc quotidie Sextius, ut consummao die cum se ad nocturnam quie|tem recepisset, interrogaret a|nimum suum; quod hodie ma|lum tuum sa|nasti? cui vi|tio obstitisti? qua parte me|lior es? Senec. de Ira. l. 3. c. 36 Psal. 111. 4. as of Sextius the Roman Philosopher, of
whom it is recorded, that every evening as he was going to bed, hee
would question his soul, what Evil he had healed, what Vice he had
withstood that day; in what regard he was better then before; an
example worthy our Christian imitation, and a shame it would be
to us to fall short of Heathens herein.
II. Call to mind the passages of Gods Providence towards thee,
and treasure them up in thine heart and memory, labouring to make
a right use of them. The truth is, it is an argument of a prophane
and irreligious heart, to let the remarkable passages of Gods Pro|vidence
pass away without any due observation of them; for as the
Psalmist speaketh, The Lord hath so done his marvellous works, that
they ought to be had in remembrance; and therefore it is thy duty,
and will be thy wisdome, as in the day, to take notice of all the
passages of Gods Providence towards thee; so in the evening to
call them to remembrance, that they may take the deeper impres|sion
upon thee.
III. If thou hast been moved to anger in the day time,Ephes. 4. 26 let not
the Sun goe down upon thy wrath; which is the counsel of the A|postle
Paul, whereby he implieth such a speedy suppression of an|ger,
that it may not sleep with thee, for saith he in the next verse,
This is to give place to the Devil,Vers. 27. who, like the Lion that is greedy
of his Prey,Quietis tempo|re ad animum ira cundi acce|dit, c. Gregor. when the Sun is down creepeth forth, seeking whom
he may devour; and in the night season, coming to the angry
man in his bed, saith Gregory, he setteth before him the greatness
of the wrong done unto him, and aggravateth the ame, by all the
amplifying circumstances thereof, to heighten up his anger to a
revenge;Ut ira die orta cum die decidat. Ambros. in E|phes. 4. 26 and therefore saith the Apostle, Let not the Sun goe
down upon your wrath; but if you have been moved uno anger, it
must not live past a day, lest in the day having conceived some
displeasure, thou travel with revenge in the night, and in the
morning bring forth some mischief or other; and therefore as we
say of the Toad-stool.Oritur oitur. it grows up in a night, and dyes in a night;
so should this poysonous weed of anger, dye on the day wherein it
was born.
IV. Before thou goest to bed, be sure to offer unto God thine
evening sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving; this is hinted unto
us under the Law, where the Lord required his Evening Sacrifice,
as well as his Morning,Exod. 29 38, 39 Now, this is that which thou shalt offer upon
the Altar, two Lamb of the first year, day by day continually; the

one Lamb thou shalt offer in the Morning, and the other Lamb thou
shalt offer at Even. This was the daily ordinary Sacrifice, which the
Lord required under the Law, and therefore much more doth hee
require a Morning and an Evening sacrifice of Prayer and Praises
now under the Gospel. And truly, if thou shalt lye down in thy
sins unrepented of, thou mayest happily awake with Hell flames a|bout
thine ears; and therefore farre be it from thee to presume to
goe to thy bed, before thou hast offered unto God thine evening
sacrifice of Prayer, and therein heartily begged the pardon and
forgiveness of all thy sins, in and thorow the merits and mediation
of Jesus Christ. Shouldst thou put off the performance of this duty
till thou art in thy bed, as the practise of too too many is, it is very
likely thou wilt fall asleep before thou hast made any great pro|gress
therein; and those prayers which thou makest in thy bed
will prove but drowsie yawning prayers at the best; therefore bee
sure to offer up thine evening sacrifice before thou goest into thy
bed, and if conveniently thou canst, before supper, for by experi|ence
we find that our bodies are much more drowsie, and our spi|rits
much more dead and heavie after supper than before.
Q. Whether a man finding his body drowsie, and his spirits dead
and heavie, had better fall upon the duty of Prayer, or forbear it for
that time?
Ans. Drowsiness of body, and deadness of heart, is no sufficient
warrant for the omission of thine evening sacrifice of Prayer, but
thou oughtest to erform it notwithstanding, as well as thou canst,
and that for these Reasons.
1 Because the Scripture giveth us no warrant for the omission
of a bounden duty, because of some present drowsiness and indis|position
thereunto, but doth rather expresly hold forth the con|trary,
enjoyning Christians to pray always,Luke 21. 36 and to pray continually,Rom. 12. 12
with sundry the like expressions: Which imply, as a frequent lif|ting
up our hearts to God in ejaculatory Prayers, so a constant ob|servance
of our set times of solemn prayer.
2 As man that hath little or no appetite to his meat, yet by
forcing himself to eat a bit or two, he begins to have a better sto|mack
thereunto; so when a Christian hath no mind or disposition
unto Prayer, but findes his body drowsie, his spirit heavie, and his
heart dead; yet by forcing himself thereunto, though against his
mind, doth many times find his affections ickned, and his spi|rits
raised up in Prayer; yea it is wonderfu what quicknings and

enlargements do many times come upon an adventurous soul, up|on
a soul that will adventure upon duty, against deadness, drow+ness,
and such like discouragements; and therefore let not the
drowsiness of thy body, nor the heaviness of thy spirit, so far prevail
with thee, as to forbear and omit thy course of praying; But fall
upon it, and for ought thou knowest, thou mayest feel and finde
the lively quicknings and inlargements of Gods Spirit upon thy
spirit in the performance thereof.
3 When a Christian feels and findes his body drowsie, his spirit
heavy, and himself very indisposed unto the duty of prayer, yet
hee may do it with much uprightness and sincerity of heart, that
is, hee may do it in obedience to the command of God, as in the
sight and presence of God, with a desire to approve himself unto
God in the doing of it, and herewith hee may exceedingly comfort
himself against deadness and drowsiness; for such is the excellency
of this grace of sincerity, that it maketh all our services to be plea|sing
unto God, though they bee performed with deadness of heart,
and dulness of spirit.
4 Though our prayers bee performed with much deadness of
heart, and indisposition of body, yet being put up in the name of
Christ, they finde acceptance with God in and thorow his Media|tion
and Intercession. Let us therefore put up our prayers in the
name of Christ, and by Faith cast our selves and our services upon
him, and then wee shall not need to doubt of Gods acceptance of
them. Thus have I shewed thee the duties to bee performed by
thee in the evening before thy going to bed.
I come now to the duties to bee performed by thee at thy lying
down.
I. As thou art going to bed, take all occasions of holy and heavenly
Meditations. To give you some hints,
As thou art putting off thy cloaths, think how it will not be long
before thou beest stripped of all, and go out of the world as naked
as thou camest into it; which Iob excellently expresseth, Naked
saith hee,Job 1. 21 came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return
thither; q. d. I came into the world destitute of cloathing, and of
all outward comforts whatsoever; and naked shall I return thither,
not into his Mothers womb again,Joh. 3. 4 for that is impossible, but to
the grave, the womb of the earth, and common Mother of all; so
that his meaning is, I shall go out of the world, as naked as I
came into it.2 Cor. 5. 4 Hece Death is called an uncloathing, because it

strips a man of all his ornaments, not only of his apparel, but also
of his honours, wealth, and riches.
How should the consideration thereof stir thee up to labour for
the true riches, and spiritual cloathing, I mean the saving graces
of Gods Spirit, and the robe of Christs Righteousness, and then
thou shalt not goe out naked, but adorned and enriched.
As thou art laying thy self down in thy bed, let the bed mind
thee of thy grave, thy sheets mind thee of thy winding-sheet,
and thy sleep mind thee of death, for death is but a kind of sleep;
sleep is a short death, and death is a long sleep: Hence Sleep and
Death are often put the one for the other in Scripture,Deut. 31. 16Dan. 12. 2Joh. 11. 11 and death is
often set out by sleep. That thou maist lengthen out this medita|tion,
think of the several resemblances between Sleep and Death;
as,
1 Men asleep are at rest, free from all trouble, from all toyl
and travel; so the dead doe rest from their labours, as Revel. 14.
13. blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for they rest from
their labours; that is, from their troubles and travails.
2 Men asleep rise again: so the body after it is dead and laid
in the grave,Job 19. 25 shall arise again; death is but a sleep somewhat lon|ger
than ordinary.
3 Sleep refresheth the body of a man: so doth death the bo|dies
of the Saints; for the body lieth down a weak, frail, mortal,
corruptible body, but riseth a strong, glorious, immortal, and in|corruptible
body; so much the Apostle Paul plainly expresseth,
where speaking of the resurrection of the body, he saith, It is sown
in corruption,1 Cor. 15. 42, 44. it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonour, it
is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is
sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.
4 Sleep oftentimes cometh upon a man unexpectedly: so doth
death; for how many dye on the sudden, when they least of all
looked for it; and therefore how doth it concern us to live in a
continual expectation of, and preparation for death?
5 Sleep cometh acceptably to some men, so doth death to be|leevers,
who welcome death as their best friend next to Jesus
Christ. Thus let thy sleep mind thee of thy death, and that not
as farre off, but as near at hand, thinking thou mayest this night
sleep the sleep of death;Cuivis potest ac|cidere quod cui|quam potest. Sen. for how many have gone well to bed, and
been dead before the morning? and that which happeneth unto
one may befall another.

II. As thou art going to sleep, commend thy self, thy relations,
wife, children, servants, and all that thou hast, into the armes
of Gods protection, knowing, that they are safe whom the Lord
keepeth.
And then labour to fall asleep as thou art meditating of some
good thing, for then will thy sleep bee more sweet, thy dreams
more comfortable, and thine heart will be in better plight when
thou awakest.


CHAP. XXI.
Of the Morality of the Sabbath.
HAving shewed you how to walk with God on the Week days,
I shall now shew you how to walk with God on the Sabbath
Day; so as it may prove a comfortable day unto you. To this end
I shall
1 Prove the Morality of the Sabbath.
2 Give you grounds for the change of the Sabbath, from the last
day of the week to the first, proving our Lords Day to be now the
true Sabbath.
3 Give you Directions how to sanctifie the same.
4 Adde some Motives to quicken you up to a conscionable ob|servation
of the directions.
1 Because there are many who are not convinced of the Mo|rality
of the Sabbath, and so not of the continuance thereof, there|fore
it is requisite that I first prove the Commandement of the
Sabbath to be moral and perpetual, and to continue in force even
to the end of the world, for that is accounted Moral, which
(as a rule of life) bindeth all Persons, in all places, at all
times.
Arguments proving the Morality of the Sabbath.
1 Because it was sanctified in the time of Adams innocency, as
we read, Gen. 2. 3, 4. now Adam in his innocent estate was a
Publick person, the great representative of all the World, that
therefore which was commanded to him in his innocency, apper|tained
to all his Posterity even to the end of the world. And if
God saw it necessary for our first Parents in the time of their in|nocency
to have a Sabbath Day to serve him in, that they might
more freely and fully give themselves to holy and religious exer|cises.

Then what need have we the Posterity of Adam, now in our
corrupted estate, to have a Sabbath, to take our thoughts off from
our worldly businesses, and bestow them wholly on God, and the du|ties
of his Worship and Service?
2 The Commandement concerning the Sabbath is placed in the
number of the Moral Commandements, for when God renewed the
whole Moral Law, delivering it most solemnly on Mount Sinai, and
ingraved it in two Tables, hee placed this Commandement con|cerning
the Sabbath amongst the rest, and made it one entire Pre|cept,
so as if the morality thereof be denied, and this Comman|dement
made no part of the Moral Law, then the Moral Law
would consist but of nine Commandements,Exod. 34. 28 cut. 4. 13.  10. 4 which is contrary to
the Word of God, which often maketh express mention of
Ten.
3 The manner of the delivery of this Commandement confirms
the morality and perpetuity of it; and shews, that it is of as great
force as any of the other Nine.
1 For first,Exod. 20. 1 God by his immediate Voyce commanded this, as
well as the rest.
2 This Commandement was written by the Finger of God,Exod. 31. 18Deut. 5. 22 in
Tables of Stone, as well as the other, as to signifie the hardness
of our hearts, so likewise the continuance and perpetuity of this
Commandement.
3 It was placed in the very heart of the Ten Commandements,
as that which by a careful and conscionable performance of the
duties required therein, would give life to the keeping of all the
rest. And it is a certain truth, that he who makes no conscience to
keep holy the Sabbath Day, will make little conscience of keeping
any of the other Commandements, so he may doe it without dis|credit
of his reputation, or danger of mans Law. Look how a
man is careful and conscionable in the performance of the duties
of piety to God on this Day, in like manner is he careful and con|scionable
in the performance of the duties of righteousness to|ward
his neighbour on the week days.
ObjGal. 4. 10 I Some object that of the Apostle, Yee observe days, months,
and times, and years;Col. 2. 16 as also that to the Colossians, Let no man
judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new
Moon, or of the Sabbath Day.
Ans. The Apostle here condemns not the Moral Sabbath, which
we now call the Lords Day, but he speaks of the Levitical Sab|baths,

which were the first day of every month, and the first and
last days of every one of their solemn Feasts,Lev. 23. 37, 38, 39. which were called
Sabbaths, all which are now abrogated.
Obj. 2 Some object, that to a Christian every day is a Sabbath,
and therefore say, that we should not restrain it to one day more than to
another.
Ans. 1 True it is, every day should be a Sabbath to a Christian
in two respects:

1 In a resting from Sin.
2 In a readiness to serve God.

For as we should at all times rest from Sin, so we should bee
always in a readiness and disposition to serve God.
Yet are we not bound to spend every day as a Sabbath, by lay|ing
aside the lawful works of our Callings, and giving up our selves
wholly to the solemn duties of Gods Worship and Service, which
is contrary to the command of God, who saith, Six days shalt thou
labour,Exod. 20. 9, 10. and doe all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not doe any work; where the Lord doth
require of us as well to follow the works of our Calling on the six
days, as to keep holy the Sabbath Day, by a conscionable perfor|mance
of his Worship and Service.
I deny not but Divine Worship is to bee performed unto God
every day: as under the Law, we read they had their Morning and
Evening sacrifice every day; so we should every day offer up our
morning and evening sacrifice of Prayer; and truly by duties of
piety to God are our worldly businesses sanctified and seasoned,
and therefore are every day to be performed, but yet so as the
duties of our ordinary Callings be likewise performed, and not neg|lected
by us.
2 Upon the same ground, neither Adam, nor the Iewes before
Christ should have observed any Sabbath, because they were bound
to rest from sin, as well as Christians.
3 Neither are we to keep days of fasting, because we are to
fast from sin every day.
Having thus proved the Morality of the Sabbath, and an|swered
some Objections against it.
II. I shall in the next place give you the grounds for the change
of the Sabbath, from the last day of the week to the first.
1 Divine institution, even the institution of Christ himself,
which appeareth two ways.

1 By the title given to the first Day of the Week, namely, the
Lords Day: for whatsoever in Holy Writ is said to be the Lords
denominatively, fo that Christ is the Author and institutor; as for
instance, The Lords Supper, because he instituted it; The people of
the Lord, because he chose them; the Lords Messengers, because
he sends them. Upon the same ground the first day of the week is
denominatively called the Lords Day, and that not by Creation, for
so every day is his from the beginning, but by Divine institution, be|cause
it was instituted by Christ the Lord, for Divine Worship and
Service,Dom nicum di|em Apostoli rli|giosa slemnita|te habendum sanxerunt, quia in eodem Re|demptor noster a mortuis resur|rexit, qui ideo Dominicus ap|pell tur. Aug. Serm. 151. de Tempore.Acts 1. 2, 3 and for the memorial of the great work of Redemption
wrought by him. Agreeable hereunto is that of Augustine, who
saith, that the Apostles appointed the Lords Day to be kept with all
religious solemnity, because in that day our Redeemer rose from the
dead, and therefore is called the Lords Day.
2 By the practise of the Apostles, who constantly assembled
together on the first day of the week, which is our Lords Day, and
that without doubt, upon the command of Christ himself; for
whereas he continued forty days on earth after his resurrection be|fore
he ascended into Heaen, it is said, in that time hee gave
Commandements unto his Apostles, and spake unto them of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God; that is, he instructed them how
they should change the bodily sacrifices of Beasts, into the spiritual
sacrifices of Prayer and Praises; the Sacrament of Circumcision in|to
the Sacrament of Baptism, the Sacrament of the Passeover, into
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And then likewise he instruct|ed
his Apostles touching the change of the Sabbath into the Lords
Day.Non humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius ob|servatione  instituto. Iunii prelect. in. Gen. 2. 3 To which agreeth that of learned Iunius, who saith positive|ly,
that the change of the Sabbath was not by the tradition of men,
but by the observation and appointment of Christ, who both on
the day of his resurrection, and on every seventh day after un|to
his Ascension into Heaven, appeared to his Disciples, and
came into their assemblies. Hereupon we read the Apostles met
together on every first day of the week to preach the Word, and
to communicate the Lords Supper, as Ioh. 20. 19, 26. Acts 2. 1.
Acts 20. 7, and in divers other places. And wee find it expresly
ordained by the Apostle Paul, that the weekly Collections for the
Poor should be on that day.1 Cor. 16. 1, 2 Now concerning the Collection for the
Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so doe
yee; upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him
in store, as God hath prospered him, c. And why on that day?

surely no other reason can well bee imagined, but that their as|sembling
together to partake of the Ordinances of God, was wont to
be on that day; And therefore, because works of charity suit well
with duties of piety; and that by the Ordinances then dispensed,
they might be stirred up to a more free and chearful contribution;
the Apostle ordained also, that the Collections for the poor should
be on the same day, viz. the first day of the week.
2 Another Argument proving the first day of the week, com|monly
called the Lords Day, to bee the true Christian Sabbath
now under the Gospel, may bee taken from the constant practice
of the Church and People of God since the Apostles times. As I
have shewed you, that it was the practice of the Apostles to ob|serve
the first day of the week, which is argument enough to
warrant the day, they being guided by the Spirit of Christ in an
especial manner: So it doth clearly appear, that it hath been the
practice of all holy men since the Apostles times, to observe this
day, and that under the name of the Lords Day.
Ignatius, who lived in St. Iohns time, saith, Let every one that
loveth Christ keep holy the Lords Day, which is the Queen of daies.Omnis Christi  Domini , reginam   incipem die|rum omnium. Ignat. Epist. 3. ad Magnes. Euseb. l. 4. cap. 22.
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history plainly shews how the Church
and People of God in several ages after the Apostles times obser|ved
the first day of the week, as instituted by Christ, and ordain|ed
afterwards by the Apostles. I might spend much paper in
shewing how this day hath been observed in all ages, from the A|postles
times to these daies. Now the constant custome of the
Church is not to bee sleighted. That expression of the Apostle, Cor. 11. 16.
If any man seem to bee contentious, wee have no such custome, nei|ther
the Churches of God, sheweth, that the custome of the
Church is a matter to be regarded.
3 The Resurrection of Christ both giveth a ground for the san|ctifying
of our Christian Sabbath, and likewise sheweth a reason
for the changing of the day, For the work of Redemption wrought
by Jesus Christ, being far more excellent than the work of Creation,
did much more deserve a weekly memorial. That the work of
Redemption was more excellent appears, In that it cost more to
redeem the world of Gods Elect, than to create the whole world;
for to create the world, it cost God but a word, as it were;Psal. 148. 5. Hee
but spake the word, and it was done. But to redeem the world of
Gods Elect, it cost no less than the precious blood of the Son of
God. So that this work hath swallowed up the former, as the

Temple did the Tabernacle.2 King. 8. 4. And wee who live after Christs
Resurrection, are as much bound to the celebration of the first
day of the week, as they who lived before, to the last.
It is very observable, that a seventh day hath been observed to
the honour of God ever since the Creation; and such a seventh,
as never a week in the alteration was without a Sabbath, and ne|ver
a week had two Sabbaths; for as the week ended with the for|mer
Sabbath, so the next week began with our Sabbath, which
could not have been, if any other seventh day had been chosen.
If any shall ask why the change of the day is not more clearly
expressed in the New Testament, I answer, because there was no
question moved about the same in the Apostles times; which may
likewise serve as a reason why in the New Testament there is no
express command for the baptizing of Infants in particular, name|ly,
because there was no question moved about the same in the
Apostles times.
III. Come wee now to the Directions how to sanctifie the
Lords Day.
To the sanctification whereof two things are required.

1 An observing of a rest.
2 A consecrating of that rest wholly to the worship and service
of God.

I. There must bee a resting, and that from several things. As
1 From all the ordinary works of our Calling, which is expresly
set down in the Commandement; Exod. 20. 9, 10. Six daies shalt thou labour and
do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, in it thou shalt not do any work. viz. of thy Calling. And let
not any pretend the greatness of their charge, as a plea for their
working; But know assuredly, that what you get that day by your
labour, will contribute little towards your charge. For whatsoe|ver
is got on that day, will not be blessed of the Lord, but will
prove like Achans wedge of gold, which being got contrary to the
command of God, brought the fire of Gods curse upon all the
rest which hee had lawfully gotten.
2 From all kinds of recreations, especially such as tend to car|nal
and ensual delight, which though they may be lawful at other
times, yet are unlawful on the Lords Day, being as expresly for|bidden
by God himself, as the works of our Calling, as you shall
finde, in Isa. 58. 13. where the Lord requires of his People, That
they turn away their feet from doing their own pleasures on his holy

day. And that they call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, honourable, and honour him, not doing their own wais, nor
finding their own pleasures. And it is found by experience, that
recreations do more steal away our affections from heavenly me|ditations,Quanto  est arare, quam saltare in Sab|bato. Aug. in enarrationem tituli Psal. 91.
and distract us in Gods service, than the works of our
Calling. Whereupon saith St. Augustine, How much better is it
to plow on the Lords Day, than to dance?
3 From all immoderate eating and drinking, whereby wee are
fitter to sleep than to attend upon the Ordinances of God. And
therefore how blame-worthy are they, who make the Lords Day
a day of Feasting their neighbours and friends? For though it be
lawful upon this day to make such provision as shall be convenient
for our own families, or for the relief of our poor neighbours,
yet to make solemn feasts upon this day (as is the custome of
too many) whereby servants are kept from the publick Ordinan|ces,
and our selves and guests are more indisposed to the duties of
Gods worship and service, must needs be unlawful. And there|fore,
though wee be not forbidden upon the Lords Day to kindle
a fire for the dressing of meat, yet we must take heed, that wee
make not such a flame, as shall kindle the fire of Gods wrath a|gainst
us.
4 From all worldly words, and discoursing of earthly affairs,
which the Lord himself expresly forbiddeth by the Prophet Isaiah,
Not speaking thine own words,Isa. 58. 13. which imports talking and discour|sing
of worldly matters on the Sabbath day; For where the Lord
hath commanded the whole man to rest from worldly works,
there hee commands, as, the hand to rest from working, so the
tongue from talking of worldly matters. But in the fourth Com|mandement,
the Lord hath commanded the whole man to rest
from worldly works, where hee saith,Exod. 20. 10. Thou shalt do no manner of
work, c. Therefore hee commands the tongue to rest from talk|ing
of worldly matters, as well as the hand from working of ser|vile
and worldly works. How blame-worthy then are they, who
make the Lords Day a reckoning-day with work-men, and ser|vants,
or at least a visiting day amongst their friends and neigh|bours,
and so confequently a day of idle tattle about their profits,
pleasures, or other mens matters?
5 As from worldly words, so from worldly thoughts, as much as
wee can. For
1 Know, that every Commandement extends to our very

thoughts, binding them, as well as to the outward actions, ex.
gr. The sixth Commandement from murtherous thoughts as
well as from the act of Murther. The seventh, from adulterous,
and lustful thoughts, as well as from the act of Adultery. The
eighth, from covetous thoughts, as well as from the act of Co|vetousness.
2 Know, that the Lord requireth not onely the outward man,
and external actions, to bee consecrated unto him, but especially
the inward man; in which regard wee ought,Luk. 10. 27. as much as possibly
wee can, to sequester our thoughts from worldly matters, that
they may be wholly taken up with spiritual and heavenly Medi|tations.
6 There is another rest expected from every one on the Lords
Day, and that is a resting from sin, which wee ought to do, as
much as in us lyeth, at all times, but especially on the Lords
Day, which ought to be kept as an holy rest. And truly, wee can|not
offer unto God a greater indignity, than to serve the Devil
in the works of darkness on the Lords Day, which is consecrated
to the honour and service of God.
Thus much of the first particular requisite to the sanctification
of the Lords Day, namely, an observing of a rest.
II. Come wee now to the second, viz. A consecrating that
rest wholly to the worship and service of God. For it is not enough
that wee keep a rest, but wee must keep an holy rest; barely to
rest on the Sabbath day, is but a Sabbath of beasts. Wee must re|member
the Sabbath day to keep it holy. For this is the chief end
whereunto the outward rest tendeth.
Now the consecration of the Sabbaths rest, consists,
1 In our preparation thereunto.
2 In a conscionable performance of those duties the Lord then
requireth of us, which may be brought to two heads, viz.

1 Duties of Piety.
2 Works of Mercy.

Duties of Piety are of three sorts, viz 1 Publick. 2 Private.
3 Secret. The which, because they are interchangeably mixed
with one another, therefore I shall interchangeably speak of
them.
The duties to be performed by way of preparation, are these.
1 Remember the day beforehand, to the end you may so order
and dispose of your worldly affairs, that they may be dispatched

in convenient time on the Eve of the Sabbath, that so both
your selves and servants may goe to bed in such time, that
your bodies may be well refreshed with sleep, and your mindes
fitted for the duties of the day.Exod. 20. 8. This the Lord intimateth in the
beginning of the fourth Commandement, saying, Remember to
keep holy the Sabbath Day; where by remembring it, may bee
meant a minding of it before hand. How blame worthy then are
they, who sit up themselves, and keep their servants so late up in
the night before the Sabbath, that they are enforced to lye lon|ger
in their beds than ordinary on the Sabbath Day, yea and
when they are come into the Congregation, are fitter to sleep
than to hear; Is this to remember the Sabbath to keep it holy?
2 At your first awaking in the morning, lift up your hearts to God in
Prayer and Thanksgiving, for that comfortable rest and sleep hee
hath vouchsafed unto you the night past;Psal. 127. 2 For, it is he hat giveth
his beloved sleep, and who reneweth his mercy every morning. And
then begge of God the assistance of his Spirit,Lam. 3. 22, 23 to carry you
through all the duties of the day.
3 Rise early on the Sabbath Day; for in regard there are, as secret
duties of Piety to be performed by you in your Clossets, so pri|vate
duties of Piety in and with the Family (if you live in a Fa|mily)
before you goe to the publick Congregation; yee ought
to rise so early, that you may have convenient time for these du|ties,
and be at the Church at the beginning of the Exercises. How
blame worthy then are they, who on the week-dayes can rise be|times
to follow their worldly businesses, but on the Lords Day doe
lye longer in bed than ordinarily, giving themselves up to their
carnal ease and rest? Is this to keep holy the Sabbath Day, thus to
sleep away the first and chiefest part thereof?
4 In your rising, let out your hearts in a serious meditation of Ie|sus
Christ, and of the great things he hath done and suffered for
you, and of the many good things whereof in and through him
you are made partakers. Meditate likewise on the infinite Ma|jesty
of God, whom the glorious Angels adore with covered faces,
that your hearts being possessed with an aweful apprehension there|of,
you may perform the duties of Gods worship and service
with such everence as becometh so sacred a Majesty.
5 So soon as you are up and ready, with-draw your self into some
privae place, and there read some porion of the Scriptures, which
will be an excellent means to season your hearts, and compose

your minds; yea hereby you will be the better prepared to hear
the Word preached, and the better enabled to try the Doctrines
delivered,1 Thes. 5. 21 according to the exhortation of the Apostle, Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good.
6 As Prayer is a duty to be performed every morning, so espe|cially
on the Lords-Day morning; which is in some measure to bee
suitable thereunto. Having therefore confessed your sins, and beg|ged
the pardon of them, together with power against them, and
grace to serve God: then pray both for the Minister, and for
your selves.
1 For the Minister, that God would give him a door of utte|rance,
that he may open his mouth boldly to publish the Myste|ries
of the Gospel; yea that he may speak the VVord truly, sin|cerely,
powerfully, and profitably, delivering that which is sui|table
and seasonable to your condition.
2 For your selves, that God would banish out of your heads
all worldly wandring thoughts, which may distract your minds in
the hearing of the Word, and so choaking that heavenly seed,
make it fruitless. And that he would give unto you, as attention to
hearken, so understanding to conceive, wisdome to apply, judge|ment
to discern, faith to beleeve, memory to retain, and grace
to practise what you shall hear; that so the Word may prove
unto you a savour of life unto life, and not a savour of death unto
death.
These two last duties of reading the Word, and Prayer, are not
to be performed only alone in secret, but likewise in and with
your Families, if so be you be Parents, and Masters of Families;
and therefore before you goe to the publick Ordinances, call your
Family together, and pray with them, as for other things, so in
special for the influences of the grace of God, and the incomes
of his Spirit upon your hearts and spirits in the good du|ties
you shall take in hand, that so you may perform them af|ter
such a manner, as glory may redound to Gods name, and some
spiritual good and advantage to your own souls.
These are the duties to be performed by way of preparation.
Having thus fitted and prepared your selves,
I. Call your Fmily together, your Children and Servants, and
take them along with you to the publick Congregation; and et
Ioshuahs resolution bee often in your mind,Josh. 24. 15 As for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord. And as you are going,

1 Consider whither you are going, viz. Not to a Fair or Market,
but to the House of God, where God himself is present to be|hold
you, yea where God himself speaketh by the mouth of his
Ministers.
2 Go with a readiness of heart, and resolution of mind, to re|ceive
every truth that shall bee made known unto you out of Gods
Word; with such an heart came Cornelius, to hear Peter. Wee are
all here present before God,Act. 10. 33. to hear all things that are commanded
thee of God,. Acts 17. 11. said Cornelius to Peter. And it is said of the Bereans,
that they received the Word with all readiness of mind.
II. Being come into Gods House, observe these Rules and
Directions.
1 Set your selves as in the sight and presence of God, who not
onely observeth your outward carriage and behaviour, but like|wise
understandeth all the imaginations of your hearts, and is
privy to every wandring thought in praying, hearing, and other
holy duties, which will be a special means to keep your minds
from roving after other matters.
2 Labour to hear the word with profit.
To this end and purpose I finde four special virtues commen|ded
in the Scripture, viz.
1 Humility. 2 Honesty. 3 Attention. 4 Faith.
1 Humility, for when a man is of an humble, lowly, meek,
and contrite spirit, then is hee fit to hear the Word, because hi
heart being emptied of pride, and self-conceitedness, there will
be room for the Word to take place;Psal. 25. 9. therefore saith David, The
meek will the Lord guide in judgement, and the meek will hee teac
his way. And saith the Lord himself by his Prophet Isaiah, To
this man will I look,Isa. 66. 2. even to him that is poor (viz. poor in spirit)
and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word
2 Another virtue requisite to the profitable hearing of the
Word, is Honesty, or uprightness of heart, whereby a man sin|cerely
purposeth in every thing to approve himself unto God, as
to avoid every sin whatsoever, that the Word condemneth, be it
never so delightsome or profitable unto him; so to indeavour
himself to the performance of every duty belonging to his place
and calling, which the Word commandeth. This is that honest
and good heart which our Saviour intendeth, Luk. 8. 15.
3 As Honesty, so Attention is requisite; while the Word is
preaching, you must diligently attend thereunto, as they who

would be loath to lose a word that should be delivered. This par|ticular
is noted of those that heard Christ-preach, of whom it is
said, That they were attentive to hear him; or as the Greek text
hath it,. Luk. 19. 48. All the people hanged on him to hear him, i. e. They were
very attentive, as unwilling to let any thing pass them: So
should you be as attentive to the Ministery of the Word. To
this end, keep your eyes steddy on the Preacher. And as hee
passeth from point to point, think briefly on the point which is
past, which will exceedingly help your memory.
4 Faith is another virtue requisite to the profitable hearing of
the Word, I say, Faith, whereby we do not only beleeve that
which is taught us out of the Word to be true, but also apply it
unto our selves, as if it were in special directed unto us. The
Gospel is the power of God unto salvationRom. 1. 16. saith the Apostle, but to
whom? even to every one that beleeveth. And saith the Author
to the Hebrews,Heb. 4. 2. The Word preached did not profit them, not being
mixed with Faith in them that heard it. In whose heart there is
true Faith, that man will apply the whole Word of-God unto
himself, whether it be the threatnings of the Law, to terrifie him
from sin, or the sweet promises of the Gospel to allure him to
holiness; and so maketh much profit of every Sermon hee hea|reth.
Thus much for your hehaviour in the publick Congregation.
But you must not rest here, thinking you have thereby sancti|fied
the Sabbath day. For there are likewise both Private and
Secret duties of Piety required to a true sanctification of the
Lords Day, of which you ought to be as careful and conscionable,
as of the publick duties in the publick Congregation. For God
requires the whole day, and not a part onely. As therefore you
would not be contented your servants should work for you only
an hour or two on each of the six daies: So neither should you
yeeld less unto God, than you require for your selves. By Pri|vate
duties of Piety, I mean such as are perfomed in a private
Family. And by Secret, such as are done in some secret and re|tired
place, between God and ones self alone.
Now the Private duties of Piety which are especially required
of such who are Parents and Masters of Families, and wherein
every member thereof are to joyn, are these.
I. Repeating the Sermons they have heard with their family,
and examining them one after another what they remember, ex|plaining

the same unto them, which is commended to us by the
practice and example of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who
when he was come home,Mat. 13. 51. said unto his Disciples, Have yee un|derstood
all these things? viz. that he had preached to the multi|tude;
And St. Mark saith, When they were alone, hee expounded
all things to his Disciples.Mark 4. 34. Christus suo ex|emplo, c. Chemnit. exa|min. cap. de. dieb.  Wherupon one observeth, That Christ
by his example doth instruct every Master of a family how to carry
himself in reference to those under his charge on the Lords Daies af|ter
their departure from the publick Congregation.
And truly a treble benefit will follow hereupon.
1 In respect of your selves: for the more you build up others,
the more your selves are built up in Knowledge, Faith, and eve|ry
grace of God.
2 In respect of your children and servants, for it will make
them to hearken more attentively to that which is delivered in
the publick Congregation, if they know they shall be called to an
account for the same when they come home.
3 It would much help both your selves and servants in the un|derstading
and beleeving of that which you have heard in the
publick, if at home you would repeat it, and confer of it, and ex|amine
the proofs that have been delivered for the confirmation
of it.
II. Another private duty is singing of Psalms, for this may and
ought to be performed in your families, as well as in the Congre|gation.
This David commends for one duty of the Sabbath, as
Psal. 92. 1. The title of the Psalm is, A Psalm or Song for the
Sabbath day. And thus it begins, It is a good thing to give thanks
unto the Lord, to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High. This
Ordinance being questioned by some, and denied by others, I
shall
1 Prove the lawfulness thereof.
2 Give you some directions for the right manner of perform|ing
the same.
First the lawfulness of singing Psalms doth appear both from
Scripture, Example, and Reasons.
1 For Scripture-proofs there are many, both in the Old and
New Testament; but not to mention those in the Old Testa|ment,
which may not prove so convincing. In the New wee
finde it commanded by the Apostle to the Ephesians Speak to your
selves in Psalms and Hymns,Ephes. 5. 19. and spiritual songs, singing, and making

melody in your heart to the Lord. And saith the Apostle Iames,
Is any among you afflicted?James 5. 13. let him pray. Is any merry? let him
sing Psalms. Where you see it is in express terms commanded, and
that as a Gospel duty.
2 We finde it commended, both by the example of our Saviour,
and the practice of the Apostles, and other Saints of God in the
Primitive times.
1 By the example of our Saviour, of whom it is recorded, that
(as at other times) so the night in which he was betrayed, hee
sung a Psalm,Matth. 26. 30. together with his Disciples; And when they had
sung an Hymn, or Psalm, they went out into the Mount of
Olives.
2 By the practice of the Apostles, and other Saints in the Pri|mitive
times.Act. 16. 25. For wee read, That at midnight Paul and Silas
prayed, and sang praises unto God, and the prisoners heard them,
Plinius Secundus,Hymnos antee|lucanos. Plin. secund. lib. 3. cap. 33. though an Heathen, who lived about two hun|dred
years after Christ, testified of Christians, that they had
their morning songs, using to rise before day to sing Psalms.
2 Reasons commending this duty, may be taken from the
benefits accompanying the same; For
1 By this duty joyntly performed, our own spirits will bee
much quickened and enlivened.
2 Wee shall thereby quicken and enliven the spirits of o|thers.
3 We shall all thereby be made the more chearful in serving
God, which may be one reason why Paul and Silas joyned sing|ing
of Psalms with their prayers.Act. 6. 25.
4 It manifesteth an holy zeal that wee bear unto our God,
and witnesseth that we are not ashamed to profess and praise his
holy Name; and therefore our tongue doth with chearfulness
sound out aloud the praises of God. This holy zeal did David
express, saying, I will give thanks unto thee (O Lord.) among
the Heathen,Psal. 18. 49. and sing praises unto thy name.
Having thus proved the lawfulness of this duty by Scripture,
Example, and Reason.
II. Come we now to the Directions for the right manner of
performing the same, which are set down by the Apostle in these
words,Col. 3. 16. Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
1 First therefore it must be in the heart, or with the heart, i. e.
our hearts must go with our voices, the one must be lift up as

well as the other.John 4. 24. Non vox, sed votum, non cho|dula musica, sed cor. For God is a Spirit, and therefore will be wor|shipped
with our hearts and spirits, as well as with our bodies.
And truly, singing with the voice, without the concurrence of
the heart and spirit, is no more pleasing to God, than a sounding
brass,Non cantans, sed amans, can|tat in aure Dei. or tinkling Cymbal.
2 As we must sing with the heart, so with grace in the heart,
that is, we must exercise the graces of Gods holy Spirit in singing,
as well as in praying; labouring to express the same affection in
singing the Psalm, as David had in penning the same; as if it be
a Psalm of Confession, then to express some humility and broken|ness
of heart and spirit in singing it. If it be a Psalm of prayers
and petitions, then must our affections be fervent. If a Psalm of
praises and thanksgivings, then must our hearts be chearful. And
thus must the affection of the heart be ever suitable to the quality
of the Psalm.
3 It must be to the Lord, that is, as in the sight and presence
of the Lord, and to his honour and glory. As the Apostle expres|seth
it in the next verse,Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever yee do, in word or deed, do it
as in the name of Christ, so to the praise and glory of God, making
his glory the main end and aim of what you do.
III. Another private Duty to be performed with our Family, is
Prayer; For if this duty ought to be performed every day, twice
at least, viz. in the morning and evening, then especially on the
Lords Day, which the Lord hath wholly consecrated to his wor|ship
and service.
The Directions for the right manner of performing this duty of
Prayer, so as it may be an acceptable service and sacrifice unto
God, you may finde in Chapter second, about the latter part
thereof.
IV. Reading the Scriptures is another Duty to be performed in
and with our Family, that so they may bee acquainted with the
Body of the Scriptures; yea and with the Precepts and Promises,
the Directions and Consolations of the Word, for their direction
and comfort. Directions for the more profitable reading of the
Scriptures, see Chap. 4.
These are the Private duties of Piety to bee performed on
the Lords Day.
Besides the Publick and Private, there are likewise secret du|ties
to be performed by every one alone in their Closets or Cham|bers;
which are briefly these.

1 Reading some part of Gods Word, or other good Books.
2 Meditating of what you have heard or read that day; which
is an excellent means to make the Word both read and preach|ed
profitable unto you. For as meat, though it be never so whol|some,
nourisheth us not, if it be not concocted and digested: so
is it with the Word of God, the food of our souls, if it be not by
meditation concocted and digested, it will nothing at all profit
us; but being by meditation digested, it will then prove effectual
to the nourishing of our souls.
3 Examining your selves, as of your former life  conversation, so
especially of your carriage the last week, and of the manner of your
performing the duties of the day; and as you should be humbled
for your faylings therein, so you should resolve, with the assistance
of Gods grace, to be more watchful over your selves for the time
to come, and to be more careful in sanctifying the Lords Day, by
a conscionable manner of performing the duties thereof.
4 Praying unto God is another duty to be performed by you in
secret, as well as publickly and privately; yea you should double
and treble your Prayers on the Lords Day. Under the Law, we
read how the Lord required double Sacrifices on the Sabbath
Day; for besides the daily Sacrifices, two Lambs more were ap|pointed
to be offered up on the Sabbath day,Nuni. 28. 9, 10 four in all, to shew
the holiness of the day. And in like manner ought you to double
your spiritual sacrifices of Prayer, and Praises on the Lords Day,
earnestly beseeching him for Christs sake to pardon, as your sins
in general, so in special the manifold infirmities and imperfecti|ons
which have passed from you in the performance of your holy
sevices, and to enable you by his Spirit to perform them for the
time to come with more life and vigor, with more fervency and af|fection.
Having thus shewed you both the Publick, Private, and Secret
duties of Piety to be performed on the Lords Day,
Come we now to the Works of Mercy, which is another Head of
duties which ought to be performed on thatday; and therefore to
duties of Piety you must adde Works of Mercy on the Sabbath day:
in a conscionable performance of both which consisteth the true san|ctification
of the Sabbath. And because man consists of two Parts,
viz. of Soul and Body, and both of them are subject to many Mala|dies,
therefore the Works of Mercy may be brought to these two
Heads:


1 Such as concern the Soul.
2 Such as concern the Body of your Neighbour.

I, The Works of Mercy which concern the Soul of your
Neighbour are these, and such like.
1 To instruct the ignorant in Points of Doctrine needful and
necessary to be known; herein Iob expressed his charity, as E|liphas
testifieth of him,Job 4. 3 Thou hast instructed many; viz. in the
knowledge of God.
2 To draw Sinners to repentance, by setting before them, as
the severity of Gods Justice against all impenitent Sinners, so
the freeness of his grace, and riches of his mercy to all peniten
Sinners.
3 To comfort such as are comfortless, through an apprehension
of the number and hainousness of their sins, by setting before
them the All-sufficiency of Christs Sacrifice,Mat. 11. 28 and the gracious of|fers
in the Gospel to all who find their sins a burthen to
them.
4 To exhort and stirre up such as have begun well to hold on pa|tiently,Heb. 10. 24 .
and constantly; whereunto the Apostle exhorteth us, Let
us, saith he, consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good
works, or to whet on to love and good works, as the word in the
Original properly signifieth.
5 To reprove and rebuke such as are scandalous and offensive
in their waies. Thus Iohn reproved Herod for Herodias his bro|ther
Philips wife,Luke 3. 19 and for many other evils.
6 To resolve the doubtful.
7 To strengthen and establish such as are weak in grace.
These indeed in one respect may be called works of Piety,
namely, as they are instructions, directions, and consolations
gathered out of the holy Scriptures: But in another respect they
are works of mercy, namely, as they tend to the good of your
neighbours souls: In which the poorest that are may be rich in
good works.
II. The works of mercy, which concern the body of our neigh|bour,
are these, and such like.
1 Relieving such as are in want. The Apostle enjoyning the
Corinthians to lay up some thing in store,1 Cor. 16. 1, 2 every first day of the
week (which is the Lords Day) implieth, that that is a very fit
season, not only to do such works of mercy, which are then of|fered
unto us, but also to prepare for other times. And surely,

if every one would every Lords Day set apart something out of
his commings in that week, for a stock to give to charitable uses,
much good might be done thereby. For as men by this means
will have more to give, than otherwise they will finde in their
hearts to do on the week days: So they will give both more boun|tifully,
and more willingly, because the stock out of which they
give is prepared before-hand; and (it being a sacred Stock, by
their voluntary setting it apart to such an use) their conscience
will account it sacriledge to lay it out any other way. If poor
men that live by their daies labour, and servants that live on
their wages, would every Lords Day lay up some half-pennies,
or pence, for this end and purpose, they might have without a|ny
sensible dammage to themselves, a stock for the poor. How
much greater store would be for the poor, if rich men, according
to Gods blessing on them, would so do?
2 Visiting the sick, and such as are otherwise restrained of li|berty.
This we finde practised by our Saviour, and that upon
the Sabbath day, after the publick ordinances were ended; as
Mark. 1, 29, 30. where we read, that our Saviour with some of
his Apostles, After they were come out of the Synagogue, went to
visit Peters wives Mother, who lay sick of a Feaver; which sheweth,
That Christ accounted it a work of mercy, suitable to the Sabbath,
to visit the sick. From whence we may learn, as just occasion is
offered, to spend some time of the Sabbath in visiting the sick, it
being an especial work of mercy proper to the Sabbath; yea and
an especial means to fill our minds with spiritual Meditations,
and our mouths with holy conferences, which are parts of private
sanctification of the Sabbath. What time therefore others spend
in idleness, or vain company, or sitting at street-doors, or walk|ing
abroad in the streets and fields, let us spend in this, and such
like works of mercy.
Directions for the right manner of visiting the Sick, see in
Chap. XIX.
Besides these duties of Piety, and works of Mercy, which are
commanded to be done on the Lords Day, There are some
things which the Lord permits unto us in regard of the weakness
and infirmities of our bodies, viz. Sleep, Food, and Apparel. Be|cause
we cannot with strength and delight spend the whole day
in Sabbath duties, without competent rest, food and apparel;
therefore it is lawful for us to spend some time, as in sleep, so

in apparelling our selves, and in refreshing our bodies with food,
which otherwise would be ready to faint: But by a moderate use
of these, we are inabled to do the things we take in hand the more
chearfully.
But herein two Cautions ought carefully to be observed.
1 You must spend no more time about them than needs must.
Wherefore your bodies being refreshed with moderate sleep,
you ought to get up early on the Lords Day, as about six or seven
of the clock, and to use all possible speed in dressing your selves;
and not to sit longer than needs must at your meals; that so you
may have the more time for the duties of Gods worship and ser|vice
on his day. And truly, since the Lord is so good and gra|cious
unto you, as to afford you some part of his own day for
the refreshment of your bodies; Far be it from you to abuse his
goodness, by lavishing away more time therein than needs
must.
Second Caution, Do them as Sabbath-dayes-works, which is
done two waies.
1 By doing them for this end, that thereby you may bee the
better inabled to serve God. Thus, when at your lying down
the evening before the Sabbath, you desire God to give you
quiet, comfortable sleep, that thereby your weak bodies may be
refreshed, and you the better inabled to serve him the next day
in the duties of his worship and service, this is a Sabbath-sleep.
In like manner, when you eat and drink, for this very end,
that your bodies may be refreshed, and your spirits revived, and
you thereby the better inabled with chearfulness to serve God the
remaining part of the day, this is a Sabbaths-eating and drink|ing.
2 By raising spiritual and heavenly Meditations from the
same. At your first awaking, you should call to minde what day
it is, and having blessed God for your comfortable rest and
sleep that night you should beg of him the special assistance of
his grace, to carry you thorow all the duties of the day. When
you are rising out of your beds, you should think, as of the Re|surrection
of Christs body out of his grave early on that day, so
likewise of the Resurrection of your Souls here out of the death of
sin, to the life of holiness, and of your bodies at the last day, out
of the grave of the earth, to the life of glory in Heaven. In your
apparessing your selves, you should then think of the long white

Robe of Christs Righteousness, and of the happiness of those who
have an interest therein. When you are washing your hands and
your faces, from the cleansing virtue of the water, you should take
occasion to meditate of the cleansing virtue of Christs blood,
which alone washeth your souls from the filthy spots and stains
of sin. When you go to your Tables, to partake of Gods good
creatures, your corporal food for the nourishment of your bodies,
should minister occasion of meditating on the spiritual food of
your souls, whereby they are nourished unto everlasting life;
The bread on your Tables should minde you of Jesus Christ, who
is the bread of life that came down from Heaven to quicken
your dead souls. Thus from every thing should you indeavour to
draw matter of spiritual and heavenly meditation, labouring to
keep your hears in an holy frame all the day long. For what
our Saviour said to his Disciples concerning the loaves and the
fishes, Gather up the fragments, let nothing bee lost; The like he
seemeth to speak unto you concerning the Lords Day, gather up
the parcels thereof, let no part of the day be lost, no not the
least minutes, which are precious, as the least filings of Gold.
As the Lord doth permit unto you some things which your weak
bodies stand in need of, that thereby you may be the better in|abled
to serve him on his day: So he is pleased to allow some
things to be done by you, even on his day, though they hinder
the performance of the proper works thereof; and they are such
things as are of absolute necessity.
Quest. If you ask what I mean by works of absolute necessity?
Answ. Such as must needs be done, and yet could not be done
the day before the Sabbath, nor put off to the day after, without
great prejudce. But on the other side, such things as do no
way further the sanctification of the day, but rather hinder the
same, and may as well be done the day before, or the day after,
or some other time, ought not to be done on the Lords Day.
Having thus done with the Directions for the right sanctifi|cation
of the Lords Day,
IV. Come we now to the Motives to quicken you up to a con|scionable
observation of the Directions.
1 A right sanctification of the Lords Day, maketh much to
the honour of God. Mark what the Lord himself saith to his
Church in this case, by his Prophet Isaiah, If thou tun away thy
foot from the Sabbath,Isa 58. 13. from doing thy pleasure on my hely day, and

 the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable, and
 honour him. Here it is expresly said, that by a right sancti|fying
of the Sabbath, wee honour God.
2 A right sanctification of the Sabbath is profitable to your
selves, and that in a double respect.
1 In regard of your outward temporal estate.
2 In regard of your inward spiritual estate.
1 The sanctification of the Sabbath is profitable in regard of
your outward temporal estate. For the more conscionable any
man is in sanctifying the Sabbath day, the greater blessing hee
may expect from God upon his labour on the six daies. For it is
not your own labour and toiling,Prov. 10. 22. but the blessing of God that ma|keth
rich, i. e. that, and that alone, doth it, as the Wise-man
speaketh.
2 The sanctification of the Sabbath will be profitable in regard
of your inward spiritual estate. For this was one main end why the
Sabbath was ordained, namely, that God might by it in the use
of his ordinances inrich our souls with spiritual blessings in hea|venly
things. And accordingly the sanctification of the Sabbath is
an especial means both to beget grace, and to strengthen grace;
for the Lord hath ordained it to be as a Market-day to the soul.
And truly, were we but as sensible of the good of our souls, as
we are of out bodies, the best husbands that be should not more
diligently keep Marke-daies, and Fair-daies, than we would
the Lords Daies.
3 A right sanctification of the Sabbath is very delightful to the
people of God, in that they do injoy intimate society and com|munion
with God in his ordinances on that day, which is the
greatest happiness poor creatures can possibly attain unto in this
life, being an heaven upon earth to injoy communion with
God, and some degree of those heavenly joyes which wee shall
injoy hereafter more fully in Heaven. How should the conside|ration
hereof stir you up to a careful, conscionable sanctifying
of the Lords Day, that so you may taste of those sweet comforts
and refreshments, which others have so plentifully injoyed?
4 Another Motive may be taken from the Equity of sanctify|ing
this day. For in that the Lord hath afforded unto us six daies
in seven for our own work, an reserved to himself but one for
his worship and service; whereas he might have required six
daies for his worship, and afforded but one for our work; is it

not most just and equal that we should make conscience of giving
unto God his Day, by consecrating it wholly to his worship and
service? As Ioseph said to Pophars Wife, when she tempted
him to uncleannes  Master hath not kept back any thing from
mee,Gen. 39. 9. but thee, because thou art his wife; How then can I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God? In like manner say thou
to thy vain companions, when thou art tempted any way to pro|phane
the Sabbath, God the Soveraign Lord, and Master of the
world, hath kept back no time from mee, but one day, because it
was his; How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God?


CHAP. XXII.
Of the Sacramen of the Lords Supper:
TO the worthy partaking of the Sacrament of the Lords Sup|per,
there are three sorts of duties required.

1 Duties Antecedent, i. e. Such as must go before the Sacra|ment.
2 Duties Concomitant, i. e. Such as must accompany the action
of receiving.
3 Duties Subsequent, i. e. Such as must follow after.

I. For the Duties Antecedent, though they are many, yet they
may be all brought under this one head of Examination, which
is not onely commended by the Apostle, But let a man examine
himself,1 Cor. 11. 28. and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup;
But urged and pressed upon us with greater severity than any
Pecept in the Book of God; For faith the Apostle in the same
place,Vers. 27. hee that, through a neglect of this duty of Examination,
eateth and drinketh unworthily,Vers. 29. 1 Hee is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ. 2 Hee eateth and drinketh damnatio to him|self.
1 To bee guilty of the body and blood of Christ, is in some mea|sure
to have ur hands in his bloody death and passion, and so by
consequence to be partners with Iudas in betraying him, with the
Scribes and Pharisees in accusing him, with Pilate in condemning
him, and with the cruel souldiers in crucifying him. Whose heart
doth not rise with indignation against these, when he reads or
considers their cruell handling of our blessed Saviour, in whip|ping

and scourging him, in mocking and deriding him, in piercing
and crucifying him? And therefore take heed lest thou in like
manner be guilty by thine unworthy receiving of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, through thine unprepared coming thereunto.
We read how the blood of innocent Abel, did lye so heavy upon
Cain,Gen. 4. 13. that hee cried out, My punishment is greater than I can bear.
How heavy then will the blood of Jesus Christ, who was not on|ly
an innocent man, but more than a man, lye upon them that
are guilty thereof? You know it lay so heavy upon Iudas, that
hee hanged himself.Mat. 27. 5. And you cannot be ignorant how heavy it
hath lyen upon the whole Nation of the Iews for these many hun|dred
years,Mat. 27. 25. according to that cursed wish of theirs, His blood be
on us, and on our children. As therefore thou wouldest not be
found guilty of this horrid and dreadful sin, put in practice the A|postles
counsel,1 Cor. 11. 28. namely, To examine thy self before thou presumest
to partake of that Ordinance.
2 Hee that eateth and drinketh unworthily,1 Cor. 11. 29. eateth and drinketh
damnation to himself; so our translators render it. And truly this is
a necessary consequence from the former; for hee that is guilty of
the body and blood of Christ, how can hee but incur the danger
of damnation?. Indeed, the word in the Greek translated damna|tion,
may as well signifie temporal chastisement, as eternal punish|ment.
And questionless, as hypocrites and unbeleevers, while
they eat and drink unworthily, eat and drink damnation to them|selves,
if they repent not; so also such as are faithful and sincere
Christians, when they through infirmity and negligence do partake
of this ordinance unworthily, incur thereby temporal judgements,
as sicknesse, weaknesse, and sometime death it self For saith the
Apostle, speaking of the beeeving Corinthians, who had not pre|pared
themselves as they should to that ordinance;1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause
many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, or dye. For what
cause? namely, because they received the Sacrament unworthi|ly,
and irreverently, without any preparation, or examination of
themselves. I grant, the best men cannot be said in themselves
to be worthy to partake of this ordinance: Yet if thou beest a be+leeving
Christian, and dost sincerely indeavour to receive it in
that manner, and with such affections as the Lord doth require
of thee, thou mayest be said (how unworthy soever thou art o|therwise)
to be a worthy receiver.
Having thus shewed the Necessity of the duty of Examination,

Come wee now to the Extent thereof, which may be brought to
two heads, viz.
1 Thy graces. 2 Thy sins.
First, Thou must examine thy self of thy graces, more especial|ly
of thy Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, and Love.
Touching Knowledge I shall shew
1 What Knowledge is required of every worthy Communicant.
2 The Necessity. 3 The Trial thereof.
I. For the first, what Knowledge is required?
I answer in general, Knowledge of all the fundamental Prin|ciples
of Religion.
In particular, Knowledge of the Doctrine of the Sacrament.
Fundamental Principles of Religion are such as our salvation
is founded upon, without the knowledge whereof a man cannot
be saved, and they are these.
That there is a God. That there is but one God. That that
onely true God is distinguished into three Persons; Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, all equally God. That that God is the Crea|tor
and Governour of all things. That all things were made
good by him, and are still governed by him righteously. That
man in particular was made perfectly righteous by him. That
man continued not long in his happy estate, but fell by trans|gressing
the Commandement of God in eating the forbidden
fruit. That wee are all guilty of Adams sin, being in his loins
when hee committed that sin. That every one of us brought
into the world corrupted and polluted natures, natures as full of
sin, as a Toad is of poison. That unto this original corruption,
wee have added a numberless number of actual transgressions,
and that in evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds. That by
our sins wee have made our selves liable to the wrath of God,
to the curse of the Law, to all judgements and plagues here,
and to eternal death and condemnation hereafter. That no man
can free himself out of that miserable condition, whereinto by
sin hee hath plunged himself, neither can any meer creature help
him. That God out of his free grace, and rich mercy, did send
his own Son out of his bosome into the world to take our nature
upon him, that therein hee might become our Surety and Re|deemer.
That Christ was both God and Man in one person.
That hee was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Vir|gin
Mary. That hee died upon the Cross to save his people

from their sins, That hee rose again the third day from the dead,
ascended into Heaven, sits at the right hand of God, and makes
continual intercession for us. That by Faith wee are made par|takers
of Christ, and of the benefits of his death and passion.
That Faith is the gift of God wrought in us by the Spirit of God
through the Ministery of the Word, whereby wee rest upon
Christ alone for the pardon of our sins, and for eternal life and
salvation. That it hath pleased God to make with us in and tho|row
Christ a new Covenant of Grace, wherein hee hath promised
the pardon of our sins, and the salvation of our souls, upon the
alone condition of a lively Faith.
Particuar Principles concerning the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper are these,
That it was ordained by Christ himself, as a memorial of his
great love, in offering up his life a Sacrifice for our sins. That
this as well as the other Sacrament of Baptism, is a seal of Gods
Covenant, whereby he bindes himself to perform his promises
made to us in Christ, for strengthening our Faith therein. That
the outward signs in the Lords Supper are Bread and Wine, by
which are set forth the body and blood of Christ, which the
worthy receivers by Faith do partake of in this Sacrament. That
whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ; and therefore that every one is to examine him|self,
lest he eat and drink judgement to himself.
Having thus shewed what is that knowledge which is required
of every worthy Communicant,
II. I shall now shew the Necssity thereof, which appeareth,
1 Because without this knowledge a man can never attain to
any of the other graces; for an ignorant man can neither beleeve,
nor repent, nor love God or his neighbour aright.
2 Because without this knowledge, a man cannot discern the
Lords body,1 Cor. 11. 29. which if hee do not, hee eats and drinks damnation
to himself. And therefore it is absolutely necessary that all who
receive the Lords Supper, should discern the Lords body, i. e. should
perceive that there is more to be received than that which is
seen with the eye of the body. To the bodily eye there appeareth
nothing but Bread and Wine upon the Table, but by virtue of the
divine institution, there is also Christs body and blood; if this be
not discerned, the benefit of the Sacrament is lost. But it is not
possible without knowledge (which is the eye of the soul) to

discern that body and blood under the elements of bread and
wine, therefore is the forementioned knowledge absolutely ne|cessary.
III. For the third particular, viz. The Tryal of thy know|ledge,
whether it be a true saving knowledge, thou mayest know
it by the properties thereof; some whereof are these.
1 True saving knowledge is Experimental, whereby a Christian
hath a spiritual sense and feeling of what he knows. He hath
not only a general, and a notional knowledge of God, and of his
own miserable condition by nature, and of Jesus Christ; but hee
hath likewise an experimental knowledge of God, and of his At|tributes;
as of his power in supporting him under his trials and
temptations, of his faithfulness in making good his promises un|to
him. He hath likewise a sensible feeling of his own wretched
condition by nature. And an experimental knowledge of Jesus
Christ, so that he knoweth Christ to be his Saviour and Redee|mer,
and resteth upon his merits alone for life and for salvation.
By this then try and examine thy knowledge, c.
2 True saving knowledge is Humble, and joyned with meek|ness
of spirit. For the more true knowledge a man hath, the
more he discerns his own ignorance, yea and vileness by reason of
his sins. And therefore you shall finde, those Christians who were
most eminent both in knowledge and grace, to complain most, as
of their ignorance, so of their own base and naughty hearts; as
you may see in Paul and others.Rom. 7. 24. Ephes. 3. 8. And no marvel, considering
that true saving knowledge discovers unto a man his own vile|ness
and wretchedness by reason of his sins; his own unworthiness,
yea his own emptiness and nothingness, in regard of any goodness
of his own. Whereas unsanctified knowledge is apt to puft a man
up with pride, and self-conceit, even to the contemning and
despising of others,1 Cor. . 1. which the Apostle plainly expresseth, where
he saith, Knowledge puffeth up. By this then try and examine thy
knowledge, whether it be a saving knowledge or no.
3 True saving knowledge is active and operative, being ever
accompanied with practice and obedience, so that it worketh re|formation
in the heart and life of him that hath it. By this then
try and examine thy knowledge, whether it be saving, sanctify|ing
or no.
II. The second grace necessarily required of every Communicat,
whereof thou must examine thy self, is FAITH. Concening
which I shall shew you,

1. What Faith this is. 2. The Necessity thereof. 3. Some signs
and notes for the tryall thereof.
I. For the first, what faith this is. I answer, a true saving, justi|fying
faith, may be thus described. Faith is a grace wrought in the
heart of a sinner, by the spirit of God, through the ministery of the word;
whereby being convinced of his sinfull, miserable condition, and of
all disabilitie in himself, or any other meer creature to free him out
of the same, he goeth wholly out of himself unto Iesus Christ, and
receiving him as his all-sufficient Saviour, and Soveraign, resteth
upon his perfect righteousness, and all-sufficient Sacrifice, for the par|don
and forgiveness of his sins here, and for eternal life and Salvation
hereafter.
II. The Necessity of this grace of Faith to every communi|cant
appeareth.
1. Because without faith it is impossible to please God in any ho|ly
ordinance:Heb. 11. 6. as the Apostle expresseth it. But true faith will
commend both our persons and services unto Gd, so that they
shall find acceptance with him, though they be full of weaknesses,
and imperfections.Heb. 11. 6. Non Plaas se peccas. Bern. su|per ant. Serm. 24. This made Abels sacrifice so acceptable to
God. If therefore thou come to this ordinance without faith, in|stead
of pacifying God, thou shall purchase his heavy dis|pleasure.
2. Except thou hast faith before thou approachest to that ordi|nance,
the Sacrament cometh but like a seal to a blank, and
serveth onely to seal up thine unbelief to condemnation; So that
faith is necessarily required of every worthy communicant, before
he cometh to the Lords Supper: for that ordinance is not institu|ted
for the working of faith, but for the strengthning thereof.
A man may come to the ministery of the word though he be faith|less,
because it is an ordinance instituted by God for the beget|ting
of faith,Rom. 10. 17. according to that of the Apostle, Faith cometh by
hearing; But none are to come to the Sacrament, but such as
have faith wrought in them. Because that is not an ordinance in|stituted
by God for the begetting of faith, but rather for the
strengthning thereof. It was not instituted for such as are out of
Christ, to bring them in, but for such a are in Christ, to bring them
up in him. As a man must be born before he can eat; so he must
be begotten again by the Spirit of God, before he can feed upon
the Body and Blood of Christ for his spiritual nourishment. I do
not say, that all who come to the Sacrament must have the same

measure of Faith, but it is necessary that they all have the fame
truth of Faith.
III. For the third Particular, the tryall of thy Faith, whether
it be true and saving; thou mayest know it by these two Characters,
to omit many others.
1. True faith doth receive Christ in all his Offices, not onely as
a Priest, to make satisfaction, and intercession for us; but also as
a Prophet to teach and instruct us; and as a King to rule and go|vern
us. The true believer doth as willingly cast himself at the
feet of Christ, in subjection to him, as into the arms of Christ, for
Salvation from him: He is as willing to serve Jesus Christ as to
be saved by him, as desirous to submit to his services, as to injoy
his privileges. By this therefore may'st thou try the truth of thy
faith.
2. True faith is an heart-purifying grace, it purifieth the heart.
This character of faith the Apostle Peter expresseth, Act. 15. 9. Puri|fying
their hearts by faith. Faith purifying the heart implyeth two
things.
1 That the believer maketh conscience of his inward thoughts;
whereas unbelievers with the Pharisees, make clean the out-side
of the cup, labour to keep themselves from gross and scandalous
sins, but suffer their hearts to range and rove into a world of vain
and wanton thoughts, of prophane and fruitless imaginations, and
that without any remorse, or check of conscience.
2. That faith puts a purifying disposition into the heart, so that
it loathes and detests sin, yea and strives against it, though it can|not
altogether purge and free it self from sin: when the heart
is once seasoned with faith, it will not willingly harbour sin, but
labour to worke it out more and more. By this then try the truth
and soundness of thy faith, whether it hath wrought in thee, a
purging, purifying disposition, to strive against thy corruptions, and
to worke them out of thine heart more and more.
III. The third grace necessarily required of every communi|cant
is Repentance, concerning which I shall shew
1. The nature of Repentance, what it is.
2. The Necessity thereof to a worthy partaking of the Lords
Supper.
3. Some signs and notes for the tryall thereof.
I. For the first, what true Repentance is, I answer, It is a grace
of Gods Spiri, whereby both the heart and affections within, and also

the life and actions without are reformed. In this description I
take the full nature of Repentance to be comprized. Many do
add hereunto an inward sorrowing and mourning of the heart,
which doth indeed alwaies accompany true Repentance, but it
is not of the nature thereof: For then, wheresoever sorrow for
sin were, there should be true Repentance, which is not so, as
the examples of Saul, Iudas, and other wicked men do declare.
Briefly to open this dfinition of Repentance.
First, I say, It is a grace of Gods Spirit, i. e. a gift freely given
of God, and wrought in us by his holy Spirit; so that it proceedeth
not from mans free will, nor from any power and ability of his
nature.
Again, Repentance is a Reformation, wherein consists the very
nature thereof, as the words of turning, renewing, changing, and
the like, which in Scripture are attributed to Repentance, do im|ply.
Now this Reformation must first be of the heart; for the heart
of a man is the fountain of all his actions; now in reason the
fountain must be cleansed and purged, before that which issueth
and streameth from it can be wholesome. There must be there|fore
first a renewed heart, before there can be a reformed life;
for it cannot be that the stream of our actions should be good, if
the fountain of our heart be corrupt. Hence it is that the Prophets
so often call for the cleansing of the heart, and the Apostles for
the renewing, and changing thereof, without which all external and
outward reformation is but meer Pharisaical ostentation. In the
last place is added, A reformation of the life and actions without;
for as to make some outward shew of Reformation, without re|forming
the heart within, is but Pharisaical ostentation, whereby
we deceive others: So to pretend an inward Reformation, with|out
the outward fruits of amendment, is but meer folly, where|by
we deceive our selves. For it cannot be that Reformation
should be truly rooted and grounded in the heart, but that it
will bud forth, and shew it self in the fruits of a godly life. That
man therefore deceiveth himself, who thinks his heart is purged
and reformed, when his life is polluted. For as the fruits declare
the tree, so the actions of men manifest their affections.
II. The Necessity of this grace of Repentance in every wor|thy
Communicant, upon his approaching to the Lords Table, ap|peareth,
because we come to receive a sacrifice for sin; but to
offer to receive a sacrifice for sin, without turning from sin, is to

count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing. We are not
ignorant, that one main end of our approaching to the Lords
Table, is to receive Christ as he hath offered himself a sacri|fice
and price of Redemption for our sins; for so he is set forth in
that Sacrament, the breaking of the bread, and pouring out of the
Wine, import as much. Yea Christ expresly saith of the Sacra|mental
Cup,Mat. 26. 28. This is my blood which is shed for remission of sins.
Now he that looketh for pardon of sin, must have a full pur|pose,
and according to his purpose, a faithful and resolute in|deavour
to forsake sin, which is, and will be the mind of every true
penitent, and so also it ought to be. The Lord therefore requi|reth
of them, who bring their sacrifices to him for pardon, That
they take away the evil of their works, and cease to do evil, and
learn to do well, and thereupon inferreth this gracious invitation,
Come now and let us reason together.Isa. 1. 15, c. With what face then dares
an impenitent sinner, that is not touched with any remorse for
his sins past, nor hath any purpose to turn from his sins for the
time to come, offer to take that body which was broken, and
that blood which was shed for sin? Such an eating and drink|ing
of Christs body and blood, is a plain trampling of the Son
of God under foot, and a counting of the blood of the Cove|nant
an unholy thing, a thing that may be mixed with impue
and unholy things. If this be not to be guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, what can be?
III. For the Trial of thy Repentance; whether it be found and
sincere, thou mayest know it by these signs and notes.
1 By a godly sorrow for sins past.. By a godly sorrow, I mean,
such a sorrow as maketh God its object, that is, when we grieve
and mourn for sin, more out of respect to God, than for fear of
punishment; that we have offended so good a God, so gracious
a Father, so bountiful a Lord and Master. I deny not but it is
good and commendable to grieve and mourn for sin in respect
of punishment, for fear of Hell; For it is a good preparatory
to a godly sorrow. But we must not rest therein. By this there|fore
try and examine the truth of thy Repentance, for where|soever
there is true Repentance, there must be this godly sor|row.
2. A turning from those evil waies, wherein we have formerly
walked; as you may see in the example of those penitents, that
are recorded in Scripture, as of Paul, Peter, Zacheus, and others,

who upon their repentance turned from those evil courses where|in
they had formerly walked. Hereby therefore try the truth of
thy repentance: Hath it wrought a change and alteration in thy
course of life? are old things done away? is there a forsaking of
former sins? hast thou let thy swearing, thy drunkenness, thy
whoredomes, thy cousenings by false weights and measures? canst
thou say of thy self, as Paul did of the Corinthians, I was once a
swearer, a drunkard, an adulterer, a reviler, an extortioner, a covetous
person, and the like: But now I am washed, now I am sanctified, yea
and justified in the name of the Lord Iesus Christ, and by the spirit of
my God.1 Cor. 6 10, 11. Canst thou thus say of thy self; and that in truth and
sincerity of heart? then thou hast some comfortable evidence of
the truth and soundness of thy repentance. But how vainly do they
deceive themselves, who, because they have made confession of their
sins unto God, and happily with some few ears, flatter them|selves
with a conceit of true repentance: when yet they still live
and continue in their former sinfull courses, wall owing like swine
in the filth of sin, and mire of sinfull filthiness.
3. A turning unto God:Ubi emendatio nulla, ibi pani|tentia vana. Tertul. for where there is true repentance,
there is not onely a turning from sin, but likewise a turning unto
God. Whereby I mean a sincere endeavour to serve and please
God in newness of life and better obedience. Hath then the
sense and smart of thy former wandrings, made thee earnestly to
wish, that thou mightest please God better for the time to come?
make much of such affections in thy soul, for it is an evident sign of
some change there.
IV. A fourth grace necessarily required of every Communicant
before he presume to come to the Lords Table, is LOVE.] ye
a two fold Love is required of every Communicant, viz. 1 A love
of God and of Christ. 2. A love of his Neighbour.
Both which are unseparably knit together: yet for a more
distinct handling of them, I will sever them in my discourse, and
treat of them apart, shewing you,
1. The necessity of them, to a worthy partaking of the Lords
Supper.
2 Some sings and notes for the trial of them.
I. First, For the Love of God, that is necessarily required of every
Communicant, because the greatest evidence that ever was
given of Gods Love, is there set before us. For Jesus Christ
the only Son of God, and Saviour of man, is the greatest evi|dence

of Gods Love, that ever was, or can be. Should God set
himself to make another world, and to confer on that world a
greater gift than he hath conferred on this world, namely, his
onely begotten, and dearly beloved Son, we may boldly say, hee
could not. Neither can the creatures receive, nor the Creator
give a greater gift, and that both in regard of the excellency of
the gift it self, and also in regard of the need wherein we stood
thereof, and of the good we reap thereby. Therefore Gods love
in this evidence thereof, is so set out, as goes beyond all expres|sion.
God so loved the world,Joh. 3. 16. that hee gave his only begotten Son,
c. So unutterably, so unconceivably, so infinitely, as who shall
indeavour to express this SO to the full, shall do it but So, So.
Seeing then such an evidence of such love of God to man, is set
out at the Lords Table; should not every one who approacheth
thereunto, to partake of that evidence of Gods love, come with
an heart filled with a love to God, and with a resolution to
shew forth all fruits of a true love of God on all occasions?
And as we must come with a love to God, so with a love to
Iesus Christ, who so loved us, as to dye a cruel cursed death for
us. And thereby manifested greater love to us, than to himself,
to the members of his mystical body, than to the members of his
natural body. For he offered up his natural body as a Sacrifice for
the redemption of his mystical body. What greater love than this
can be imagined Oh how doth it then concern us to go to that or|dinance
with hearts inflamed with a love to Jesus? This much
of the necessity of our love to God, and to his Son Jesus Christ.
II. For the Trial thereof, you may know it by these notes
and characters.
1 Where there is a true hearty love to God, and to Iesus Christ,
the heart will bee much taken up with the thoughts of them. Such
an one will be often thinking of God, and of Jesus Christ, and
of their transcendent love manifested in the great work of Re|demption.
David having said, Oh how do I love thy Law? he
presently adds,Psal. 119. 97. It is my meditation all the day. And indeed,
whatsoever and whomsoever we love, we cannot but frequently
think and meditate on. Indeed, such as love God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, in truth and sincerity, may have multitude of vain,
wanton worldly, covetous thoughts in their hearts, but they
take no true delight in them, they are rather their grief and their
burden; but the thoughts of God and of Christ are very sweet

and comfortable unto them. By this therefore try and examine
the truth of thy love unto God, and Jesus Christ.
2 Where there is an hearty love to God, and to Iesus Christ, such
an one will bee often speaking of them. For the tongue cannot but
be speaking of those things and persons upon whom the heart is
set. If the heart of a man be set upon the world, and the things
thereof, his tongue will be most frequently talking and discour|sing
of them. In like manner, if the heart of a man be set upon
God, and Jesus Christ, his tongue will be frequently talking and
discoursing of them. By this therefore try and examine the
truth of thy love unto God, and Jesus Christ. For hee that saith
hee loveth God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet seldome
thinks of them, or speaks of them, certainly hee deceiveth him|self;
for wee cannot but bee thinking, and speaking of those
whom we truly love.
3 Where there is an hearty love unto God, and Iesus Christ, it
will make a man willing to do any thing for them.Gen. 29. 20. Iacob loved
Rachel, and what did hee not do for her? Hee served two Ap|prentiships,
and yet all seemed nothing to him for the love he had to
her. And therefore where there is a sincere love to God, and
Christ, it will constrain such an one to lay out himself to the
uttermost for them, to put himself upon the practice of such
duties, which are hard and difficult, and require much labour
and pains. By this then try and examine the truth of thy love
unto God, and his Son Jesus Christ.
4 Where there is an hearty love to God and Iesus Christ, it
will make a man willing to suffer any thing for them. It is said of
the Primitive Saints,Heb. 10. 34. that out of their abundant love unto the
Lord Jesus Christ they accounted not their estates too dear for him,
but took joyfully the spoiling of their goods. Neither did they ac|count
their lives too dear.Rev. 12. 11. For it is expresly said, They loved not
their lives to death for him, i. e. they despised their lives in com|parison
of Christ: they willingly exposed, not only their goods and
estates to the spoil, and their persons to all manner of shame and
contempt, but also their bodies to painful deaths for the cause
of Christ. By this then try and examine the truth of thy love
unto Jesus Christ, namely, by thy willingness to suffer for the
cause and truths of Jesus Christ.
II. Love of thy neighbour is another branch of that love
which is required of every Communicant. Touching which I
shall briefly shew

1 The Necessity thereof in every Communicant.
2 The Trial thereof.
I. The Necessity thereof appeareth, in that the Lord will not
accept of any service thou performest unto him, if thou bee not
in love and charity with thy neighbour; as our Saviour himself
speaketh in that known place,Mat. 5. 23, 24. If therefore thou bring thy gift to
the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought against
thee. Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gift. This
phrase, Thy brother hath ought against thee, may be indefinitely
taken of one that hath provoked another, or hath been provo|ked
himself: hath ought against thee, whether by thy default or
his. So that hereby is implied, whether wrong be done by thee,
or to thee, if there be any variance between thee and thy neigh|bour
peace and reconciliation must be speedily sought. For with|out
it, God will not accept of any worship or service thou offerest
unto him. Though Christ here instanceth but in one kind of wor|ship,
which was the offering up of Sacrifice, yet under this hee
comprehendeth all the parts and kinds of Gods worship, as
praying, hearing, receiving the Sacrament, or the like. So that
Christs meaning is, that whensoever thou settest upon any part
of Gods worship and service, and then remembrest that thy bro|ther
hath ought against thee, i. e. that thou hast any way wronged
and offended thy brother; or as Mark hath it,Mark 11. 25. If thou hast ought
against thy brother, i. e. if he hath wronged thee, first be reconci|led
to thy brother, and then go to the ordinance of God.
II. For the Trial of the truth of thy love to thy brother, thou
mayest know it by these notes.
1 If thou hast truly forgiven thy brother, thou wilt be so far
from doing him any harm (though it lay in thy power) that thou
wilt not wish any harm unto him.
2 If thou hast truly forgiven thy offending brother, thou wilt
willingly imbrace occasions of doing him good, that so he may
know and be assured that thou art reconciled to him.Mat. 5 44. This our
Saviour requireth of all his Disciples, where he saith, Love your
enemies, i. e. those who have any way wronged you; and as an
evidence of the truth of your love, he addeth, Do good to them
tht hate you; intimating, that it is not sufficient that you speak
friendly and peaceably to your enemies, but you must likewise
take all occasions of doing them what good you can, which is true
Christian love and charity.

Having thus spoken largely to the first head of Examination,
namely, our graces; I come now to the second, namely, our sins;
wherein I shall study brevity. As it is the duty of every Com|municant
to examine himself concerning his graces, so likewise
concerning his sins, which are like that accursed thing, whereof
God speaketh to Ioshua (Iosh. 7. 11.) they must therefore be
searched out. Yea they are like the wilde gourd, that brought
death into the pot.2 King. 4. 39, 40. If they be not searched out, and cast away,
they will turn the Sacramental bread and wine into spiritual
bane.Psal. 28. 13. Hee therefore that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but
who so confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.
It is said of the Viper, that when she goeth to joyn with her
Mare, she casteth out all her poison. How much more oughtest
thou, when thou goest to have communion with thy heavenly
Spouse, the Lord Jesus Christ, cast out thy sins, which are a spi|ritual
poison, worse than the poison of any Viper? In this Exa|mination,
as thou must search after thine evil thoughts, wods,
and deeds, and after thy sins of omission and commission, so
likewise and especially after the sins thou hast committed since
thy last receiving of the blessed Sacrament, and such as are most
against the vows and covenants that formerly thou madest with
God, and which do mostgaul thy conscience, or most disgrace
thy profession, or are greatest occasions of dulling thy spirit;
that these being found out, they may be the more lamented, and
pardon for them more earnestly desired. In the examining thy
self, it will be a good help to read such a Treatise as doth in
particular set out the several sins against the several Comman|dements.
For when by such a Treatise thou art shewed that such
a thing is a sin against such a Commandement, thy conscience
will, upon the reading of such sins, tell thee, that therein thou
hast sinned. Having examined and searched thine heart thorow|ly
of all thy known sins, then humble thy self before the Throne
of Grace, in a true and unfeigned acknowledgement, and con|fession
of them, freely judging and condemning thy self before
God, with a broken and contrite heart. Directions to help thee
in the right manner of confessing thy sins, See in Chap. 20.
And having confessed thy sins, pour out thy soul in hearty
prayer unto God for the pardon and forgiveness of them all. And
then be earnest with him to make the Sacrament effectual to thy
comfort, effectual to the mortifying of thy lusts, to the strengthen|ing

of thy graces, especially to the confirming of thy Faith in
the assurance of the pardon and forgiveness of thy sins, c.
III. Having shewed the duties Antecedent, come we now to
the duties Concomitant, i. e. such as must accompany the action
of receiving.
But first I shall premise some few Directions touching the Man|ner
of thine approaching to the Lords Table.
1 Having thus prepared thy self, go not in the strength of thy
preparations, but onely in the strength of Iesus Christ, looking for
acceptance onely in and thorow his merits and mediation. For
though thou hast prepared thy self after the best manner that
thou canst, yet if with an impartial eye thou shalt look back upon
thy preparations, how full of weaknesses, infirmities and imper|fections
wilt thou finde them? So that if Christ do not cover
both thy person and thy preparation, with the Robe of his Righ|teousness,
and sprinkle them with his blood, neither thy person,
nor thy preparation will finde acceptance with God. Cast there|fore
all thy preparations at the feet of Jesus Christ, and say,
Lord, I come not in the strength of my preparations, but onely in thy
strength; I come in thine alone name and mediation, to partake of
thy body, and of the benefits of thy death and passion. And thou
mayest then be confident that God will over-look thy manifold
weaknesses and imperfections in the work of preparation, and ac|cept
of thee and of thy services in and thorow his beloved Son
Jesus Christ.
2 As thou art going, meditate on the ends and benefits of that
solemn ordinance; some whereof are these,
1 The remembrance of the death of Christ,. it being instituted
as a memorial thereof.
2 The spiritual nourishment of our souls.
3 The strengthening of our Faith in the assurance of the par|don
and forgiveness of our sins.
4 The sealing of the Covenant of Grace, with all the bles|sings
thereof, unto the beleeving soul.
5 The encreasing of our spiritual union and communion with
Christ, and all his members. A serious meditation of these will
be a special means to stir up in us some spiritual appetite after
the ordinance, that we shall go with hungring and thirsting de|sires
after the same.
3 Go with a strong expectation to receive much from Christ in

and thorow that ordinance, knowing that Christ will inlarge him|self
uno all those, who come with inlarged hearts, with a strong
expectation of many good things.Psal. 81. 10. Open thy mouth wide, saith
the Lord, and I will fill it. So that if thou open thy mouth wide,
in a longing expectation of great matters, he will fill it. Yea the
more thine heart is inlarged in desire and expectation, the more
will Gods heart be inlarged in bounty towards thee. As therefore
God hath promised in the Covenant of Grace to pardon thy sins,
to subdue thy corruptions, to give thee a soft heart, and the like, go
with an expectation of these and such like blessings, and thou shalt
not be disappointed of thine hopes.
4 Approach to the Lords Table with all holy reverence, in re|spect
of Gods glorious Majesty,Levit. 10. 3. who is in a special manner present
at that ordinance to behold his guests, and will be sanctified by all
those who draw nigh unto him.
5 Approach thereunto with all humility, in respect of thine own
vileness and unworthiness, who art but sinful dust and ashes, and
(if thou hast any light of grace in thee) canst not but be conscious
to thy self of more corruption in thine own heart, than thou know|est
to be in the heart of another. And therefore say not, Such an one
is ignorant, and such an one is loose in his life and conversa|tion,
but say, Lord, I am ignorant, I am unworthy to draw nigh un|to
thee in so holy an Ordinance, not worthy to gather up the crumbs un|der
thy Table. And know, that the more unworthy thou art in
thine own account, the worthier guest thou art in the account of
God.
6 As thou art going to the Lords Table, cast all thy worldly
thoughts and businesses out of thine head, which otherwise will
carry away thine heart from the ordinance, and exceedingly disturb
thee thereat. In Iob 1. 6. wee read, There was a day when the Sons
of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came
also amongst them. In like manner, on the day when Gods Children
present themselves before the Lord in that solemn Ordinance,
Satan will be sure to appear amongst them, to disturb and di|stract
them therein (as much as possibly he can) by casting into
their heads vain and impertinent thoughts. And therefore it con|cerneth
thee to be watchful over thy thoughts, and to keep thine
heart close to the ordinance. To that end it will be thy wisdome
oft to eye the outward elements of bread and wine, and diligently
to observe the outward rites and actions in the ordinance, and

thereupon to meditate of the spiritual things signified thereby.
These things premised, Come we now to the Duties to be perform|ed
at the Ordinance, which are these,
I. When thou art present at the Ordinance, put forth all the strength
thou canst in the partaking thereof, I mean, the strength of thy af|fections.
For though thou art very weak, yet if thou put forth thy
weakness, God will accept thereof. Content not thy self therefore
with a meer outward participation of the Lords Supper, but let thy
care be to bring up thine heart, and thine affections to the Ordi|nance,
and to put forth what strength thou canst.
II. Remember the death of Christ, which is Christs command in
the institution of this Ordinance; for saith he,. Luke 22. 19. This do in remem|brance
of mee, viz. in remembrance of my bitter death and passion.
For the Apostle Paul explaining this remembrance of Christ, ap|plieth
it to his death,1 Cor. 11. 26, 27. and the shewing it forth. This do, saith hee,
in remembrance of mee: For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye do shew the Lords death till he come. So that this Ordi|nance
of the Lords Supper was instituted for a solemn Memorial of
that great Sacrifice, the Lord Jesus Christ, that his death might ne|ver
be forgotten, but be ever fresh in our memories. And why must
his death be thus remembred? Surely because thereby was the Cove|nant
of Grace ratified and sealed, our Redemption purchased, our
sins expiated, our reconciliation made with God, and the founda|tion
of our peace laid. And therefore at the Table, let out thine
heart in a serious meditation of the manifold sufferings of Christ,
which is the main business of this Ordinance.. And meditate not
only of his sufferings at his death, but likewise in the whole course
of his life, even from his cratch to his Cross, from his birth to his
death. For his whole life was a continual suffering. Meditate
therefore of his mean birth, and flight in his infancy, of the mani|fold
reproaches which were cast upon him from time to time; yea
of his manifold persecutions, of their cruel handling of him at the
time of his death, when they apprehended him like a theef, bound
him, arraigned, and condemned him as a Malefactor, buffeted
him with their hands, beat him with staves, scourged him with
whips, making log furrows on his back, platted on his head a
Crown of sharp Thorns, laid an heavy cross on his back, nailed
his hands and feet to that Cross, give him Gall and Vineger to
drink, and sundry waies much afflicted him. Thus was his body
broken with torments. In relation hereunto, it is said of him,

That he was a man of sorrows,Isa. 53. 3 and acquainted with griefs. Especi|ally
when thou art present at the Sacrament, take a turn with
Christ in the Garden, by meditating of his bitter Agony, where|in
he sweat drops of blood, which was never read, or heard of in any
before or since; yea the blood which Christ then sweat was not
thin watery blood,Luke 22. 44 but thick blood, as St. Luke expresseth it, Being
in an agony, his sweat was as it were great drops of blood,Non guitae sed grumi, as  the word in the Origi|nal properly signifieth. falling down
to the ground; which latter clause sheweth, that the blood of
Christ passed through the pores of his body in such a plentiful
manner, that it trickled down to the ground in great abundance; so
that not only the eyes of Christ, but all the parts of his body did seem
to weep, and that tears of blood, as Bernard speaketh.
In this sweat of Christ there are three things remarkable,Non solum ocu|lis, sed mem|bris omnibus flevisse vide|tur. Bern. which
doe exceedingly set forth the greatness of his Agony.
1 It was in a cold night, for which cause afterwards they kind|led
a Fire in the High-Priests Hall;Luke 22. 55 and cold driveth the blood
inward.
2 Hee lay upon the cold ground, which was enough to drive the
blood inward.Mat. 26. 39
3 He was in exceeding great fear,Mark 14. 33 which naturally draweth the
blood from the outward parts to the Heart; and yet in a cold
night,Mat. 26. 39 lying upon the cold ground, and being in great fear, he sweat
drops of blood. Who can imagine the bitterness of our Saviours
Agony at that time? And what was it which put him into that ago|ny?
questionless, the apprehension of what hee was to suffer, as
appeareth by his Prayer in his Agony, Father, if it be possible let
this cup pass from me. Now, if the apprehension of what hee was
to suffer was so bitter, oh how bitter think you were his Suffer|ings
upon the Cross,Mat. 27. 46 when he cried out, My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me? which words doe not imply, that the Deity
was severed from the Humanity, but that the Father had with|drawn
from him all sensible feeling of his loving favour, had
restrained the influence of those beams which might any way re|fresh
his troubled soul;am. 1. 12 so that Christ might well take up the
words of the captive Iews, and say, Behold, and see if there bee
any sorrow like to my sorrow, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted mee
in the day of his fierce anger.
These things call to mind in the time of the administration
of the Sacrament, not only when thou art eating the Bread, and
drinking the Wine; but also when thou seest the Bread broken,

and the Wine poured forth, then thou shouldst think how Christs
Body was broken with torments, and his Blood shed for remission
of sins; and also when thou seest others taking the Bread, and
the Wine, thou shouldst then be steeping thy thoughts in the me|ditation
of Christs bitter death, and manifold sufferings.
This remembrance of Christs Death at the Sacrament, must not
be a bare Historical remembrance thereof, contenting thy self
with a remembrance of the History of Christs death, as it is set
forth by the Evangelists, but it must be an operative, and practi|cal
remembrance, working up thine heart,
1 To an unfeigned love of God, who out of his free grace,
and rich mercy, did send his dearly beloved Son out of his own
bosome into the world, to take our Nature upon him, and therein
to dye a bitter cursed death for mans redemption. Who can suffici|ently
admire the riches of Gods love to man therein? How may
we with David cry out, and say, Lord, what is ma that thou art
mindful of him? especially that thou shouldest be so mindful of
him, as to give the Son of thy love to suffer a cursed death upon
the Cross, to make us, who were children of Wrath, and bond|slaves
of Sathan, Sons of God, and Heirs of eternal life and salva|tion.
And how should this incomprehensible love of God, fire
and inflame our cold and frozen hearts with a fervent love unto
him again?
2 The remembrance of Christs death should work up our
hearts to an ardent love of Christ, for that wonderful love of his,
in giving himself for us, his Body to be crucified, his Blood to be
shed, and his Soul to bear the intollerable burden of his Fathers
Wrath due to our Sins, which made him sweat drops of blood in
the Garden, and to cry out on the Cross, My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me? Oh how should this ravish our souls with
admiration of so great love? and inflame our hearts with love
again unto him, who did, and suffered so much for us? How
should the meditation of the manifold sufferings of Christ, espe|cially
of his bitter Death and Passion, work in us an holy pas|sion
of love?
3 The remembrance of Christs death should work in us a care to
please him in all things, to be willing to doe and suffer any thing
for him, who hath done and suffered so much for us; which
Christ declareth to be a good proof of our love to him,Joh. 14. 15 saying, If
yee love me, keep my Commandements. And though we cannot ex|actly

keep the Commandements of Christ, yet we may and ought
sincerely to endeavour the keeping of them, without which our
profession of love is but vain and fruitless; in shew, and not
in truth.
4 The remembrance of Christs death should work in us a godly
sorrow for our sins, as the true cause of his sufferings. For the truth
is, it was not so much Iudas that betrayed Christ, nor the Scribes
and Pharisees that accused him, nor Pilate that condemned him,
nor the Souldiers that Crucified him, nor the Devil that set them
all on work, as our sins that were the true cause of Christs suffer|ings.
The Souldiers that Scourged him, and Crucified him, were
but our Executioners, to inflict on him those punishments which
our Sins deserved, and Gods Justice imposed for the same. They
were our Sins which envenomed those Whips that scourged his
innocent Body, those Thorns which pricked his Temples, and
those Nayls which pierced his Hands and Feet, and made them
so bitter unto him. Oh therefore that we could so look upon him
whom we have pierced by our Sins, that we might mourn as one that
mourneth for his only Son; and be in bitterness, as one that is in bit|terness
for his first-born.
5 The remembrance of Christs death should work in us the death
of Sin; wee should so remember the death of Christ, as to
dye unto Sin. For the Apostle Paul urges our death to sin from the
death of Christ,Rom. 6. 2 that as Christ dyed and rose again, so wee should
dye to sin, and live to God. To this end, let us hate and loath Sin
as the greatest evil, resolving with the assistance of Gods grace
to leave and forsake all manner of sins for the time to come; for
why should any sin seem light to us, which lay so heavie upon our
Saviour, as to cast him into a bloody sweat? Why should any sin
be sweet to us, which was so bitter to our Saviour? Farre bee it
from us, by our renewed sins, to tear open his Wounds afresh,
and Crucifie him again.
6 The remembrance of Christs death should work u our
hearts to some due thankfulness unto God, and his Son Iesus Christ,
for their unspeakable love and mercy towards us therein. Thankful|ness
is a grace, not only to be exercised after our receiving of the
Sacrament, but likewise while we are present at the Ordinance,
when our hearts are affected with the apprehension of the incom|prehensible
love of God the Father, in giving his beloved Son
out of his own bosome to dye for us; and of the unspeakable love

of Christ, in offering his own Body a Sacrifice upon the Cross for
our Sins, then should they break forth in praises and thanksgi|vings
unto God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.
III. Another Duty to be performed at the Ordinance, is the ex|ercise
of thy graces, more especially thy faith and repentance. It is
not enough that thou bring faith, repentance, and other graces to
the Sacrament, but thou must likewise there stirre up thy graces,
and exercise the same, or else thou wilt be an unworthy receiver.
For not only a wicked man that wants grace, but likewise a child
of God that hath true grace, may receive the Sacrament unwor|thily,
and go away without any comfort or benefit at all; namely,
if hee do not there stir up and exercise his graces. For Sacraments
do not work as Physick, by a virtue inherent in them, but accor|ding
to the disposition of the party that partaketh of them.Non ex opere operato, sed ex opere operan|tis. And
therefore, as thou wouldest be a worthy guest, and partake of
the comfort of the Ordinance, stir up and exercise thy gra|ces.
As
I. Thy Faith. This is the chief grace to be exercised at the Sa|crament;
for Faith is the eye of the Soul, whereby it seeth and
discerneth the body and blood of Christ under the elements of
bread and wine;Qui fide vacu|us dente non mente mondu|cat. Chem. Exa. it is likewise the hand of the Soul, whereby it re|ceiveth
Jesus Christ; and the mouth of the Soul, whereby it
feedeth upon Jesus Christ. And therefore without the exercising
of thy Faith at the Sacrament, thou canst receive no benefit
at all.
There is a threefold act of Faith to be exercised at the Lords
Supper.
1 To look out for Jesus Christ. 2 To receive Christ. 3 To
apply and appropriate him unto thine own self.
1 The first act of Faith, is to look out for Christ; and therefore
when thou art present at the Lords Supper, rest not in the out|ward
elements, in the beholding and taking of them; but with the
eye of Faith discern the body and blood of Christ under the ele|ments
of bread and wine, which indeed do spiritually, sacramen|tally
set forth the body and blood of Christ, as is clear from
Christs own expression, for holding the bread in his hand, he said
of it,Mat. 26. 26. This is my body, i. e. Mystically, and Sacramentally, by way
of representation; as if hee had said, This bread representeth my
body. And holding the cup that had wine in it, and speaking of
the wine therein,Mat. 26. 27. hee saith, This is my blood, i. e. Mystically and

Sacramentally, by way of representation, q. d. This wine repre|senteth
my blood.
And as thou art not to rest in the outward elements, so nei|ther
in the outward rites and actions, but in the beholding of
them thou art with the eye of Faith to see and discern the spiri|tual
things signified thereby. When therefore thou beholdest the
Minister breaking the bread, then meditate of the manifold suf|ferings
of Christ, and with the eye of Faith, look upon Jesus
Christ hanging upon the Cross, there conflicting with his Fathers
wrath, and groaning under the weight and burden of our sins.
Behold his blessed body broken and torn with stripes and wounds,
with whips and nails. The Apostle St. Paul thus bringeth in Christ
himself applying that rite of breaking the bread, for saith hee,
Christ took bread,1 Cor. 11. 24. and brake it, and said, This is my body which
is broken for you; which yet is not to be so understood, as if his
blessed body, or any part or member thereof were broken in two
peeces. (For that charge of not breaking a bone of the Paschal
Lamb is applied to Christ,John 19. 16. in that his leggs were not broken.)
But of the breakings of his flesh by thorns, whips, nails, c. and
other sufferings which hee endured in his body, till his blood
was shed. This rite also of breaking the bread, implieth, tha
the sufferings of Christ were so many, and so great, that they did
even break him again. For wee use to say of one that hath endu|red
much pain, or other great grief, that hath wasted his flesh,
or dried up his blood, See, how hee is broken; and in this sense
also may Christ be said to be broken.
Again, when thou seest the Minister pouring out of the wine,
then exercise and actuate thy Faith in the blood of Jesus Christ,
and the shedding thereof, which indeed sheweth the extent of
Christs sufferings, even to the taking away of his life, which is
the furthest extent of a mans suffering in this world. These two
therefore, The breaking of Christs body, and the shedding of his
blood, are fitly joyned together; the former to shew the extremi|ty
of Christs sufferings; the latter, the extent thereof, even as far
as possibly could bee, to the shedding of his blood.
Again, when thou seest the Minister offering the bread and wine
to the Communicants, then by the eye of Faith see Gods love in
offering his Son to every beleeving Communicant. For as veri|ly
as the Minister doth offer the bread and the wine, so truly
doth God really offer Christ, with all the benefits of his death and

passion to every beleeving Communicant. I do not say carnally,
but really; not the flesh of Christ, but Christ with all the bene|fits
of his death and passion, as Reconciliation, Redemption,
Remission of sins, c. For there is not a meer Representation,
but a real and true exhibition of Christ, as broken for our sins.
II. Another act of Faith to bee exercised at the Lords Supper,
is to receive Iesus Christ. For the Beleever having seen Christ
with the eye of Faith under the outward elements, and fore|mentioned
rites, then hee receiveth him into his heart with much
joy and gladness. As therefore thou stretchest forth the hand of
thy body to receive the bread and wine, stretch forth the hand
of Faith to apprehend and receive Jesus Christ, and to rest upon
him for life and for salvation. For Faith is that instrument
whereby wee receive Christ and all his benefits, as they are
offered to us in the Gospel, and sealed up to us in the Sacra|ment.
Faith is to the soul, as the hand is to the body, that
which is offered to a man for his good, the hand readily recei|veth,
and what the hand so receiveth is a mans own. Thus God
offering his Son unto us, Faith perswades the heart of Gods good
will to man, and of his true intent to have man made partaker
of his Son, and thereupon apprehends him, and receives him for
his own, and Christ is truly his.
III. Another act of Faith to be exercised at the Lords Supper,
is to apply and appropriate Christ to thy self, which is implied under
the Rites of eating the bread, ad drinking the wine whereby
is meant, a feeding upon Christ by Faith, which is an applying
of him. When therefore thou art eating the bread, and drinking
the wine, fee upon Christ by a particular application of him, and
all his benefits, to thine own souls comfort. By Faith assure
thy self that Christ was born for thee, that hee might bee thy Sa|viour,
to save the from thy sins. That hee performed perfect o|bedience
unto the Law, that his Righteousness might be impu|ted
uto thee. Thus hee died a bitter cursed death to free thee
from eternal death and condemnation, which thy sins had deser|ved.
Thus thou oughtest to apply Christ with all his benefits
unto thine own souls comfort. And thus to act Faith, is to eat
and drink indeed, to communicate indeed. The truth is, this
act of Faith, in applying Christ, is the most suitable to the Ordi|nance
of the Lords Supper. And the more thou canst put forth
the act of application therein, the greater comfort shalt thou

receive from the Ordinance; for propriety in Christ is that
which sweetens all. Yet lest weak Christians, such as are weak
in Faith, should be discouraged, and think themselves uncapable
of comfort, because they cannot thus eed upon Christ by Faith,
they cannot apply Christ, nor the benefits of his death unto
themselves.
I desire such to take notice, that though this act of applica|tion
is the most suitable to the Ordinance, yet the former act of
receiving Christ, and resting upon him, gives us a true interest in
him, whereby Christ and all his benefits become ours, which
puts us into a blessed and happy condition. Yet I would advise
all such who have attained to that measure and degree of Faith,
as to lay hold upon Jesus Christ, and to receive him as their Sa|viour,
and thereupon to rest upon him alone for life and salva|tion,
that they would strive to raise it one pitch higher, namely,
to apply hrist, with all the benefits of his death and passion, unto
their own souls comfort. Because this act of Faith doth especial|ly
make to our comfort and consolation, as well as to our spi|ritual
benefit.
II. Another grace to bee exercised at the Lords Supper, is Re|pentance;
For a broken Christ requires a broken heart. Whereas in
true Repentance there is a godly sorrow for sins past; And a full
purpose and resolution of heart to leave and forsake them for the
time to come, and to walk more closely with God. While you
are at the Sacrament, you should exercise your Repentance in
both these particulars.
1 You should labour to be affected with a true grief and sorrow fo
your sins. To that end seriously meditate of the manifold suffer|ings
of Christ; for cetainly a due and serious meditation of what
Christ hath suffered for our sins, cannot but affect our hearts with
some measure of grief and sorrow for the same; for shall Christ
bleed for our sins, and shall not wee weep for them? was
Christ broken with torments for our sins, and shall not the con|sideration
thereof break our hearts for them?
2 You must ingage your selves by a solemn Vow and promise, unto
God to bee more watchful over your selves against sin for the time
to come; and to walk more closely and exactly with God. As often
as you partake of the Lords Supper, so often God reneweth the
Covenant on his part, hee ingageth himself afresh, to bee your
God, to pardon your sins, to subdue your corruptions, to write his

Law in your hearts, that is, to work in you, as a desire and dis|position
to the keeping of his Laws and Commandements; so a
sincere indeavour after the same. And therefore it is your duty
to renew the Covenant on your parts, to ingage your selves a|fresh
in the strength of Christ, to walk as a people in Covenant
with God, to bee more watchful over your selves against sin,
for the time to come; to bee more his faithful servants, than
ever you were before.
Having shewed both the Duties Antecedent, and Concomi|tant,
Come wee now to the Duties Subsequent, such as must fol|low
after the action of receiving: For it is not enough that you
duly prepare your selves to that Ordinance, and reverently carry
your selves at it, but you must likewise walk in some measure
suitably thereunto. To that end observe these Directions.
1 So soon as you get home, withdraw your self into some secret
place, and there upon your knees from your heart bless God, as for
hs manifold favours, mercies, and blessings, so especially
and above all for the fountain of all blessings, the Lord Jesus
Christ, for his Covenant of Grace made unto you in him, for
adding the Sacraments as Seals to the Covenant of Grace for
the strengthening of your Faith, and for making you that day par|takers
of his blessed Sacrament, and for that comfort and refresh|ment
which you finde therein. I hope you are not such beasts as
to forget to return thanks to God for the food wherewith your
bodies are refreshed. And will you bless God for your cor|poral
food,Omne bonum ab ipso, c. Aug. de Doct. Christi. and not for your spiritual food, whereby your souls
are nourished unto everlasting life? Will you bless God for a
crumb, and not for a Christ? in whom are all good things con|tained
in a most eminent manner.
2 Did you finde your hearts cheared and warmed at the Lords
Supper, beware of quenching that spiritual heat which was there
kindled in you, by a sudden falling into worldly conferences, and
fruitless discourses; But labour to keep alive that sacred fire
which you found then kindled in your hearts by prayer, medi|tation,
and holy conferences; for know, that a sudden quenching of
the Spirit, will exceedingly tend to the hardening of your hearts.
3 Maintain a stricter watchfulness over your selves against sin for
the time to come. Were your souls washed at the Sacrament, with
the blood of Christ, from the filthy spots and stains of sin, and
will you son after with the Sow wallow again in the filth of

sin, and mie of sinful filthiness?2 Pet. 2. 22 Did you upon your approaching to
that Ordinance, cast up your sins by confession? and will you
now with the Dogge, return to your vomit again? Did you there
by the eye of faith see Christ crucified for your Sins, under the
rites of breaking the Bread, and pouring out the Wine and wil you
now, by a fresh committing of sin, crucifie him again? rather re|solve,
and strive hence forward to crucifie your sins, for which Christ
was crucified, to hate, abhor, and abandon every Sin as much as in
you lieth.
4 Labour to live more soberly,Tit. 2. 12 righteously, and godly in this pre|sent
world. More soberly towards your selves,Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae. more righteously to|wards
your Neighbours, and more godly towards God. As you
have been made partakers of an Ordinance not common to all, but
peculiar to Saints, so your lives should have somewhat peculiar in
them, which is not common to wicked men. You should live
convincing lives, by exceeding others in holiness, and in righte|ousness.
You must be more frequent and fervent in Family-du|ties,
more careful in sanctifying the Lords Day, more just and
honest in your dealings with men, living so as you may credit your
Profession, and adorn the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And when you
are tempted to any sin, thus reason the case with your selves;
Was I not lately at the Lords Table, and did I not there vow
and promise to be more watchful against Sin, and more careful
to walk in the waies of godliness, and shall I now step out of the
way of godliness into the way of sin? Thus lay your temptation
to the touch-stone of your vow, and try whether it bee not a|gainst
it: which through the blessing of God may prevent ma|ny
a Sin.


CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Common mutual Duties betwixt Husband and Wife.
HAving shewed the general Directions which appertain to
Christians as Christians.
I come now to the particular Duties which appertain to thee
in thy several and distinct relations. For it is not sufficient that
thou make conscience of the general Duties of Christianity, but
thou must also be conscionable in the performance of the parti|cular
duties of thy several relations, whereby much good is both
mutually communicated one to another, and received one from

another. Whereas the Apostle Paul in setting down the severul
Duties of relations, doth still bring them under three Heads, viz.
Husbands and Wives,Ephe. 5. 22. c. Parents and Children, Masters and Ser|vants;
I shall follow his Method,Col. 3. 18, c. shewing thee the duties of each
of these.
For the Duties of Husband and Wife, they may be drawn to
two Heads.

1 To such as are common to both.
2 Such as are proper and peculiar to each severally.

The common and mutual Duties are these.
I. A loving affection of one to another. I call this a mutual Du|ty,
because as the Husband is to love his Wife,Ephes. 5. 25, 28, 33, so the Wife is to
love her Husband.Tit. 2. 4 Love is a duty which every Christian oweth
to another,Mat. 22. 39 Love thy neighbour as thy self, saith our Saviour.
Where by Neighbour is meant every man, every woman, so that
we are bound to love every one, even our enemies, for Christs
sake. But the nearer any are knit together, the more they are
bound to this duty of love, and to abound therein. Now, who
are so nearly knit together as Husband and Wife? and therefore
there ought to be a mutual loving affection between them, and
that love which one sheweth to the other will stirre up the other
to requite that love again, so as there is nothing lost by love.
II. Outward concord and agreement.Hb. 12. 14 This should be, as farre as
is possible, with all men, i. e. so farre as may stand with faith and
a good conscience; but more especially between Husband and
Wife, who are so nearly knit together. For without concord and
agreement between Husband and Wife, what comfort can either
find in their house? The truth is, every one lives more or less
comfortable in his house,Prov. 15. 17 as there is concord and agreement
there. And therefore saith the Wise man, Better is a dinner of
herbs, or roots, where love is, than a stalled Oxe, and hatred there|with.
And again,Prov. 17. 1 Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith,
than an house full of sacrifice, with strife; i. e. slender fare, yea a
dry crust, with peace and concord, is more comfortable than
good chear, with strife and contention; for that will so imbit|ter
the sweetest Meats, that a man can find little relish in
them.
For the better preserving of concord and agreement betwixt
Husband and Wife, take these few Directions.
1 Labour to suppress and keep down all furious Passions, which

doe usually occasion discord and dissention; especially when one
is passionate it will be the wisdom of the other to act patience, and
to express a spirit of meekness; for when both are hot and angry
together, then the fire of contention is like to increase to such a
flame as will not suddenly bee quenched. And therefore I
would commend this rule to Married persons, To beware of being
both angry together, but rather let one be to the other like
Davids Harp, to apt ease Sauls fury.
2 Though the fire of contention be kindled at home, yet let it not
break forth into thy neighbours house; but bee sure thou keep it
within thine own walls. For it is found by too frequent experi|ence,
that differences between Man and Wife being once di|vulged,
are more hardly made up.
3 When any difference is risen, let each strive who should first
seek after peace and reconciliation, for theirs is the glory who first
begin. I have read that there was sometimes a variance between
two famous Philosophers, Aristippus and Aeschines, Aristippus
at length cometh to Aeschines, and seeks for peace and recon|ciliation,
and withall said, Remember, though I am the elder, and
the Party wronged, yet I fought the peace. True, said Aeschines,
and for this I will ever acknowledge thee the worthier man, for I
began the strife, but thou the peace. But how many of us come
short of Aristippus (though an Heathen Philosopher) in this par|ticular,
thinking it a disgrace, first to seek after peace and recon|ciliation?
III. Another mutual Duty which Husband and Wife owe one to
another is Prayer. They ought to pray one for another. In a con|scionable
performance whereof, may Husband and Wife bee
helpful each to other,Mat. 7. 7 in all things needful to either of them, it
eing the means which the Lord hath sanctified for obtaining of
every good thing,am. 5. 16 both for our selves and others.Gen. 25. 21 It is recorded
of Isaac, That he intreated the Lord for his Wife, because she was
arren, and the Lord was intreated of him; i. e. the Lord heard
his Prayer and granted his request.
IV. Another mutual duty is, A provident care of one for another,
seeking the good of one another, even as of themselves. This thir
care of one for another respecteth especially both the Soul, and
the good name of each other.
1 There ought to be a provident care for one anothers Souls;
as,

1 If a beleeving Husband or Wife be married to an unbelee|ver,
they ought to use all the means they can to win the other.
This the Apostle Peter presseth upon Wives, for he commands
them so to carry themselves towards their Husbands, That they may
without the Word be won by the conversation of their Wives.1 Pet. 3. 1. And
the Apostle Paul intimateth this to be the duty of Husbands to|wards
their Wives;1 Cor. 7. 16. For, saith he, How knowest thou, O man, whether
thou shalt save thy wife? viz. by thy godly conversation. And if ei|ther
of you shall be a means of the conversion of the other, how
intirely will it knit your affections one to another?
2 If both Husband and Wife bee in the state of Grace, they
should be watchful one over the other, as to prevent sin in one
another, so to redress it the best way they can when either of
them are fallen thereinto, by seasonable admonition, yea and
reproof also, if admonition will not serve; Herein Husband and
Wife should more respect the mutual good of one another, than
fear the giving of offence.
And it is likewise a special duty incumbent upon Husband and
Wife, to help forward the growth of grace in each other, as by
a frequent conferring together of good things, especially of what
they hear in the publick Ministery of the Word; so likewise by a
constant performing family-duties, especially Prayer. Though
this duty appertain chiefly to the Husband, yet the Wife ought
to put her Husband in mind thereof, if hee forget it, and to stir
him up, if hee be backward.
2 There ought to bee a provident care in Husband and Wife, as
for one anothers souls, so for one anothers good name. The Hus|bands
good name ought to bee as dear to the Wife, as her own.
And the Wives good name ought to be as dear to the Husband
as his own. And truly, great reason there is, that parties so near|ly
knit together, should be careful of one anothers good name,
because a name is more precious than all the goods they enjoy.
V. Another mutual duty is,Vitiis nemo siac nascitur. Hor. To conceal and cover the infirmi|ties
of one another. There is no man or woman without their in|firmities;
it will be therefore your wisdome to conceal the same,
so far as you can with a good conscience.Charitas tolerat quos amat. Greg. in Ezek. And truly this is one
special act and exercise of love, to seek to cover and conceal
the infirmities of those whom they love. How blame-worthy
then are they who take all occasions to spread abroad one ano|thers
infirmities, and many times belye one another? This fault

is so much the greater in two especial respects.
1 Because the Husband and Wife know more of one anothers
infirmities; and therefore if they be so ill minded, can more
discredit and defame one another, than any other.
2 Because, of all other parties, they are most bound to conceal
one anothers infirmities, by reason of their near union.


CHAP. XXIV.
Of Husbands Duties to their Wives.
HAving shewed the Common-mutual duties appertaining
both to the Husband and the Wife, I come now to the spe|cial
and particular duties belonging to each of them severally.
And first of the duties of the Husband, all which may bee
comprized under this one word LOVE;Ephes. 5. 25, 33. for wee finde that of|ten
expresly set down and mentioned as the chief duty of the
Husband.Col 3. 19.
For the more profitable pressing whereof, I shall shew
1 The manner how it ought to be performed.
2 The particulars in which it ought to expressed.
I. For the manner, the Apostle St. Paul setteth it down in
two phrases.
1 As Christ loved his Church, Husbands love your Wives, even as
Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it.. The note of
comparison, EVEN AS, requireth not an equality, as if it were
possible for an Husband to love his Wife as much as Christ
loved his Church; but it notes a similitude and likeness, and im|plieth
two things.
1 That you must indeavour to come as near Christ herein as you
can, never thinking you have loved enough, because you can
never love so much as Christ did.
2 That though your love in quantity cannot be equal to Christs,
yet in quality and condition it ought to be like his, viz. True, Free,
and Constant.
1 As Christs love to his Church was a true,Ephes. 5. 25. real love, which hee
expressed, by giving himself for her: So should the Husbands
love to his Wife be a true, and real love, not loving her in word
onely, but in deed also, manifesting his love by some real ex|pressions
thereof.

2 As Christs love to his Church was a free love, for his love a|rose
wholly and only from himself, there being nothing in the
Church to move him to love her: So should the Husbands love to
his Wife be a free love, loving her, though there were nothing in
her to draw his love, but onely that shee is his wife.
3 As Christs love to his Church is a constant and continued love,
for whom hee once loveth,John 13. 1. hee loveh to the end: So should the
Husbands love to his Wife be a constant and continued love, no
onely by fits, for a while, but constantly till death.
2 The Husband ought to lve his wife as his own body; as the A|postle
St. Paul speaketh,Ephes.. 5. 28. So ought men to love their Wives, as
their own bodies. Though the former comparison, taken from
Christs Example, be the more excellent, laying fort a more pr|fect
patern, yet this other taken from a mans body, is more sen|sible,
and better discerned of man. For every man knoweth how
hee loveth his own body, viz. with all tenderness and compassion;
fity therefore is it added by the Apostle. And it is to be taken
both as a Motive to stir up the Husband to love his Wife, be|cause
shee is as nearly joyned to him as his body; and also as a
Pattern, to shew him how hee should love his Wife, even as hee
doth his body, truly and tenderly, as the Apostle in the following
verses more fully expresseth it;Vers. 29. For no man ever yet hated his own
flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it.
II. The particulars in which an Husband ought to express his
love to his Wife, are these, and such like.
1 By honouring her as his companion and yok-fellow,1 Pet. 3. 7. which the
Apostle Peter expresseth; for speaking of the Husbands duties, he
reckoneth this, of giving honour to the Wife.Gen. 2. 18. The title given to the
Wife by God himself, An help meet for her Husband, implieth a
kinde of fellowship with him.Gen. 2. 25. And also the place whence the wo|man
was taken, viz. his side, where his heart lay, implieth as
much; for shee is as the heart in the body, far more excellent
than any other member under the head, and almost equal to the
head. It is observable, that when the woman was made, shee
was not taken out of the mans head, because shee was not to rule
over him; nor out of his feet, because shee was not to be subject
to him as a slave, or servant; but out of his side, that hee might
take her as his yoak-fellow and companion, which hee ought to
do, considering they are joynt-partakers of many special preroga|tives
which are common to both, being Ioynt-Parents of the same

children,. Ioynt-Governours of the same houshold, Ioynt-Partakers
of the same goods (in regard of the use of them) and Ioynt-Heirs
of the grace of life, as the Apostle Peter speaketh.1 Pet. 3. 7.
2 By delighting in her. This the Wise-man commendeth, in
Prov. 5. 19. Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, let
her breasts satisfie thee at all times, and bee thou ravisht alwaies with
her love, that is, be thou enamoured with her, even to delight.
Mark how the Lord termeth the Wife of Ezekiel,Ezek. 24. 16. The desire, or
delight of his eyes, because hee delighted in her, and shee was
exceeding dear unto him. And truly, if a man exceed not the
bounds of civility and sobriety, his affection towards his Wife
cannot be too great. Hiply thy Wife is not so beautiful, nor so
delightful in her self, as some other women are. Yet as Parents
love and delight in their children, not so much because they are
comely, witty, or the like, but because they are their children;
So thou oughtest to delight in thy Wife, not so much because she
is beautiful, wise, or the like; but because shee is thy Wife, even
the Wife which the Lord hath allotted unto thee, beleeving her
to be the fittest Wife for thee, with whom thou oughtest to rest
satisfied.
3 By treating her mildly. The Husband must shew himself
milde and gentle in all things towards his Wife. This mildness
is urged by the Apostle under the contrary Vice, Bitterness; for
saith hee,Col. 3. 19. Husbands love your Wives, and bee not bitter against
them. Where bitterness is opposed to mildness, gentleness, fami|liarity,
and the like. So that both the speech and carriage of the
Husband towards his Wife, must bee with much mildness and
gentleness; If hee instruct her, it must be with all meekness and
mildness; If hee command any thing to be done, it should be by
way of entreating; hee should not bee too peremptory in com|manding;
If hee reprove her,Gal. 6. 1. it must be with all mildness and
meekness that may be. If a Brother is to bee restored with a spirit
of meekness, as the Apostle speaketh, how much more a Wife?
For this end a Husband must observe both his own present temper,
and his Wives, and forbear to reprove when himself or his
Wife is in passion; for while himself is in passion, hee is unfit to
reprove, because passion is apt to blind reason, so as it knoweth
not how to keep any mean or measure. And if shee be in passion,
she is unfit to be reproved, because passion so fills the heart, that
it's not capable of any good advice. And as an Husband in re|proving

his Wife should observe a fit time, so likewise a fit place,
forbearing to doe it openly, before Children or Servants, but pri|vately
between her and himself; for her honour and credit is to
be maintained before Children and Servants, as much as may be,
because she is a Joynt-governour with him over them; now for
her to be checked and controlled before them, will make them
despise her. Herein therefore great wisdome is to bee ob|served.
Qu. Whether an Husband may lawfully strike, or beat his Wife?
Ans. Though the Husband hath some authority over his Wife,
yet it doth not appear that he hath any power or liberty thereup|on
to beat her.
1 For first, we find it neither commanded, nor commended
to us in the Scriptures, there being neither precept, nor presi|dent
for the same.
2 What fruit can be expected from an Husbands beating of
his Wife? but a return of blowes, and scratches, to the utmost
of her strength. For this is most certain, that if a man who hath
no authority over another, strike him, hee will turn against him,
and doe him all the mischief that he can. Now therefore there
being no ground to perswade Wives, that their Husbands have
such authority over them, as to strike them for their faults; what
hope is there that they will patiently bear it, and be bettered by
it? or rather, is it not more likely that they will not only rise a|gainst
them, but if they can, over-master their Husbands, and e|ver
after cast off all subjection to them?
3 The near conjunction and communion that is between man
and wife, will not stand with such base and servile dealing, that
the Husband should beat and strike his Wife. This is the next
way to have her despised of Children and Servants, and so de|prive
her of all government.
4 Another particular wherein an Husband ought to express his
love to his VVife,1 Pet. 3. 7 is, By a diligent endeavouring of her spiritual
good. Hence the Husband is commanded to dwell with his Wife as
a man of knowledge; i. e. able and willing to instruct her in the
knowledge of the truth;1 Cor. 14. 35. wherefore else is shee to ask him at-home?
And how otherwise shall he be the guide of her youth?Prov. 2. 17 if
he be not able and willing to guide her feet in the way of peace.Luke 1. 79
But of this I spake in the Common mutual Duties of Husband
and Wife, set down in the fore-going Chapter.



CHAP. XXV.
Of the Duties of Wives.
HAving shewed the Duties of Husbands in reference to their
Wives, I come now to shew the Duties of Wives towards
their Husbands.
As the main duty on the Husbands part was love, so the main
duty on the Wives part is subjection;Ephes. 5. 22 under which many parti|culars
are comprised.
The subjection of the Wife to the Husband implieth two
things.

1 That she acknowledge a superiority in her Husband.
2 That she put in practise such duties as doe issue and flow
from the acknowledgement of that superiority.

I. The former is not only a duty, but the ground of all other
duties whatsoever; for till the Wife be fully satisfied about the
superiority of her Husband, no duty will be performed by her as
it ought. Therefore Wives ought to learn this point in the first
place, viz. That their Husbands are their superiours; which
clearly appeareth,
1 By the order of Creation. The Man was first created, and
thereupon had the Birth-right.Ius primog|turae.
2 By the institution of God, who said to the woman,Gen. 3. 16 Thy desire
shall be subject to his, and he shall rule ver thee,
3 By the names and titles given in Scripture to the Husband,1 Pet. 3. 6
which doe imply a superiority in him,Prov. 2. 17 as Lord, Guide, Head,
c.1 Cor. 11. 3 I grant indeed there is but a very little disparity, and
small inequality between Husband and Wife, being both gover|nours
of the same Family, Parents of the same Children,1 Pet. 3. 7 and
heirs together of the grace of life, yet God having so expresly ap|pointed
subjection on the Wives part, it ought to bee acknow|ledged.
II. As the Wife ought to acknowledge and yeeld a superiority
in her Husband, so she ought to put in practice such duties as
doe issue and flow from the acknowledgement thereof, which may
be branched into three particulars.
1 Honour. This God requires of all inferiours towards their
Superiours,Exod. 20. 12 in the fifth Commandement, and therefore is a

duty incubent upon all Wives in reference to their Husbands,
who are their superiours, as being their Lords, Guides, and Heads.
This honour VVives ought to express,
1 By their inward esteem of their Husbands, accounting them
worthy of honour for their place sake, because they are their Hus|bands,
whether they be richer, or poorer; elder, or younger than
selves.
2 By their outward respect, which they should manifest, both
by their reverend carriage, and speech, giving them such title; as
signifie superiority, and savour of respect.
2 Another Branch of the VVives subjection, is Meekness;
which she ought to shew,
1 In a quiet taking of reproof from her Husband. As it is the
Husbands duty to reprove his Wife upon just occasion, so it is her
duty to take it with all meekness, and mildness; and to en|deavour
to amend and reform what is justly reproved. Yea, though
the Husband should chance to reprove his VVife wrongfully (as
even the best and wisest sometimes may doe) it will bee a part
of wisedome in the wife, rather to take it meekly and patiently,
than to break forth into passionate expressions; yet in such a case
she may clear her own innocency, and shew her Husbands mi|stake;
but if he will not beleeve her, or turn away from her, she
ought to bear it with meekness and mildness.
2 In being willing to be advised by her Husband, and ready to
follow his good advice; yet  the VVife hath a clearer sight, and
seeth better than her Husband what God hath commanded,
though she may not usurp authority over her Husband,1 Tim. 2. 12 yet shee
may and must in all humility perswade and advise him to that
which is good. And happy is that Husband (if hee can see his
own happiness) in whose bosome the Lord hath laid so good a
counsellor.
3 Another Branch of the VVives subjection is, Obedience;
and indeed this is the principal part of that subjection which the
Apostle requireth of VVives to their Husbands,Ephes. 5. 22. Wives submit your
selves unto your own husbands. And the Apostle Peter commands
this duty unto VVives,1 Pet. 3. 6 by the example of Sarah, who obeyed A|braham.
Now Sarahs obedience to Abraham was eminent in two things
especially.
1 In doing what he required of her; for when on a sudden

there came three men to Abraham,Gen. 18. 6 and he was desirous to en|tertain
them, he bid his VVife make such and such provision
with all possible speed, and accordingly she did.
2 In forbearing to doe any thing without his consent. Though
Sarah was highly provoked by Hagar, who despised her Mi|stris,
yet would she not deal roughly with her, much less turn
her out of doors, till she had her Husbands consent, who said
unto his wife, Doe to thy Maid as it pleaseth thee.Gen. 16. 4, 6 In like man|ner,
should VVives manifest their obedience to their Hus|bands.
1 In a ready and willing doing of what their Husbands require
of them.
2 In a forbearing to doe things which appertain to their Hus|bands
authority, without their particular, or at least general con|sent.
VVhen an Husband, from the experience hee hath of his
VVives wisdome and faithfulness, giveth liberty unto her to doe
what she pleaseth in the Houshold affairs, then the VVife may
doe much without a particular consent from her Husband, but
otherwise she shall doe well to forbear, unless upon good ground
she is confident her Husband will not dislike the doing of such
a thing.
For the kind of obedience which the VVife is to yeeld to the
Husband,Ephs. 5 22 the Apostle sets it down in two expressions, As unto the
Lord,Col. 3. 18 and in the Lord.
The former hints unto us, that the VVives obedience must
be a consciencious obedience, that is, in obedience to God, to his
Ordinance and Commandement, who requireth it of them; so
that it must be in conscience of the Ordinance of God, and in
obedience to his command; and thus will their obedience to
their Husbands be an acceptable service unto God. For as they re|leeve
Christ in the Poor,Mat. 25. 40 who releeve them for Christs sake, so
those VVives obey God in their Husbands, who obey them for
Gods sake, I mean out of conscience to the ordinance and com|mand
of God.
The latter expression,. in the Lord, hints unto us, that the Wives
obedience must bee in all lawful commands, not extending to
any thing against the VVill of God; so that if Husbands com|mand
any thing against the revealed VVill of God, their VVives
are not bound to obey them: for their Husbands power is subor|dinate
to the Power of God, and the subordinate power must

ever yeeld to the supream power. And therefore if Wives shall
out of respect to, or fear of their Husbands, yeeld obedience to
any unlawful command, doing that which is evil, their Husbands
command will be no good plea, much less sufficient excuse for
them.


CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Duties of Parents.
HAving shewed the Duties of Husbands and Wives, I come
now to shew the Duties of Parents and Children.
The Duties of Parents in reference to their Children, are
these.
I. To see that they bee admitted into the Church by Baptism in
conven , i. e. within some few daies after they are born.
The Iew.Gen. 17. 12. vere commanded to circumcize their children on the eighth
day; But though Baptism succeeded in the room of Circumcision,Col. 2. 11, 12.
as the Apostle hinteth; yet are not wee now under the Gospel
strictly tied to that day; notwithstanding from that command of
God to the Iews, wee may doubtless infer, that the Children
of Christians may and ought to be baptized within some few daies
after they are born.
II. To train them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord. This
duty the Apostle Paul in special presseth upon Parents, Yee Pa|rents,
saith hee,Ephes. 6. 4. bring up your Children in the nurture and admoni|tion
of the Lord, q. . Let your main care be, not how to make
them rich, but religious, how to work the sincere fear of God in|to
their souls, that as God of his infinite goodness hath made them
your children by natural Generation, so you should strive and in|deavour
to make them his Children, by a godly and religious e|ducation.
Austin in his fifth Book of Confessions,Majori solicitu|dne me partu|ricbat spiritu, quam carne, c. Aug. Con|fess. lib. 5. cap. 9. speaking of his
Mother Monica, saith, That shee travelled with greater care, and
stronger pai for his spiritual birth, than for his natural birth. And
truly the like care and pains should be in all Paren towards
their Children. Not thinking it sufficient that they have brought
them up to some good Trade, whereby they may live another day:
But they must likewise bring them up in the fear of God, teaching
them so to serve him here, that they may live with him eternally
in the Heavens.

For your better help herein take these few Directions.
1 Instruct them in the Principles of Religion, by teaching them
some good Catechism, which should be frequently, if not daily
performed, though but a very little at once, to prevent weari|someness
in your children.
Q. How soon should wee begin to teach our children?
A. When they are able to learn any thing that is evil,Prov. 4. 3, 4. it is high
time to teach them something that is good. Solomon saith, when
hee was young and tender,Prov. 31. 1, 2. his Father taught him. And that his Mo|ther
did so too, you may read in the last chapter of the Book of
Proverbs.
2 Betimes instruct them in the practical part of Christianity, by
calling upon them frequently to read the Scriptures; daily to of|fer
up a morning and an evening Sacrifice of prayer and praise
unto God; constantly to give thanks before and after meals,
carefully to avoid all known sins, and diligently to perform e|very
known duty, and that out of conscience.Gen. 18. 19. This the Lord
commended in Abraham, I know him, saith God, that hee will
command his children, and his houshold after him, to keep the way
of the Lord, to do justice and judgement.
3 Bring them with you to the House of God, so soon as they can
remember any thing which they hear. When Ioshua read the words
of the Law before the Congregation of Israel,Josh. 8. 35. it is expresly said,
That the women and the little-ones were amongst the men.
4 Examine your children at home of what they have heard in
the publick Congregation, and labour to make it more clear and
plain to their understanding.
5 Bee often speaking before them of the great things the Lord
hath done for his Church and people, both of old,Josh. 4. 6. and in your daies.
This the Lord commanded the Israelitish Parents to do to their
children,Psal. 78. 4, 5, 6. which wee finde accordingly practised by them. As
children generally have good memories, so they are excellent at
the remembring of stories.
6 Bee patterns of piety and godlness unto your children. For
the truth is, there is great force in Examples to draw others ei|ther
to good or evil. And it is usually the disposition of Children
to follow their Parents; And therefore how doth it concern Pa|rents
to look to their waies and courses, especially how they be|have
themselves before their children, who are much inclined to
follow their example? Oh that all Parents would seriously think

of this, that the consideration hereof might reclaim them from
all loose and wicked courses, lest by their evil example they
make their children twofold more the children of Hell, than
they were by nature!
7 Bee sure you forget not daily to pray to God for them, especi|ally
that hee would indue them with his saving, sanctifying gra|ces,
that as they grow in years, so they may grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And for
your incouragement know, that children of many prayers seldome
miscarry. Parents are generally careful to lay up wealth and
riches for their children, oh that they would be as careful to lay
up a stock of prayers for them in Heaven, which will questionless
prove their childrens best portion!
Oh that all Parents would thus indeavour to bring up their
children in the fear and nurture of the Lord, that as they were
instruments to beget them in the flesh, so they might be instru|ments
to beget them in the Faith! which is the main duty incum|bent
upon Parents in reference to their children.
III. Another duty is, To provide for the bodies of their chil|dren,
as well as for their souls. This the Apostle intimateth, where
hee saith,1 Tim 5. 8. If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of
his own house,Hac parte fide|lis, si curam suo|rum nen habeat, infideli deteror est; absolute de|teriorem esse, non est necesse. Estius. hee is worse than an Infidel, viz. in this point, be|cause
he by the light of nature knoweth this to be a duty. And a|gain
saith the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 12. 14. Children ought not to lay
up for their Parents, but Parents for their children; as God shall
bless them. But yet beware of with-holding thy hand from works
of charity, because of many children, nay rather, the more chil|dren
thou hast, the more liberal thou oughtest to be, that so
the Lord may double his blessing upon thee and thine; for the
seed of the merciful, saith the Psalmist,Psal. 37. 26. are blessed. And saith the
Apostle,2 Cor. 9. 6. Hee that soweth bountifully, shall reap bountifully.
IV. It is the duty of Parents to rebuke their children when they
do amiss, whereby you may both free your selves from the guilt
of your childrens sin and prevent much evil in your children.
For questionless the want thereof is one special cause of so much
wickedness and prophaneness in many children.
V. When reproof prevails not, you ought to correct them for their
faults. This duty the Scripture often presseth upon Parents;
Chasten thy Son while there is hope,Prov. 19. 18. and let not thy soul spare for
his crying; or, as the Original properly signifieth, Let not thy

soul spare to his destruction. Intimating, that the Fathers sparing
of his child, may tend to his destruction, or as wee use to say,
bring him to the Gallows. So that too much lenity, may prove the
greatest cruelty in the issue. An Antient Father in the Church re|lates
a sad story of a youth,Gregor. Dial. l. 4. cap. 18. whose usual custome it was upon auy
thing that crossed him, to curse and blaspheme, and not being du|ly
corrected for the same, hee continued in that wicked course to
his dying-day; and as the story noteth, the Devil was seen to car|ry
him away. But herein two extreams are carefully to be avoi|ded,
viz. Lenity, and Severity. As Parents ought not to bee too
indulgent towards their children, which was Elies fault for which,
sore judgements befell both him and his children:Ephes. 6. 4. So neither
should they be too severe in correcting their children,Col. 3. 21. as some are,
having no respect either to the fault,Patres non o|portet asperos esse circa fiios. Cyp. Testim. l. 3. cap. 71. age, or disposition of
their children. Therefore the Apostle giveth this dehortation un|to
Parents, Not to provoke their children unto wrath.
VI. Another duty is, To bring up their children in some ho|nest
Calling, it being the ordinary means, as to prevent idleness,
which is the bane of youth, so to inable them to live in the world,
and to be serviceable to the Kingdome wherein they live. In
the choice of a Calling, respect should be had, as to the childrens
ability and fitness, so to their disposition and inclination, care|fully
observing to what Callings they are most disposed.
VII. To provide fit Matches and Marriages for their children,
It being the means the Lord hath sanctified for the keeping their
bodies chast and undefiled. This the Lord gave in commande|ment
to his people of old, by his Prophet Ieremy,Jer. 29. 6. saying, Take
Wives to your Sons, and give your Daughters to Husbands. In
the choice of an Husband or Wife, the Parents ought to have
greater respect to piety and prudence, thn to wealth and riches,
for thereby shall they procure much happiness to their children in
their Marriages.


CHAP. XXVII.
Of Childrens Duties.
HAving shewed the Duties of Parents towards their Chil|dren,
I come now to shew the Duties of Children in refe|rence
to their Parents, which may bee brought to three heads,

viz. 1 Obedience. 2 Honour. 3 Gratitude.
I. Obedience, This is often pressed in Scripture as the main
and principal duty of Children in reference towards their Pa|rents.
Their Obedience ought to bee expressed,
1 By a cheerful yeelding to their Precepts and Commands,
readily doing what they require of them, and that for conscience
sake, even to the command of God, who requireth this duty at
their hands; for saith the Apostle, Children obey your Parents in
all things,Col. 3. 20. for this is well-pleasing to the Lord. And again, Children
obey your Parents in the Lord,Ephes. 6. 1. for this is right. In the former
place,. it is in all things. In the latter, it is in the Lord; whereby
is implied, that Childrens Obedience must be in all things ho|nest
and lawful, agreeable to the Word of God; so that if their Pa|rents
should command them to do any thing contrary to the Word
of God, they must therein obey God, and not their Parents. For
children are no further bound to obey their earthly Parents, than
may stand with obedience to God their heavenly Father.
2 Children ought to express their obedience to their Parents,
in hearkning to their good instructions. It being the duty of Parents
to instruct their children, it must needs be the duty of children to
hearken unto, and to obey their good instructions, which Solomon
much presseth upon children.Prev. 1. 8. My Son, saith hee, hear the instru|ction
of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. Where
hee doth not only command children to obey the wholesome in|structions
of their Fathers, but doth likewise infinuate, that they
should not sleight and reject the advice of a Mother, because of
the weakness of her sex. As children ought to hearken to the
good instruction of their Parents in all things, so more especially
in two things.

1 In the choice of their Callings.
2 In the choice of their Matches.

1 The former is commended in the Scripture by the approved
practice of godly children,Gen. 28. 2. as of Iacob, Samuel, David, and others.
And truly,1 Sam. 1. 28. in regard that Parents are the means of bringing up
their children in the world,1 Sam. 17. 15. till they are fit for Callings, and that
not without much care and cost, is it not most meet and just that
their counsel and advice should be taken in the choice of their
Calling, and course of life? And as in their Callings, so likewise
in their Marriages, and not to marry without their consent,
which the very light of nature teacheth, and God himself com|mandeth,

when hee layeth a charge upon Parents,Deut. 7. 3. to give their
Daughters to Husbands, and to take Wives for their Sons, which doth
necessarily imply,Filli sine con|sensu parentum rit  jure nu|bere non possunt. Tertul. ad uxor. lib. 2. that children ought not to take unto themselves
Wives or Husbands without, especially against their Parents con|sent.
Such Marriages have by the Fathers of the Church been de|clared
unlawful; yea and to be of no force till the Parents do
ratifie them. And therefore such children as shall adventure to
joyn themselves in Marriage without their Parents consent, how
can they expect a blessing from God upon them? yea they have
rather cause to fear the curse of God upon them, and their po|sterity.
How did the curse of God fall upon Esau, and his po|sterity,
because he married against the consent of his Parents, ta|king
unto himself Wives,Gen. 26. 34, 35. which were a grief of mind unto Isaac
and Rebeckah?
II. Another duty which children owe unto their Parents, is, Ho|nour
and Reverence. This the Lord in express terms requireth of
all children in the fifth Commandement,Exod. 20. 12. Honour thy Father and
thy Mother. This honour and reverence children must manifest,
1 By their modest silence before their Parents, not forward to
speak in their presence without leave from them.
2 By their humble speeches, speaking unto them submissively
and reverently, giving them fitting titles, as Father, Sir, and
the like.
3 By their respective carriage, which they should shew by
uncovering their heads, bowing their body, standing up before
them, with the like. Ioseph, though highly advanced, yet when
hee appeared before his Father with his two Sons,Gen. 48. 12. the text saith,
Hee bowed himself with his face to the earth. Yea though his Father
was blind through age, and therefore could not see what respect
his Son shewed to him, yet notwithstanding he bowed to the very
ground. And when Solomon heard of the approach of his Mother,
the Text saith,1 Kg. 2. 19. Hee rose from the Throne to meet her, and bowed
himself unto her, and set her at his right hand, and all this in to|ken
of his reverence, and to give good example unto others.
III. Another duty which children owe to their Parents, is Gra|titude,
a thankful requital of their love, and care, which the A|postle
in express terms requireth of all children,1 Tim. 5. 4. namely, to re|quite
their Parents, for that, saith hee, is good and acceptable be|fore
God. This requital may and ought to bee manifested several
waies. As

1 By releeving them according to their need, if God give ability,
Iosephs practise herein is set before us as a Pattern, who being in
prosperity, and his Father in want, first sent him corn freely out
of Aegypt,Gen. 42, 25 and afterwards sent for him into Aegypt, and there
furnished him plentifully with corn,Gen. 45. 9 and all other needful things;
insomuch that the text saith,Gen. 47. 12 Ioseph nourished his father and bre|thren,
and all his fathers houshold with bread; according to their
families. And it is recorded of Ruth, that she did not only glean
for Naomi her Mother in Law, but having food given her by
Boaz servants for her refreshment,Ruth 2. 18 she reserved part thereof, and
gave it to her mother. I have read of a Daughter, whose Father
being sentenced to be famished to death,Valr. Mar. and thereupon none be|ing
suffered to bring him Meat, she gave him suck with her own
breasts. How blame-worthy then, yea and unnatural are such
Children, whose Parents being poor, and themselves able to re|leeve
them, doe notwithstanding  them to want things
needful?1 Joh. 3. 17 Saint Iohn saith, That the lve of God dwelleth not in
him who shutteth up his bowels of compssion from his brother. How
then can it dwell in that Child, who shutteth up his bowels of
compassion against his own Father or Mother? who having not
only a sufficiency, but also an affluency of worldly things, suffers
his Parents to want necessaries?
2 By loving their Parents. And truly that love which Parents
bear unto their Children, and have manifested by bringing them
up in the world, should by the law of equity stirre up in Children
a love to their Parents? for love deserveth love.
3 By concealing and covering their infirmities, which will e|vidence
the truth of their love to their Parents, and procure Gods
blessing upon them.Gen. 9. 22, 23 Shem and Iaphet we read were blessed for
this, because they would not behold the nakedness of their Fa|ther,
when being drunken he lay uncovered in his Tent; and
Cham, for discovering and making known his Fathers nakedness,
was cursed of God. As therefore Children would avoyd Chams
curse, let them carefully shun Chams Sin, forbearing to blazen
abroad their fathers infirmity.



CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Duties of Masters.
THe last Head of Family relations is Master and Ser|vants.
The Duties of Masters in reference to their Servants, may be
brought under two Heads.

1 Such as concern the Bodies of their Servants.
2 Such as concern the Souls of their Servants.

The Duties of Masters, in reference to the Bodies of their Ser|vants,
are.
1 To provide fitting raiment for them, such as may fence them
against the extremity of the weather. I mean if by agreement
they are bound to find them apparel, as is the condition of most
Apprentices.
2 To give them wholsome and sufficient food. As their food must
be wholsome for the preservation of their health, so sufficient for the
encrease of their strength, that they may be the better enabled
with cheerfulness to doe their Masters service.Prov. 31. 15 Solomons House|wife
among other things is commended for her giving meat to her
houshold, and a portion to her maidens. VVhereby is meant a suf|ficient
portion and quantity of meat to her servants. Oh that all
Huswives would imitate her herein, and not pinch their Servants
bellies, which too many doe!
3 To afford them Physick when they are sick. For Masters are
commanded to give unto their servants that which is just and equal.Col. 4. 1.
And is it not just and equal that those servants who labour for
their Masters in the time of their health, should be cared for by
their Masters in the time of their sickness?Mat. 8. 6 The Centurions care
for his sick Servant is left upon record for our imitation, who used
the best means he knew for his Servants recovery; which was to
goe unto Christ. The humanity of this Centurion being a Gentle,
may be a witness against the inhumanity of many Christians, who
take little care for their sick Servants.
4 Not to oppress them with labour, by over-working them, re|quiring
more of them than they are well able to perform. This
would be cruelty in a man to his Beast, much more in a Master to
his Servant. Indeed the Aegyptians dealt so cruelly with the Is|raelites,

that they groaned under their burthens,Exod. 3. 7, 8 whose groans ascen|ded
unto the ears of God, who thereupon came down to deliver them
from their bondage. And let Gods hearing the cry of those op|pressed
Servants, and revenging them of their Oppressors, make
all Masters beware of laying heavie burthens upon their Ser|vants,
requiring more of them than they are well able to perform,
lest their groans ascend up unto God.
5 To pay them their wages when it is due, without delaying it, or
defrauding them of any part thereof.Deut. 24. 14 It is reckoned in Scripture as
a crying Sin,Levit. 19. 13 to keep back and with-hold the Labourers, or Ser|vants
wages;Jam. 5. 4 a sin that crieth unto God for vengeance, who is
the Poors avenger; and as he taketh special notice of their wrongs
and oppressions, so will he take care to avenge the same.
II. The Duties of Masters in reference to the Souls of their
Servants are,
1 To instruct and Catechise their Servants in the Principles of
religion. For if it be a duty incumbent upon all Masters of Fa|milies
to provide for the nourishment of the bodies of their Ser|vants,
how much more then should they be careful for the nourish-of
their souls? yea let all Masters of Families know, that they
are as expresly charged to teach and Catechise their Servants, as
the Minister is to instruct his Flock;Deut. 6. 7 witness Gods command to
the Israelites, Thou shalt talk of my Lawes when thou fittest in thine
house, and when  walkest by the way, and when thou liest down,
and when thou risest up. And God hath manifested his appro|bation
thereof,Gen. 18. 12 by commending Abraham for his practice
therein.
2 To cause the Scriptures to bee frequently read in the Family. We
read that under the Law the people of Israel were commanded to
cause the words of the Lord to be written upon the Posts of their
Houses,Deut. 6. 6, 9 to the end they might be frequently read by every one
in the House. And saith the Apostle Paul, Let the Word of Christ
dwell in you. By the Word of Christ, the Apostle meaneth the Do|ctrin
of the Gospel,Col. 3. 16 which was published by Christ, and is con|tained
in the Old and New Testament.Valt Doctri|nam Evang illis esse . Cal. in loc. Let this word, saith the
Apostle, dwell in you, i. e. be yee much imployed in the reading
thereof, as in your Closets, so in your Families; or as Calvin
interprets it, Make the Word familiar to you, by giving it house|hold
entertainment. But oh! what a stranger is the Word to
most Families? how seldome is it read amongst them? If that

house bee an Hell where the Scriptures are not read, as Luther said,
Oh how many houses are there as so many hells, for want of
reading the Scriptures?
3 To pray daily in and with their Family. To offer up a morning
and an evening Sacrifice of prayer and praises unto God in their
Family. For the better stirring you up to this much negleted
duty of Family-prayer, I shall commend a few Arguments.
1 Taken from the practice of the faithful in all ages.Gen. 12. 8.  13. 4.  21. 33. Wee read
it was Abrahams practice wheresoever hee came, to build an Al|tar
to God, where God should be called upon joyntly by him
and his family. Wee read likewise it was Iobs practice, as you
shall finde, Iob 1. 5. And Ioshuahs, as appears by his protestation,
as for mee and my family, wee will serve the Lord.Josh. 24. 15. In the New
Testament it is recorded of Cornelius,Act. 10. . That hee was a devout wan,
who feared God with all his house, and prayed to God alwaies; which
implieth hee kept a constant course in prayer. Now these things
are recorded for our learning, that so we might write after their
Copy, by following their Example in so excellent a duty.
2 Every Master in his Family is both a King, a Prophet, and a
Priest. Hee is a King to govern his Family, a Prophet to teach and
instruct his Family, and a Priest to offer the sacrifice of prayer
and thanksgiving, not only for himself, but also for all those who
are committed to his charge. Let therefore all Masters of Fami|lies
know, that it is their duty which God will require of them,
not onely to pray by themselves (and yet I would to God all did
but that) but also to call together all their family, and to bee
their mouth unto God in prayer, unto which they may be incou|raged
by Gods gracious promise,Mat. 18. 0. That where two or three are ga|thered
together in Christs name, there hee will be in the midst of
them.
3 A Master of a Family by his daily offering up a morning and
evening Sacrifize of prayer and praise, will make his house an
house of prayer, or little Temple, which God will fill with his pre|sence.
Yea a Christians house is hereby made Gods Church, by
a constant performance of holy duties, which is a great honour
unto a family.
4 Family-prayers are a special means to bring down Gods
blessing upon the whole family,2 Sam. 6. 11. and upon all their lawful un|dertakings.
As God blessed the house of Obed-Edom for the
Arks sake: So will God bless those families in which his name is

called upon; For godliness is profitable unto all things, as well
in families, as in any other societies.
5 Another Argument may be taken from the danger of neg|lecting
this duty of Family-prayer, for such do incur the danger
of Gods wrath and fury.Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that
know thee not, and upon the families that call not upon thy Name,
saith the Prophet Ieremiah. Which words contain a fearful im|precation
against all prayerless-families. And it is observable,
that such as neglect this duty of prayer in their family, are joyned
with the Heathen; and truly very fitly, for wherein do they dif|fer
from the Heathens, who have not so much as a form of god|liness
in their families, upon whom God will power out his fu|ry?
Oh think of this all yee who make no conscience of praying
daily with your families, consider it well, and lay it to heart!
Are yee not under that Prophetical curse, and liable to the
pouring forth of Gods wrath and fury, both upon your selves, and
upon all that belong unto you? even your Wives, your Children,
your Servants, yea and very wares and goods? It may well be
written upon the doors of such houses, as one saith, Lord have
mercy on us; for surely the plague of God is not far from them,
but nigh unto them.
Obj. Mee thinks I hear some saying, they are convinced of the
necessity of the duty, and fain they would do it, but oh they cannot,
they know not how to pray.
Answ. I would advise such rather to read some good prayer,
than altogether to omit the duty; for many Masters of Families
who are not able to conceive a prayer of themselves, yet if they
meet with a form of prayer answerable to their occasions, can
pray heartily and earnestly. Yet I would not have them ever
content themselves with reading a form of prayer, but to labour
to pray of themselves without a book. And for your help therein,
take these two Directions.
1 Carefully observe the prayers of others, their order and
method.
2 Take notice of your own sins in particular, and of your par|ticular
wants, what graces you stand in need of, and desire. As
also take notice of the particular blessings God bestoweth on you,
and thereby you will be inabled in some measure to pray your
selves, by confessing your sins unto God, and begging, as the par|don
of them in and thorow the merits of Jesus Christ, so such

graces as you stand in need of. And when once in any competent
measure you can pray for your selves, then by degrees you may
come to pray with your Family.


CHAP. XXIX.
Of Servants Duties to their Masters.
HAving shewed the Duties of Masters in reference to their
Servants, Come wee now to the Duties of Servants in re|ference
to their Masters; which may be brought to three heads viz.
1 Obedience. 2 Diligence. 3 Faithfulness.
I. Obedience is that the Apostle St. Paul often presseth upon
Servants,Ephes. 6. 5, 6. as a main and principal duty.Col. 3. 22. And indeed no inferiours
are more bound to obedience than Servants. Your Obedience
must be manifested in two particulars.
1 In a ready yeelding to your Masters commands. For indeed
it is the proper work of a Servant to hearken to his Masters Pre|cepts,
and to yeeld ready obedience unto them.
2 In a patient bearing of reproofs and corrections, yea though the
correction be wrongfully inflicted, without just cause, which the A|postle
Peter expresly requireth of Servants, for saith hee, Servants
be subject to your Masters with all fear,1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, c. not onely to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward: For this is thank-worthy, if a man
for conscience towards God, indure grief, suffering wrongfully. For
what glory is it, if when yee be buffeted for your faults, yee take it
patiently? but if when yee do well, and suffer for it, yee take it pa+tiently,
this is acceptable with God. And if unjust correction ought
patiently to be born, then much more unjust reproofs. But if the
reproof or correction be just, then you ought speedily to amend
and reform the things for which you are ustly reproved or cor|rected.
For the Manner of Servants Obedience, the Apostle sets it
down in several expressions. As
1 It must be a sincere Obedience. This the Apostle Paul sets
down with two expressions in one verse.. Col. 3. 22.

1 Negatively, Not with eye-service.
2 Affirmatively, With singleness of heart.

Not with eye-service, which implieth a meer outward service on|ly,
to satisfie the eye of man, But with singleness of heart, q. d. Let
not your Obedience be hypocritical, meerly to be seen of your Ma|sters,

but let it be in truth and uprightness of heart, doing service
to your Masters in the sincerity of your hearts, without any hy|pocrisie
or dissimulation, labouring in your Masters absence as
well as in his presence, remembring Gods eye is ever upon
you.
2 Your obedience must be consciencious, for conscience sake, be|cause
the Lord requireth it at your hands; so much the Apostle
expresseth,Col. 3. 23 for speaking to Servants, he saith, Whatsoever yee, doe,
doe it heartily, as to the Lord, q. d. whatsoever service yee doe to
your Masters, doe it for the Lords sake, because he hath comman|ded
it, and therefore doe it out of conscience to the Word, and
command of God, who requireth you to yeeld sincere service and
obedience to your Masters, for this will stirre you up to doe it
after the best manner you can, that so God may accept thereof,
and reward you for the same.
3 Your obedience must be cheerful. This the Apostle inti|mateth,
Collos. 3. 23. where he saith, Whatsoever yee doe, doe it
heartily: i. e. whatsoever yee doe in the service of your
Masters,. doe it from the heart, as it is in the Greek, that is,
with good will, as the Apostle in another place expounds himself,
saying,Ephes. 6. 7 . With good will doing service; or us the Greek word pro|perly
signifieth, with a good and cheerful mind. So that Servants
ought not to doe their work grudgingly, or discontentedly, as it
were with an ill will, but cheerfully, with a good will.
4 Your obedience must be universal unto every thing which they
require of you;. Col. 3. 22. so much the Apostle expresseth, Servants, saith he,
obey your Masters in all things, i. e. not only in such things as
seem easie, and most pleasing to your fancy, but whatsoever they
command you, being not contrary to the Word of God, but are
in themselves honest and lawful; for if they shall command you
to lye, swear, or to use false weights and measures, which are
things forbidden by God, you ought not therein to yeeld to their
commands, but to say unto them,Ioseph servus est, fed pravis Domin suae cu|piditatibus ser|vire nescit. Gre|gor. as Ioseph did to his Mistris,
How shall I doe this great wickedness, and sin against God? though
hee was a Servant to his Master, yet would hee not be a Servant to
his Mistris lusts.
II. Another Duty incumbent upon Servants is, Diligence in
dispatching their Masters work and business, without loitering, or
minding their own ease and pleasure; but as their strength and
time is their Masters, so they ought to put forth their strength,

and imploy their whole time in their Masters service; I say, their
whole time, excepting some part thereof for their secret devoti|ons,
especially their Morning and Evening Prayers unto God:
for Servants must have respect to their Master in Heaven, as well
as to their Master on earth, and make as much conscience of per|forming
their duty to him, as to their Masters according to the
flesh; for indeed, the Lord is the best Master, who gives the best
wages, and largest rewards.
III. Another Duty is Faithfulness. Servants must shew all
faithfulness to their Masters,Tit. 2. 10 as the Apostle expresseth. Both that
trust that is reposed in Servants, and that account that is to bee
taken of them require faithfulness. Doe you not remember what
the Lord said to his Steward, Give an account of thy stewardship?Luke 16. 2 Mat. 25. 19
And were not all the servants to whom talents were committed
called to an account? How then doth it concern all Servants to
be faithful to their Masters, which they ought to express both in
their words and deeds.
1 In words, not daring to excuse any unwarrantable act with
the telling of a lye, which is to adde sin unto sin; let all lying
Servants consider the fearful Judgement executed on Gehaz,
who when his Master asked him where he had been, presently an|swered
him with a lye,2 King. 5. 25 saying, Thy servant went no whither;
whereupon he went out of his presence a Leper as white as snow.
2 In deeds, and that several wayes.
1 Not disposing their Masters goods at their own pleasures, ei|ther
to themselves, by taking more than is allowed them, or to
others, by giving any part thereof away. Many Servants think
they may lawfully give away Victuals, and other things of their
Masters to the Poor; but though they may inform their Masters,
or Mistresses, of such things in the house meet to be given away,
and likewise of persons fit to receive such almes; yet have they
no power of themselves to give away any thing of their Masters:
and pretence of Charity is no good excuse for Theft.
2 Not pilfering and purloyning their Masters goods to their
own private use, which the Apostle expresly condemneth in Ser|vants,
Tit. 2. 10. Let all pilfering Servants know, that there is a
Book full of Curses and Plagues against every one that stealeth, or
sweareth, which Book is large, twenty cubits long, and ten cub its
broad,Zech. 5. 2, 3 and yet is filled with Curses that shall come swiftly upon them,
as the Prophet Zechary speaketh.
3 But rather labouring to preserve, and increase their Ma|sters
estate by all good and lawful means.Tit. 2. 10. Thus the Apostle Paul
expresseth the duties of Servants, Not purloining, but shewing all
good fidelity, viz. to their Masters, in increasing their estate, which
is highly commended in that faithful servant in the Parable, for
which hee received from his Lord and Master, both a gracious ap|probation,
in these words, Well done good and faithful servant, thou
hast been faithful in a few things, and also a plentiful remunera|tion,
in the next words, I will make thee Ruler over many things,
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. So that hee that is faithful in
a little, taketh the best course to become Ruler of much, if the
Lord see it good for him.


CHAP. XXX.
Of resting upon Christ alone for Life and for Salvation.
HAving in the foregoing Chapters given you several practical
Directions for your Christian Conversation in the world,
shewing you how to walk with God all the day long, in your several
Callings, Conditions, and Relations; I shall close this Treatise with
one general Caution, namely, That when you have in some measure
put in practice the foremetioned Rules and Directions, you would
beware of resting therein, and of looking for life and for salvation
in and thorow them. And truly, there is good reason for this
Caution, because it is natural for men out of Christ to seek for
salvation by their own works, and to rest on them, which is one
of the most dangerous things in the world; For so long as a man
doth so, hee is uncapable of Christ, as seeing no need hee hath of
a Saviour.Rom. 9. 32. It is said of the Iews, that they lost salvation, because
they sought it not by Faith, i. e. by Faith in Christs Righteousness,
in what he had done and suffered, but sought it by the own Righ|teousness,
i. e. by resting in their own works, which indeed is the
high-way to hell and destruction, as well as the way of sin, though
it be somewhat a cleaner way. For there is a double way to hell,
The way of Sin, and the way of Duty. The way of Sin is a filthy, dirty
way, whereas the way of Duty is a fairer, cleaner way; I mean
Duties rested in are the ready way to hell and destruction.
Whereupon it was the counsel of Luther, To take heed not onely of
our sins, but also of our duties, i. e. of resting in them, and build|ing

our hope of salvation upon them. Therefore to take you off
from that, I shall commend to your serious consideration two
fundamental Principles, necessary to be known of all that will
be saved.
1 That Iesus Christ is the onely way and means of salvation.
2 That beleeving in Christ is the onely means of partaking of him,
and of salvation by him. As there is no salvation but by Christ,
so there is no having Christ and salvation but by Faith.
1 The former is clear from many places of Scripture; as first
from that known place,Act. 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other,
c. Here the Apostle plainly shews, that there is no salvation
but by Christ, for which hee gives a sufficient reason in the next
words; For there is no name under Heaven given among men where|by
wee must be saved; implying thereby, that if through Gods free
Grace we be saved, it must necessarily be in and by Jesus Christ.
For it is not the name of a mans own duties or righteousness whereby
hee can be saved, they are full of infirmities and imperfections,
whereupon the Church crieth out,lsa. 64. 6. All our righteousnesses are as
filthy raggs, i e. the best works of the best men, performed after
the best manner that they can, are as a menstruous cloath, full of
spots and stains, full of weaknesses and imperfections. Neither
is it the name of a mans graces, whereby hee can bee saved, for
they likewise are weak and imperfect, there being a mixture of
sin, as in our best duties, so in our best graces; a mixture of pride
with our humility, of hypocrisie with our sincerity, of unbeleef
with our faith, c. I grant indeed that Christians may look to
their graces as evidences of their part and interest in Jesus
Christ, and of salvation by him, but not as causes of their salva|tion.
They may likewise make use of duties as means to bring
them unto Christ, but not to bee saved by them. Christ, and
Christ alone, is the only cause and Author of their salvation, and
therefore hee stiles himself the way, the truth, and the life, saying,Joh. 14, 6. , Via illa certissima, as Bza in loc.
I am the way, the truth, and the life, i. e. the true way to eternal
life, the onely way by which wee may certainly, and out of which
it is impossible wee should ever attain unto eternal life and sal|vation.
In which respect hee is often stiled A SAVIOUR.. Luk. 2. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 18. . Yea
hee is termed the Author of eternal salvation, Heb. 5. 9. The word
in the Greek properly signifieth a cause, even the efficient cause of
of our salvation; and that hee is both by purchase from his Father,
and by conquest over Satan, whose slaves and vassals all mankind

were.Heb. 2. 10. In this respect hee is likewise called the Captain of our Sal|vation.Luk. 2. 29.
Yea hee is stiled Salvation it self.. And on this ground
was the name Iesus given him,Mat. 1. 21. Because it was hee who should save
his people from their sins.Mat. 7. 24. And therefore as hee is the wise builder,
who built his house upon the Rock: So he is the wise Christian, who
builds his hope of salvation only upon this Rock, the Lord Jesus
Christ. And the truth is, all other things besides Jesus Christ,
will prove but rotten and sandy foundations to all those who
shall build their hope of salvation upon them. And yet how ma|ny
foolish Christians be there who build their hope of salvation
upon other things besides Jesus Christ. As
1 Some upon their freedome from scandalous sins, they are not so
bad as other men, and thereupon flatter themselves with a con|ceit
of their good estate, yea and hope of salvation; which was
the deceit of the proud Pharisee,Luk. 18. 11. who thought himself a good
man, because hee was not so bad as others. Whereas in truth
it is not hee who is not so bad as others, that hath a well-grounded
hope of salvation, but he who goeth wholly out of him|self
unto Christ, that with a disclaiming of all Righteousness of
his own, doth place his whole confidence upon the Righteous|ness
of Jesus Christ, and the merits of his death and passion, for
life, and for salvation.
2 Others build their hope of salvation upon some good desires
in their hearts now and then by fits. But alas! they are much mi|staken
and deceived, who think with a few good desires to break
open the gates of Heaven. I grant indeed that good desires in the
soul, I mean, desires of grace and holiness, are a good sign of
some beginnings of grace, for it is grace to desire grace. But if
you rest contented with your desires after grace and goodness,
and not go unto Jesus Christ the fountain of all grace and good|ness,
you may lye down in sorrow, and fall short of eternal life
and salvation.
3 Others build their hope of salvation upon their bare outward
profession of Religion, they have been baptized, and profess the
true Christian Faith, and thereupon think themselves as good
Christians as the best.Mat. 21. 19. But as Christ cursed the Fig-tree which had
leaves only, and no fruit; so will hee curse them who bear the
leaves of Profession, but want the fruits of a godly life and con|versation.
And it is like to fare with them, as it did with the
five foolish Virgins, who had their Lamps of Profession, as well as

the wise Virgins, but for want of oyl in their Lamps, i. e. of grace
in their hearts, were shut out of the Bride-chamber, i. e. out of
Heaven, which is the Bride-chamber of Jesus Christ.
4 Others build and bottome their hope of salvation upon their
civil Righteousness, and moral honesty, their just and upright deal|ing
with men, and the like, when as many Heathen who had
no knowledge of Jesus Christ, and so fell short of Heaven, have
gone further in Morality and Civil Righteousness than these men.
5 Others build their hope of salvation upon their Religious
Righteousness, their frequent performance of holy and religious du|ties;
they are frequent in hearing, praying, reading, partaking of
the Lords Supper, c. and hereupon flatter themselves with an
hope of salvation: whereas their best services, should they bee
weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary, would be found too
light, and insufficient to salvation, being full of weaknesses, in|firmities,
and imperfections, for which the Lord might justly
condemn them, should hee deal with them according to the ri|gour
of his justice.
6 Others build their hope of salvation upon their sorrow and
humiliation; finding their hearts in some measure affected with
grief and sorrow for their sins, especially if they do but drop a
few tears; oh then they flatter themselves with an hope both
of the pardon and forgiveness of their sins, and of eternal life and
salvation, which they ground upon that promise of our Saviour.
Come unto mee all yee that labour,Mat 11. 28. and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Conceiving that Christ had promised rest and peace,
yea life and salvation unto all that found their hearts affected
with grief and sorrow for their sins, without any more adoe
whereas I conceive it is not so much a promise of rest and sal|vation
unto humbled souls, as an invitation unto such (because
they are most apt to be discouraged) to come unto Christ, from
whom alone peace and comfort, rest and salvation is to bee had.
Such therefore as having found their hearts affected with grief
and sorrow for their sins, do rest satisfied therewith, and seek
not out for Jesus Christ, they are like to sit down without Christ,
and so fall short both of true peace here, and of salvation hereafter.
7 Others bottome their hope of salvation upon their partial
repentance; I mean their leaving and forsaking some sins, when
in the mean time they wittingly live in the practice of other sins,
which in truth is but a seigned and hypocritical repentance, like

that of Herods, who upon Iohn Baptists preaching is said to leave
many sins, but yet would by no means part with his Herodias,
his darling and beloved sin. Nay, though your repentance bee
true and full, yet if you stay there, and not look beyond it unto
Jesus Christ, you will fall short of salvation.
8 Others bottom their hope of Salvation upon their Works of
Charity, thinking to purchase Heaven by their good Works, and
so wholly exclude Christs merits, which they ground upon that
sentence of Absolution pronounced by our Saviour at the Day of
Judgement unto his Elect,Mat. 25. 34 wherein hee giveth Heaven to them
who have expressed their charity to his poor members, in feeding,
cloathing them, and the like; whereas our Saviour instanceth in
these Works of Charity, as the fruites of their faith, whereby
they did evidence their faith to be a true and lively faith, which
manifested its life by those works of charity; so that works of
charity in themselves can be no good ground to bottom your sal|vation
upon, but only faith in Jesus Christ, which is ever accom|panied
with works of charity, if true and sound.
9 Others bottom their hope of Salvation upon the Mercy of
God. They will confess themselves to be poor, wretched, sinful
Creatures, but they hope the mercy of God will pardon their sins,
and accept their poor services. Thus many make the Mercy of
God to eik out their own righteousness, and so both put toge|ther
they think will be a means of attonement and reconciliati|on
with God, yea and of obtaining eternal life and salvati|on.
But such doe wonderfully mistake the proper work of Gods
Mercy, which is not to eik out our righteousness, but to shew
us our unrighteousness and misery, and then to shew us Jesus
Christ, the perfection of his righteousness, the all-sufficiency
of his Sacrifice, with his willingness to receive all poor Sin|ners
that will come unto him, and then to stirre up our hearts
to receive Jesus Christ as our Priest, Prophet, and King, and to
rest upon him for life and for salvation. And thus might I goe
on, shewing you the many false and rotten foundations upon
which the greatest part of men doe build their hopes of Salvati|on;
whereas in truth Christ is the only true solid foundation,
whereon we can safely build the hope of our Salvation.1 Cor. 3. 11 And
therefore saith the Apostle, Other foundation can no man lay, th
that is laid, the Lord Iesus Christ; intimating Christ to be the
only true foundation. So that he is the wise Christian that builds

his hope of salvation only upon that rock the Lord Jesus Christ.
And so I pass from the first fundamental Principle to the se|cond,
namely,
II. That beleeving in Christ is the only means, as of partaking of
Christ, so of salvation by him. This was typified by the means of
the Israelites cure of the sting of the fiery Serpents, and that was
by looking upon the brazen Serpent; for as the Israelites by look|ing
upon the brazen Serpent were perfectly cured of the sting of
the fiery Serpents: In like manner all poor Sinners, sensible of the
sting of Sin, by looking with the eye of faith upon Jesus Christ
lifted up upon the Cross, shall be perfectly cured of the sting of
their sins. This application of that Type our Saviour himself
maketh,Joh. 3. 14, 15 for saith he, As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wil|derness,
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever
beleeveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. So that
beleeving in Jesus Christ is the only means of partaking of Christ
and of salvation by him,
What this faith is which maketh us partakers of Christ, and of
Salvation by him, I have formerly shewed, in the Directions for
the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper.
How should the consideration hereof stirre you up, to labour
above all things to beleeve in Jesus Christ? that is, to goe wholly
out of your selves unto Jesus Christ, and to receive him as he is of|fered
in the Gospel. Mind this work most of all, for it is the All
in all to your Salvation; and yet how doe the greatest part of you
minde your pleasures, and your profits more than this? Can
they give you an interest in Christ, or a right to Salvation? Why
then should your pleasures and your profits be so minded, and
sought after by you? even more than faith, which only can give
you an interest in Christ, and a right unto salvation in and tho|row
him. Surely it is a thing to be lamented, that men should so
much mind worldly things, and in the mean time forget spiritual
things; That they should be so politick for their bodies, and so
foolish for their souls; That they should with Martha, be so much
troubled about earthly things, and not with Mary, mind this
one thing necessary; but resolve hence forward to give no rest to
your souls till you have attained to this saving grace of faith.
The means God hath sanctified thereunto may be brought to
three Heads.

1 The removing of some lets and impediments.

2 The embracing of some truths.
3 The practising of some Duties.

The lets and impediments are of two sorts.

1 Such as keep Natural men and women from beleeving in
Jesus Christ.
2 Such as keep off many a sincere broken-hearted Sinner.

I. The lets and impediments that keep off Natural men and
women from beleeving in Jesus Christ, are these, and such
like.
1 A love of their lusts; For this men generally know, that as
Dagon fell down before the Ark: so their lusts must fall down
before Jesus Christ; they know that when Christ is received into
the heart by faith, their lusts must be cast out, for Christ will not
be received into that heart which is full of base and sinful lusts.
Now mens lusts are dear unto them, and very unwilling they are
to part with them, they had as lieve part with Christ as part with
their lusts.Joh. 3. 19 This our Saviour intimateth, where he saith, Light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light; where
by Light is meant principally Iesus Christ with his Gospel, and
by darkness mens lusts, which they prefer before Jesus Christ, and
will not part with them for the gaining of Christ, with all the be|nefits
of his Death and Passion. Oh that any man should bee so
sottish, as to prefer a base sinful lust before Jesus Christ! Surely
that man hath a low mean esteem of Christ, who thinks him not
able to recompence the loss of a base lust.
2 An over-much love of the world and worldly things. The
truth is, that soul that is not in some measure divorsed from the
world, cannot by faith embrace the Lord Jesus Christ as her Hus|band.
O therefore let it be your daily Prayer, and earnest endea|vour,
to wean your hearts more and more from the love of these
earthly things, that yee may not love them so much, as thereby to
be kept from loving and embracing of Jesus Christ.
3 Spiritual Pride, grounded upon a mans over-valuing conceit
of himself, and of his own estate. How many are apt to think
with the Church of Laodicea, that they are rich and full, and have
need of nothing; when in truth they are poor, and blind, and
naked, wretched, and miserable, being empty of all grace and
goodness? yea they are the more wretched and miserable, be|cause
they know not their misery, and so see no need, no necessity
they have of Jesus Christ; which is the saddest condition in the

world: for such are furthest off from going unto Christ, and belee|ving
in him. Hee therefore that would imbrace Jesus Christ as
his Saviour, must come with an empty hand and heart, receiving
him with an empty hand of Faith, into an empty heart, emptied of
all self, as self righteousness, self-worthiness, self-goodness, c.
II. The Lets and Impediments that keep off many a sincere,
broken-hearted sinner from clozing with Jesus Christ, and be|leeving
in him, are these, and such like,
1 A deep apprehension of the number and heinousness of their sins;
For the removal of this, let such consider,
1 That the more and greater their sins are, the greater need they
have to go unto Iesus Christ, and to cast themselves, and the bur|then
of their sins upon him. For as the more sick any are in body,
the more need they have of a Physician: So the more sinful any
souls are, the more sick of sin, the more need they have to go
unto Jesus Christ, who is the onely Physician of the soul, who
both can and will heal all their sins, which are the spiritual dis|eases
of their souls, as readily as he healed bodily diseases, when
he was upon the earth, if they will go unto him.
2 Let such know and consider, that the apprehension of the num|ber
and heinousness of their sins, should be so far from keeping them
from going to Christ, and receiving him, that it should be a forcible
Argument to drive them unto Christ,Mat. 9. 13. seeing Christ professeth hee
came into the world to save sinners; where by sinners are meant,
such as are truly sensible of their sins. And thereupon all such sin|ners
are invited to come uno him;Mat. 11. 28. Come unto mee all yee that
labour and are heavy laden, viz. with the weight and burden of
your sins. And therefore the Apostle Paul averreth this truth with
a gloriovs preface;1 Tim. 1. 15 This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all ac|ceptation,
viz. That Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners,
and that without exception of sins or persons; yea that hee came
to save the chief of sinners. Why then should the apprehension of
thy sins keep thee off from going unto Christ, and resting upon
him for salvation? when as hee came to save such sinners as thou
art, nay worser, even the chief of sinners.
2 A second Let and Impediment is, A doubting of Christs wil|lingness
to receive them, if they should go unto him. For the bet|ter
convincing such of Christs willingness to receive and imbrace
all poor sinners, that will but go unto him, and imbrace him with
the arms of their Faith, I shall lay down three grounds thereof
1 The first is the several gracious invitations of Christ to poor sin|ners
to come unto him, as Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 11. 28. Ioh. 7. 37.
2 Christs willingness appears, in that hee hath instituted and ap|pointed
his Ministers, hee hath dispatched Embassadors in his name
to wooe, instruct, and beseech men to come in unto him, and to accept
of that Reconciliation which hee hath purchased by his blood.2 Cor. 5. 20.
3 Christs willingness doth appear, in that hee oth accept of the
least and lowest degree of Faith, and will not discourage the weak|est
soul that cometh unto him.Mat. 12. 20. A bruised reed shall hee not break,
and smoaking flax shall hee not quench. As by a bruised need is
there meant a weak Christian, so by smoaking flax, such an one
as hath corruption mixed with grace. For the flax there men|tioned
is the weick of a Candle, which if it smoak, giveth but little
light, and yeelds a stinking savour. Though true beleevers by
reason of the flesh in them may bee such, yet will not Christ
quench that little light of Faith that is in them.
3 A third Let and Impediment, is a fear and jealousie that they
are not sufficiently humbled under the sense of their sins; and the ra|ther,
because they do not finde their hearts so broken, as the hearts of
others have been. For the removal of this, I desire such to take
notice of these things.
1 That a man may be sufficiently humbled and broken for his sins,
though not so deeply as others; for true humiliation admits of de|grees,
and all Christians have it not in a like measure. And there|fore
far be it from any to conclude that they are not sufficiently
humbled, because they have not attained to such a measure and
degree thereof, as some others have.
2 Though thou art not so deeply humbled as some others have
been, yet if thou art so sensible of thy sins, and of thy misery thereby,
that thou art truly sensible of the need and necessity thou hast of Jesus
Christ, it is sufficient, and thou mayest with boldness go unto Je|sus
Christ, roul thy self into his bosome, and cast thy self into his
arms. Though thou never knewest what belongs to the bitter
throws, and stinging pangs which others feel in their new birth,
yet that work being done, for which deep humiliation is required
(namely, to be sensible of the need of Christ, and thereupon to
long after him) thou mayest bee incouraged to go unto Jesus
Christ, and to rest upon him, as for the pardon of thy sins here,
so for eternal life and salvation hereafter.
3 Know, that if thou beest not at present so deeply humbled and

broken for thy sins, as thou wouldest be, yet thou mayest bee more
humbled after thy beleeving in Christ. For a Christians sorrow and
humiliation for sin and misery is not all at first, but oftenimes it
is more and greater after a clozing with Jesus Christ, and a sen|sible
feeling of Gods love, than it was before. Yea the les humi|liation
before Faith in Jesus Christ, the more many times fol|lows
after. And that is true humiliation, and Evangelical Re|petance,
which followeth after Faith.
4 Another Let and Impediment that keeps off many a sincere
Christian from going unto Christ, and clozing with him, is a fear
and sealousie that their day of grace is past; and tht it is now too
late, having so long stood out against the tenders and offers of
Jesus Christ. For the removal of this, I shall propound four things
to your serious consideration.
1 It is not for any man to say his day of grace is past, for that
is one of those secrets which belong only unto God to know. And
we must not meddle with Gods secrets, but check our selves for it.
2 If thou hast stood out against Christ hitherto, thou hast now
therefore the more reason to come in, and cloze with the tenders
and offers of Jesus Christ.
3 If thou hast an heart desirous to cloze with the tenders and
offers of Jesus Christ, it is certain thy day of grace is not yet past,
Christ still knocks at the door of thine heart, therefore now resolve
to open unto him.
4 Consider, that Christ hath several seasons of bringing men
home to himself; some hee brings home to himself in the latter
end of the day, who questionless refused him in the former part
thereof; and therefore so long as life lasteth, do not say it is
too late, but stir up thy self to receive Jesus Christ as hee is of|fered
in the Gospel, and to rest upon him, and his merits alone
for life and salvation.
Having thus shewed you the Lets and Impediments to be
removed,
II. I proceed now to the truths to be imbraced, which are these,
1 That every man out of Christ is in a wretched miserable con|dtion,
liable to the wrath of God, to the curse of the Law, to all
judgements and plagues here, and to eternal death and condem|nation
hereafter, with the Devils and damned in Hell flames.
Yea every Christless man and woman hang over the very mouth
of Hell, by the rotten thred of their lives, which is ready every

moment to crack, and then what can be expected but an irreco|verable
downfall into Hell.
2 That no man is able to help himself out of this wretched, mi|serable
condition,2 Cor. 3. 5 for as the Apostle speaketh, We are not sufficient
of our selves, so much as to think a good thought, much less can we
doe any thing of our selves to free our selves from so great a
bondage and slavery as sin hath brought us into.
3 That God himself out of his free grace and rich mercy did send
his own Son out of his bosome into the world to take our Nature upon
him,Gal. 4. 45 that therein he might redeem us out of our wretched, miserable
condition.
4 That Christ is an all-sufficient Saviour, who by his Death
hath made full satisfaction to Gods Justice for all our sins,. and
therefore is able to save us to the uttermost, to the uttermost of
our sins, yea to the uttermost of our fears and doubts.
5 That Iesus Christ is willing to receive and embrace all poor
sinners who will but goe unto him,Heb. 7. 25 and cast themselves, and the bur|then
of their sins upon him;Isa. 55. 1 as appears by his manifold gracious in|vitations
unto poor Sinners,Mat. 11. 28 who are but sensible of their sins,Joh. 7. 37 to
come unto him.Rev. 22. 17
6 That there is no way or means of Salvation, but only by
beleeving in Jesus Christ; and beleeving is necessary to salvation
in two respects.
1 As it is the Command of God,Necessitate prae|cepti. that we should beleeve in
the name of his Son Jesus Christ; as 1 Ioh. 3. 23. This is his
Commandement, that we should beleeve on the name of his Son Ie|sus
Christ.
2 As it is the condition or means that God hath set down for
the obtaining of eternal life and salvation;Necessitate e|dii. as Ioh. 3. 16. For
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that who|soever
beleeveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Hence it is that unbelief is made the only ground and reason of
mens Damnation.Joh. 3. 18, 36 Though men shall be punished for all other
sins, yet not beleeving is the ground and reason why they perish
by their sins, because beleeving in Jesus Christ is the only means
of Salvation.
These are the Truths to be embraced.
III. Come we now to the Duties to be practised.
1 Upon a serious apprehension of thy miserable condition
without Christ, labour to stirre up in thy soul some affectionate,

longing, restless desires after the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou
maist in truth from thine heart, say, Oh that Christ were
mine! oh that upon any terms my Soul might enjoy him. This is the
lifting up of the doors and gates of the Soul, that so the King of
glory my enter in, and dwell there.
2 Being convinced that there is no way or means of Salvati|on,
but only by going out of thy self unto Jesus, and casting thy self
upon him; Adventure thy soul upon Christ, cast thy self into his
arms, and be sure thou give not way to carnal reasonings, to
doubtings and temptations from the number and hainousness of
thy sins, or from thine unworthiness, but reason from the entent
and freeness of Gods offer of Christ, and from Christs willing|ness
to receive all poor Sinners that will but adventure their souls
upon him, saying with Iob, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in
him,Est. 4. 16 Job 13, 15. and with Ester, I will go; if I perish, I perish; I
will perish trusting upon Jesus Christ.
3 Diligently frequent the publick Ministery of the Word,Rom. 10. 14, 17 it
being the ordinary means God hath sanctified for the working of
faith in our hearts, according to that of the Apostle, Faith cometh
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. And the hearing of
the Gospel, is called the hearing of faith,Gal. 3. 2 because by hearing the
Doctrin of Faith, the Spirit works the grace of faith in our
hearts. This is the still Voyce in which he speaks to the hearts of
Sinners; and when God by his Spirit doth begin to work upon
thine heart in the hearing of the Word, doe thou second the
work of Gods Spirit, by oft meditating thereon, and applying it
unto thy self more and more. And whensoever any sin is pressed
home upon thy Conscience by the Minister, and awakens thee,
labour to drive the nayl home to the head, strive to maintain the
power of it upon thine heart all the week after.
4 Be earnest with God in Prayer, that whatsoever he denieth
thee, he would not deny thee the saving grace of faith;Ephes. 2. 8 Faith is
not of our selves, it is the free gift of God, as the Apostle teacheth
us. Now the means God hath sanctified for the obtaining of e|very
good gift, is Prayer; As therefore thou desirest faith, ear|nestly
begge it of God, resting assured that he will not deny thee,
if thou dost from thy heart ask it in the name of his Son Jesus
Christ.Joh. 16. 23 Oh therefore be not wanting to thy self herein, but see|ing
faith may be had for asking, ask and ask again; and with pa|tience
wait upon God for the inclining thine heart to close with

the tenders and offers of Jesus Christ. Prescribe him not any time,
for as hee worketh on whom hee pleaseth, so hee worketh when
hee pleaseth;Hab. 2. 3 and therefore though he tarry, wait; for God ne|ver
failed any that continued to wait on him, but at length hee sa|tisfied
the longing desire of their souls.
FINIS.





