




THE
Grand Pyrate:
Or, the
LIFE and DEATH
OF
Capt. GEORGE CVSACK
The great Sea-Robber. WITH
An Accompt of all his notorious Robberies both at
Sea and Land. TOGETHER
With his TRYAL, CONDEMNATION, and
EXECVTION.
Taken by an Impartial Hand.
Licensed Novemb. 19. 1675. Roger L'Estrange.
LONDON,
Printed for Ionathan Edwin at the Sign of the Three
Roses in Ludgate-street. MDCLXXVI.








THE
GRAND PIRATE,
Or the LIFE and DEATH of
Captain GEORGE CUSACK.
_THE World hath been long en|tertained
with Accounts of High|way-men
and Land-Robbers, but
Piracies and Sea-Robbers being
for the most part either under the
guard  protection of some States,
that avowedly drive this infam|ous
Traffick, as they of Algiers
and Salley do, or on the pretence
of a Commission from some Prince engaged in a War
with his Neighbours; therefore it is hoped that the fol|lowing
Account shall be received and read generally,
since it contains some of the passages of the most signal
Sea-Robber, that perhaps this Age hath known, who en|courag'd
with success, did with a most daring boldness,
drive that cursed Trade for 15 years, and not daunted

with one misfortune, continued and improved in his vil|lainous
course of life, till at length this Captain George
Cusack (for that was his name) was taken, and being
found guilty of unparallell'd Crimes, was put to death at
the Execution Dock on Monday the Eighteenth of Ia|nuary,
1674. according to the Sentence past upon him.
GEorge Cusack Son to one Mr. Cusack of Granstowen
in the County of East-Meath in Ireland, was bred
a Scholar and a Roman Catholick, and was disposed by
his Parents for a Fryer, but the wildness of his youth
not agreeing with a Religious Life, made him first rob
his nearest Kinsman Mr. Benedict Arthur of Sixty pounds
and his Watch within two Miles of Dublin in the year
53; after which he went to serve as a private Souldier
in Flanders, but the severity of that Discipline not a|greeing
with his looser temper, he did betake himself
to Sea-Service in several Privateers, where he continu|ed
for some time in a private capacity; but after frequent
removals, his first Rise was to the degree of a Gunners
Mate aboard of Captain North, in a Voyage to Guinney;
where being very mutinous, and usual punishments not
being able to keep him in order, his Captain put him
aboard the Gift Frigate, Captain Reynolds Commander,
in whom he sayled to Barbadoes; and after his return
entred himself a Midship-man aboard Sir Edward Spragge:
by whom being employed as a Press-Master in the for|mer
Dutch War, amongst many others he prest one that
was in the hands of the Bayliffs, taken by them upon
Execution, and carried him clear away; for which and
for being a grand Mutineer, he was afterward seized,
and committed a Prisoner to the Marshalsey for some
moneths.
But at last being set at liberty, and having resolutions

to raise himself by any sinister wayes, and determining
to surprize and run away with the first good Ship he
could get employment in, it so happened, that in the
year 1668. being at Cadiz in Spain, he was entertained
as Gunner aboard the Hopewell of Tangier, Captain Lam|bert
Bartholomew Welters Commander, a Vessel of about
250 Tuns, and 24 Guns, bound from Tangier to Vir|ginia,
and richly laden, who sayling from Cadiz the se|cond
of September, and the next day springing a Leak,
thereupon by the general opinion of Officers aboard,
it was thought best to put in at the Grand Canares to
stop it, where meeting with contrary winds, they con|strained
them to make more Southerly. Upon the Eighth
of October following at One of the Clock in the Morning,
being in 24 Degrees and about 40 Minutes Northern
Latitude, and about 220 English Leagues Westward
from erre, the said George Cusack, with one Richard
Parslow, one of the Mates or Pilots, and several others
of their Confederates, having privately armed them|selves,
fell upon the Watches, and by violence seized
the said Captain Lambert, Thomas Power Merchant and
Supercargo of the said Vessel, Daniel Gilson chief Mate,
together with the Boatswain, Carpenter, Butler, and se|veral
others, having first through the great Cabbin door
shot the Cabbin-Boy through the Thigh, and the Car|penter
upon the Deck through the Buttock, whom they
also wounded in the Arm, together with the Boatswain,
all whom this Cusack commanded unto the Round-house,
placing Guards over them, where they apprehended e|very
minute to be murdered and thrown over-board;
at last he hawled out the small Boat of tht Ship, and by
violence forced into the Boat Captain Lambert, with
the chief Mate, the wounded Carpenter, the Butler
with three Seamen more, whom he exposed to the mer|cy

of the Ocean, denying them the Long-boat, though
they begged it upon their knees, without giving any
reason for so inhumane an action, or having any pro|vocation
thereunto.
The said Thomas Power being commanded out of the
Round-house with the rest, observing the said Cusack
to be the principal Conspirator, desired to speak a few
words with him before he was put off, who replied, God
damme, what you have to say, say quickly; whereupon the
said Power desired him to Pistol him there, rather than
to expose him to the mercy of the Sea, for he had rather
dye a sudden death, than a certain lingering one; but
withall told him, he conceiv'd he had a better way for
the saving of his life, for a day or two might be of use
to him till he had taken an accompt of the Ships Cargo, 
how she was stored with Water and Provision, which
having done, he might Pistol him, or throw him over|board
at pleasure. Upon which the said Cusack forth|with
commanded the said Power into the great Cabbin,
under the command of two Musquetiers, straitly char|ging
them upon pain of death to shoot him if he spoke
to any man. The Boat being fired at by a small shot out
of the Gun-room by one Edward Barry, and forced away,
Cusack together with arow, the same day broke open
Captain Lambert's Chests, and there divided betwixt
them all the Goods and Money in equal proportion,
together with all the things of value belonging to Cap|tain
Lambert in the great Cabbin, declaring their reso|lution
of running away with the Ships and Cargo, and
of taking or sinking all Ships or Vessels they should meet
with belonging to any Nation, English only excepted:
promising to all persons aboard that joyned with them,
their proportion and shares of the Ship and Cargo; to|gether
with all other Ships they should afterwards take

or surprize, according to the Lawes of Pleron: to which
end he ordered to be drawn up in Writing an Obliga|tion
to himself as Captain, and the said Parslow as Lieu|tenant,
expressing the Resolutions of the Subscribers up|on
their Oaths to live and die with them in this their
present design, to which there subscribed one Thomas
Carre alias Richardson, formerly Gunners Mate, whom
he now made Master; one Nathanael Estan alias Hillon,
whom he made Masters Mate, Moses White made Boat|swain;
thirteen Servants (who all voluntarily entered
themselves upon the said Voyage for Virginia) together
with most of the Seamen, many of them not daring to
refuse. The persons names not subscribing nor consent|ing
being Iohn Samuel the former Boatswain, sore woun|ded;
Iacob Marrelly the Chirurgion, Leonard Cornelly
the Carpenters Mate, Iacob Cornelly the chief Boy, with
three other Cabbin Boys, and Benjamin Wilbius servant
to the said Thomas Power. All whom they forced along
with them. The persons unwillingly or constrained|ly
subscribing the Writings were, Thomas Wildsmith,
Serjeant Andrew Mattes, and one Clark of Tangier Sea-men.
After the seizure of the Ship he possessed himself
of all Letters and Writings relating to the Voyage, as
well belonging to Captain Lambert, as also those in the
possession of Thomas Power, except three Papers onely
which Power hath concealed and reserved, almost all
which he threw over board, lest any of them should
discover his Piratical proceedings, and could not be per|swaded
to save a great large Bible that constantly lay
upon the great Cabbin Table, from the mercy of the
Waves, which whiles some of his own Crew endeavour|ed
to perswade him to, he replyed, You Cowards, what
do you think to go to Heaven and do such Actions as these?
No, I will make you Officers in Hell under me; and with that

threw the Bible out at the great Cabbin window, saying
Go thou thy way Divinity, what have we to do with thee
Upon which he presently altered his Course, and set Say
for Guinney, intending there to convert the Cargo into
Gold; in ten days time he run into fourteen Degrees
and a half of Northern Latitude, but not being able to
find the Cape de Verde Islands, and being ignorant whe|ther
he was to Windward or Leeward of any of them,
and not having above a months fresh Water, he deter|mined
to Sayle full West, in hopes either of falling in
with some of the Islands, or at worst to have the advan|tage
of a Trade Wind for Barbadoes, where he arrived
the fourth of November following; during this passage,
as also before, he often sollicited Thomas Power to close
with him in his design, profering him not only his own
goods, but the moyety of the Cargo besides, which
Power refusing, wrought in Cusack such a jealousie of him,
heightned with the discontents of his Confederates, that
it was daily expected when Power should be murdered,
and thrown over-board, being judged the only person
that was in a capacity of discovering their piratical pro|ceedings.
The Boat with seven men forced to Sea, be|ing
concluded without fail lost, this merry Crew of|ten
drunk to them in Hell, though indeed they had
more reason to conclude it nearer to themselves,
which they were far enough from having any appre|hension
of, witness their daily Song, and their drunken
bouts, which was

HANG sorrow, let's cast away care,
the World is bound to find us:
Thou and I, and all must die,
And leave this World behind us.
The Bell shall ring, the Clark shall sing,
The Good old Wife shall wind us.
The Sexton shall lay our Bodies in Clay
Where the Devil in Hell shall find us.

In this passage she espied a Sayl to Windward, to
whom she gave chase some hours, supposing it to be a
Portuguize from Brazile, whom they intended to make
a prize of, but were out-sayled by her, before their ar|rival
at Barbadoes, where they determined to touch and
sell for ready money, as much of the Cargo as they could,
as also to carry as many men as they could get. They
forced Power to draw up several Articles of their own
dictating, to prevent the discovery of the Vessel, which
they had likewise altered all they could, and now cal|led
her the Valiant Prince, pretending her to belong to
Dublin, from whence she was freighted to Cadiz, laden
with loose Pipe-staves,c. by Cusack, Barshow, and o|thers;
and that there she invested the produce of her
Goods in the present Cargo aboard, and was bound
for Iamaica, and so back for Dublin; and that she hath
lost her Boat at Sea in foul weather with seven men in it;
when she sprung a Leak, that she touch't there to take
in fresh Water, and to stop her Leak only: which pre|tences
being proclaimed at the Main-mast, it was decla|red
present Death to every man that gave out other|wise;
with Order to sayl forthwith.
At Carl Bay the Fourth of November, they saluted
the Fort with seven Guns, who returned one: without
touching, they keep their Course for Speights Bay, where
they hoped to Treat with more privacy and security;
but before they arrived there, a Sloop with the Kings
Jack and Ancient out, was making after them; Cusacks

Vessel lay by for her, and upon her coming up, invited
her Boat aboard, who examined Cusack whence he was,
and whither bound, who answered as formerly agreed
on. The Boat left one Thomas Fox aboard to bring him
to an Anchor in Speights Bay, who immediately acquain|ted
Cusack with the safe arrival of the Boat,  the seven
men in her that he pretended he had lost at Sea, and
that if he touch't there, my Lord Willoughby would pre|sently
seize him; that Captain Lambert had acquainted
my Lord with all particulars; and that there was a
Privateer setting out, that was ordered to pursue and
retake him; that the said Fox knew his design, and re|solved
to live and die with him. Upon which Informa|tion
Cusack called for a Pistol, and also Parslow fired at
the small Boat of the Sloop, but neither going off, the
Sloop steered away, which Cusack repented he had not
either sunk, or forcibly carried away with him.
From thence he immediately resolved for Martinico
a French Island, and about eleven a Clock the same
night he was overtaken by a small Vessel manned out
by my Lord Willoughby; who being to Windward, and
within shot of Cusack, he fired about eleven Guns at
her; upon which the Vessel immediately tacked and
returned without firing a Gun; the next Day being
betwixt Sancta Lucia and Martinico, and being be|calmed
towards the Evening, he espied a Katch ply|ing
to Windward, which he made towards all he could,
but night coming on, he haled out and manned his
Long-Boat with twelve men, whom he doubly armed,
and commanded them to Board and take her whatso|ever
she was; the Long-Boat haling her, received this
account, That she belonged to Flushing, and was bound
to Sirenam, and desired them to keep off; upon which
they durst not attempt her: but Cusack by this time

coming up (the Katch not altering her Course) hailes
her himself, being within Musquet shot, and commands
her to Strike, otherwise he would sink her; but recei|ving
no answer, he fired about ten Guns at her, besides
some Small-shot, thinking himself sure of her; but in
half an hours time she got the Windward and escaped;
but what damage is uncertain.
The Eighth of November being Sunday, by break of
day, with the King's Iack and Ancient out he came to
an Anchor, betwixt the Town of Martinico and Carbat,
giving himself out for a Man of War, bound from Lon|don
to Iamaica; that he intended to touch at, but had
missed Barbadoes, and wanting Water and Wood touch|ed
there to supply himself, which all the men aboard
were then to give out upon pain of Death. With these
pretences he sent his Boat ashore to the Fort, in which
returned aboard with him one Mr. Blake an English|man,
pretending himselfe an Interpreter, with two
English-men more, and some French, who acquainted
him, that the Governour was at Carbat at Church; and
that it was both customary for others, and would be ne|cessary
for him to kiss his hands; assuring him of all
fair accommodation there. Upon their importunity, to+gether with the invitation of the Captain of the Guard
(by whom he sent the said Governour a large Looking-Glass as a Present) he was prevailed with to go ashore,
and presently commanded with him Thomas Power: the
Church being near the Sea-side, and their Service then
ended, the Governour Monsier la Bier (with many fol|lowers)
meets Cusac, who discoursed with him in French:
Power it seems conceiving there was then before him a
most fit Opportunity, not only to discover the piratical
proceedings of Cusack, but to recover the Vessel and
Cargo, and bring the Pirates to condigne punishment,

acquaints the Governour with the sum and substance of
what has been here related touching the Ship in the pre|sence
of Cusack, which was interpreted to him by the
Black in the presence and hearing of two or three En|glish-men
more and many French, desiring the Gover|nour
that he would secure Cusack, with the Boats Crew
(who all alledged their Vessel a Man of War, and Power
only a Passenger, whom they were to deliver at Iamai|ca,
to which they were all ready to give their Oaths)
Power profering to make good the Truth of his accusa|tion
with his Life, and for the better satisfaction of the
Governor, then produced the Orders and Instructions of
his Principals, together with his Letter of Attorney, and
Captain Lambert's General Bill of Lading, signed with
his own hand, (which Papers, it seems, Power had pri|vately
secured) desiring they might be read; but Mon|sieur
la Bier would neither suffer them to be read, nor
secure Cusack, nor protect Power, nor send for other Te|stimonies
from aboard, though he was earnestly entrea|ted
to do it; only ordered Power to draw up in writing
what he had to charge Cusack with, and he would give
him a farther hearing: Power not being believed, and
being forced to shift for himself, Cusack with what men
he could get makes haste aboard; and not daring to stay
to weigh his Anchor, cuts his Cable the same night, and
stands off to Sea, and the next Morning early sends his
Boat ashore doubly arm'd to Leeward of the Town,
and Waters and Woods by force, or at least by private
connivence.
From thence he makes for Mountserrat, where he and
the rest of his Confederates being under the sense of their
own guilt, and knowing themselves fully discovered;
endeavoured to piece up a kind of agreement with the
Governour Colonel Stapleton, but not daring to trust
themselves under his power, and being informed that my

Lord Willoughby was then upon his way for England, and
intended to visit and strengthen the Leeward Islands in
his passage, he withdrew himself to a small Island called
Anguilla, where the Governour Captain Howel (being
informed of their villany, by the dispersed intelligence of
Power) upon his coming ashore seized him and his Boats
Crew, the particulars whereof you have here exposed to
your perusal as it was taken out of Cusacks own Journal,
under his own hand-writing, by which you may not only
discover the nature of the man, but from thence experi|ence
how custom in sin begets in some men an opinion
of the lawfulness of their actions, though never so crimi|nal,
villainous or injurious.
December the 9th. 1668. I went ashore, says he, with
five men to look after six men that runn'd from the Ship,
and some five miles in the Country after I drunk a little
Molby at Captain Hews, one Roch comes in and told me
that two Dutchmen run away with the Boat, and hear|ing
this I arose to go away, and stept some 40 or 50 paces
from the House, they told me if I went any further I was
a dead man, then I did suppose I was betrayed; then
came one suddenly and profered to lay hold on me, think|ing
that I had nothing but my Cane, with that I pull'd
out a Pocket Pistol and bid him stand off; and so came
through two of their ambushes, meeting in my way one
of their Lieutenants, called Lieutenant Derrick, whom I
trust in amongst the rest of his consorts in the wood,
and so going along until my wearied leggs missing the
path-way were forced into the woods, where they were
sufficiently torn, till at last being very dry with such un|satiable
thirst, I found a puddle of rain water which con|tained
to the value of a pint betwixt two Rocks, sharing
to every one his portion, we marched further, and being

troubled with the former thirst, we spied a House in the
wilderness but the place a little plainer, where I espied a
woman big with child, fearing to fright the woman we
asked for some water which she tendred to us at our re|quest,
and withall taking notice of our wearied limbs to
be scarce able to sustain our bodies treated me with a civil
entertainment in her house, which was a Cup of cold
water, being at that present more welcome to me than
Gold, there I stayed for two hours to revive my thirsty
soul which breathed for air, after this little space of time
comes one Iohn Merideth, and one Bedhell, both Merchants
who courted me to yield upon terms, and deliver my
Sword and Pistols to them, and the Governour should do
the same, to which I did give consent being unable to live
in those solitary and rather venemous woods, where Mir|wings
Musculers sting'd us as bad as Wasps, then honour
was forced to yield to unworthiness, for as assoon as the
Governor (or rather a Swine driver) had spied my Rapier
in one of those Gentlemens hands he forced him to deli|ver
my Rapier and Pistols, and this finished, till the next
day following he summonned me again, and I delivered
my self up upon conditions that I should have all my
cloathes and moneys belonging unto me in the Ship. But
what could I expect of a rebellious and unworthy Ban|dida
which never did familiar himself with men, but
with wild goats in those woods, he left me with one sute of
cloaths and one shirt to my back, continuing among
those Satyrs from the eighth day to the fifteenth, to requite
my former kindness sent up with me two more, the Boat|swain
and another, all three in Irons, down a Shallops
hold, denying me only to breath in the Hatch-way, as if
that I had perpetrated the greatest murder in the world,
which was a great vexation to my Spirit, which with great
courage being never inferiour to any, overcame this
villainous action with patience.
It would be too tedious to insert here the havock that was
made of the Ship and Cargo and Stores, with the hard
usage of Captain Lambert, and the Supercargo Power,
the design of this Paper being only to pursue the life and
action of Cusack who from hence was sent up in Irons to
Barbado's where being committed to the Marshals Cu|stody,
and afterwards to the Common-Goal, he with se|veral
other Felons broke Prison, and seizing upon an
empty. Boat ventured to Sea, and touching at an In|dian
Island or two to refresh themselves got down to
Tartodos a French Island, where being arrived he met
with an opportunity of surprizing another Ship to a grea|ter
value, the Particulars whereof you have as followeth.
A Frigat of 250 Tuns and 28 Guns mounted, called
the Saint Ioseph, belonging to David Godfry of Lisbon
Merchant, and others his partners then residing at Rochel,
being laden with Campeach Wood, Varenus Tobacco, Coco,
and other Merchandize to the value of 125000 pieces
of Eight, whereof 20000 were in ready money, and being
ready to sail in the Month of March 1669. whereof one
Peter Asdel was Captain, and Stephen Goliard Merchant
or Supercargo; who considering the hazard the Ship and
Cargo might run by the Spanish Men of War in those parts,
who make prize of all Ships but their own betwixt the
Tropick, thought it convenient for the better security of
the Ship to strengthen her with as many men as they could
conveniently get, and amongst many others unfortunately
received aboard George Cusack and his Fellows, who ha|ving
now been used and pretty well experimented in the
Trade of surprizing, and having before-hand contrived
and agreed upon their designed Treachery, the First of A|pril
following being the same night of their departure, they

fell upon the Master and Merchant, and the rest of the
French aboard being 27 in number, whom having maste|red
and secured in the Hold, they immediately set Sayl
for Carthagine, and there exposed them to the mercy of
the Spaniards their sore enemies without any relief or
maintenance in a most miserable condition, where they
remained 17 Months in close Imprisonment; he and his
followers in the mean time making for New-England, con|clude
they might now pass with more security and out of
fear of discovery, the proprietors being in no condition to
pursue them or disperse Intelligence concerning the fact;
during this passage we may reasonably conclude their car|riage
and behaviour was not much different from that of
their former, if we consider only the new name they gave
the second Piratical purchase, calling her now by the
name of the Flying Devil, as indeed she might be so term|ed,
as having none but Devils aboard her; however
though the wind that fills Pyrats Sayls does in no case
justifie their actions, they shortly after arrived safely up|on
the Coasts of New-England, where in a short time they
disposed of the Cargo of their Vessel, and afterwards
burnt the Hull, as will appear more particularly by the en|suing
Letter from thence.

Boston, N. E. Decemb. 23. 1673.
Mr. GEORGE NEVIL,
SIR, Yours by Mr. Tirry I received, and should have
been glad without the recommendation of our Kinsman
upon that common account of Courtesie and assistance, that the
course of Commerce and obligations of humanity is due to
strangers to have opportunities and means to have answered

your request; but as I was at Rochel when the Pyrat Cusack
came into these parts, so I cannot particularly as quaint you
with his negotiations here; but since my return home by proen|rations
from Mr. Bossereao an Agent from Rochel, I have
been put upon enquiry after the concernment you recommended
to me, and find that the Iurisdiction under which I live, viz.
the Colonie, never countenanced the importation of any of his
Commodities, but upon penalty of forfeiture interdicted the
same, however some of the inhabitants of this place, and persons
of considerable interest and estates concerned themselves with
the person that purchased the Cargo, and landed and disposed
of the same in the Colonie of New-Plimouth, and also
made purchase of the Ship, and in exchange furnished the Py|rate
with a small vessel or two to transport himself  Comrades,
and upon consider ation that the Frigat was not worth setting
to Sea or not worthy to drink any other water, the Artillery,
Ammunition, Sayles and Furniture being secured they burnt
the bottom. I understand that the common people of the Co|lony
manifested agreat dissatisfaction at the concernment of
those that interested themselves, also that the authority resented
the same, and took security from one Dominick Bodkin an
Irish man, the principal correspondent with Cusack, to respond
the claims of such as were concerned in the said Ship, and should
in a year and a day prosecute the same; but the said term be|ing
elapsed and no demand made, his Bonds became void, and
he by the improving of what his profit was there, is become ve|ry
considerable, and this year hath been here with a very rich
Cargo; and had the order you intimate met him, it might possi|bly
have prevailed for some competent satisfaction; the Magi|strates
and People hearing a general displacency against those
that were concerned, but him in particular, as being the only and
immediate Agent; he is gone hence for Virginia and thence is
intended for Flanders, with at least a 1000 Hogs heads of To|bacco
in two Ships upon his imployment; and in regard his

success here hath been so good, 'tis probable he may come here a|gain.
Hereby your self or friends may know how to govern
their expectations, and wherein I may serve you or them I shall
be ready to assure you I am
Your faithful friend and servant, Richard Wharton.

Cusack having thus altered the property both of Ves|sel
and goods, and being no doubt plentifully stored both
with monies and rich goods, his insatiate desire still thirst|ing
after more, he could not forbear enlarging his own
share, though with the loss of several of his own Crew,
who being big with expectations of their proportions of
the whole product, and being resolved to be more than
ordinarily merry ashore, at parting he gives them a small
sum of money to that purpose, and whilst they were in
the height of their merriment, he with the rest of his
Countrymen and principal Confederates make all the Sail
they could, leaving their Fellows as empty of their hopes,
as full of their liquor, a pleasant but not sufficient reward
for such villains. Hence he steers his course for Ireland,
and though report gives an accompt of some small depre|dations
he was guilty of in his way thither, yet I am
unwilling to trouble the Reader with matters of uncer|tainty,
his whole life being a series of continued Vil|lainies,
of which there are too many and too true in|stances.
Being therefore arrived in Ireland, and having dispo|sed
of the product of his ill gotten purchases as he thought
most convenient, and that the might follow his old trade
with less suspicion, he provides himself with an old
Greenland Shallop, and with others of his Crew putting

to Sea, in Saint George his Channel, they meet with a
Malligo Ship of Twenty four Guns, fraighted by own Mr.
Fleming, and bound for Glasco in Scotland, whom
they made towards all they could, and coming up with
her pretended themselves to be Shipwrackt men, and
were ready to starve for want of sustenance, the Captain
out of pitty received them aboard as distressed men, and
having plentifully relieved them with all things necessa|ry,
little expecting so sad a return of his kindness, they
according to their wonted custom seized the Vessel, and
carried her for Galloway in Ireland, where they dispo|sed
of her and her Cargo, and sent the Captain and his
men in the Greenland Shallop to the mercy of the Seas,
who by Gods providence got the English shores.
But now his many and frequent Piracies having ren|dred
him notorious in those Seas, he thought it most safe to
retire himself for some time within land, and to that end
having provided himself with Horses, he associates him|self
with a Company of Tories, and after many robberies,
he could not forbear falling upon the House of one Willi|am
Chanvelly a Quaker, for which some Months after he
was apprehended and committed to Prison in Dublin,
where putting in Bail for his appearance the Term fol|lowing,
in the interim he made for England, acquaint|ing
his Bail that he was gone thither to endeavor to pro|cure
his pardon, which if he obtained he would then re|turn
in certain weeks, otherwise he must shift for him|self.
After his private abode in England for some time, he
went over for Holland, where prying to and again for some
advantage, and pretending to have deserted the French
Service, and that he intended for England, having se|veral
associates along with him he became acquainted

with one Simon Harcourt, who was taken on by one Mr.
Calhoon owner of the Ship Robert, for Master of that Ship
upon a Voyage to Newcastle, with whom confederating
for the surprize of the Vessel, they accordingly effected
their design as particularly appears by the depositions
following.



Edward Creswel of London-derry maketh Oath, that
about the first day of July last past, being aboard the
Ship, called the Robert, one Mr. Calhoone being
owner, the said Ship being bound from Amsterdam to
Newcastle, one Symon Harcourt being Master, did
take in one Smith, alias Dixon, alias Cusack, with se|veral
others of the said Cusacks Companions, pretend|ing
them selves to be passengers, and the said Ship being
at Sea, this Deponent did often observe the said Har|court
and Cusack and the rest of the pretended Pas|sengers
whispering together, which gave this Depo|nent
cause to believe, that the said Harcourt and Cu|sack,
and the rest of his pretended Passengers, did
intend to surprize and seize the said Ship; soon after
one of Cusacks Companions (this Deponent being a|sleep)
came to him with a Sword drawn in his hand,
and did awake this Deponent striking him over the
face with the flat of his Sword, and calling him Dog,
Swearing several Oaths, using the Deponent in a very
ill manner, and said the Ship was their own, and that
they seized her by Vertue of a French Commission, and
afterward came up with three Ships, two Swedes, and
one Dane, and Robb'd them, leaving them not so much
as Victuals to maintain them for Twenty four Hours,
having taken their Sails, Cables and Anchors, leaving
them to the mercy of the Sea, and one Main-Sail; and
having begged on their knees for their Fore-Sail, and

Anchor, in a passion they let their Water go out of their
Casks which was more dear to them than their Victuals,
he bidding them go, the Devil would furnish them with
Sails and Anchors; this Deponent having humbly
begged for a Sute of his own Cloaths, after all being taken
from him but his Shirt and his Drawers, Cusack with
his Sword drawn caused him to leap over board, and if
the Danes Boat had not been near, (whom they had
Robb'd) this Deponent had been drowned; and this
Deponent further maketh Oath that they took out of
the said Swede Ship, a parcel of Dollars to the value of
1000. as this Deponent on Oath believes, with much
other Merchant goods; It was made out upon Oath by
the Master of the said Swede Ship, before the Council
of Elsenore, that he did take out of the said Ship all the
Victuals and Water, excepting half a Barrel of Water
and a little broken Bisquet, and left them but with one
Sail and one Anchor, and that the said Ship was left
to the mercy of the Sea, having fourteen days Sailing
to Elsenore.

Jurat. the 22 day of September, 1674.
coram me,
Ma. Bramston.




Being possessed of the Vessel, soon after that he sei|zed
another Ship called the Saint Anne of 500 Tuns,
bound from Norway to London with Timber and Deals,
chiefly belonging to Captain Shorter of the Bank-side;
and at the same time seized an old Fly-Boat belonging
to a Dane, which after having plundred and taken a|way
her Fore-sayl, with one Anchor and a Cable, and
utterly disabled her, he put the men into her that be|longed
to the Saint Anne, and turned her adrift, whom
it pleased God, after much hazzard and hardship, to
send safe ashore near Yarmouth; but he immediatly say|led

with the Saint Anne to Aberdeen in Scotland, where
(having disposed of parcel of her loading by the way)
he sold her and her remaining loading for betwixt 2 and
3 hundred pound, though she was esteemed worth about
three thousand pound: after which he came to the Thames,
and had the confidence to come to an Anchor betwixt
the Forts at Gravesend, where he continued two nights
and a day; but not finding himself secure there, he re|tired
to Lee-Road, where he lay nine days before any
discovery was made of him; but notice being given to
one Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy, (who was the man that
took him) by the Owner of the Ship Robert of her sur|prize,
and Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy receiving inti|mation
of her being at Lee, obtained a Warrant for her
apprehension from the Court of Admiralty, which was
accordingly executed, as appears by the following De|position.



James Dalton of Saint Giles in the Fields, in the County
of Middlesex, maketh Oath, that he this Deponent
on the twenty fourth of August last came to Lee with
Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy, about ten of the Clock in
the Evening, and the said Colonel Kennedy then ha|ving
a Warrant from the Iudge of the Admiralty to
seize a Ship called the Robert, this Deponent then
knowing her to be a Robber or Pirate, for he sailed in
her when she belonged to one Mr. Calhoone the right
Owner, and was on board her when she was surprised
by Captain Cusack, alias Smith, alias Dixon, who
then came as a Passenger in her from Amsterdam a|bout
June last; about four Leagues from the Fly, the
said Smith, alias Dixon, alias Cusack, seized the said
Ship; and a few hours after came up with three Ships,
viz. two Swedes and one Dane, and robbed them of

their Sayls, Anchors, Merohandize, and Provisio,
leaving nothing but one Sayl and Anchor to each and
left them to the mercy of God and the Sea, and 
into Alford Creek, and sold the Plunder there, this
Deponent being then one of the Ships Company; all
which this Deponent in formed the Iustice of in the pre|sence of the said Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy whe
they came to him with the Warrant of Admiralty to
seize the said Ship: and further, that he was a noto|rious
and desperate person, he cared at what he did.
And this Deponent too then desired the said Iustice to
be very careful of the Prisoners which he had on 
out of the Ship, for they would use all violent and de|sperate
means to carry off the said Ship, their lives
being at stake: and the said Iustice replyed, they were
all honest men, the Ship should not be taken away, he
would secure it, which he said in presence of Colonel
Kennedy and one Mr. Dermot and others; notwith|standing
that the said Iustice did say, that he had a
suspicion of them the next Morning after the Ship
came.

Jurat. 18. die Septemb. 1674.
Coram me,
Ma. Bramston.




The said Ship-Robber being thus secured at Lee, and
his Sayls brought ashore, and secured there also, Cusack
at the same time being absent upon new designs for
more purchase, but hearing how things went, makes all
the haste he could to Lee, where he and his Comrades
partly by force, and partly by connivence, repossest
themselves of Ship and Sayls, and turned the man ashore
that was in possession of her; Colonel Kennedy then
being with the Judge of the Admiralty for a special

Warrant: which being obtained, he returned with one
of his Majesties Yachts, and Mr. Ioynes the Marshal of
the Admiralty, who pursued the said Vessel, and found
her at Anchor near the Essex-shore, waiting for more of
their Comrades to come aboard. When Cusack saw the
Kings Yacht and Colours, he would have engaged, but
his men would not: he being on the Deck with a Pistol
in each hand, swore God dam him that he should be hanged,
which was to the great grief and loss of many a Merchant,
that his Oath was not sooner kept, and to the good of o|thers
so soon, leaving his Ship plentifully victualled with
fresh Meat; for he and his Crew the two Nights they
were gone had stolen a number of Sheep from Essex, ac|cording
to their wonted custom, whereof some killed,
some alive were found aboard: he was constrained with
the rest to submit himself a Prisoner, and from thence
was brought and committed to the Marshalsey in South|wark.
It now remains, that I give you an Account of the Try|al
and Sentence of this famous Pirate, which cannot
be better taken than from the Accompt then, which
followeth.







AN
Exact Narrative
OF THE
TRYALS
OF THE
PYRATS:
AND
All the PROCEEDINGS at the late Goal-Delivery
of the Admiralty, Held in the Old-Bayly, on
Thursday and Saturday, the 7th and 9th of Ian. 1674/5. WHERE
Eight Persons were Condemned to dye. Viz.

Capt. George Cusack, alias
Dixon, alias Smith.
Gerrard Coundon.
William Collingwood.
Gerrard Stack.
Henry Lovewell.
Symon Harcourt.
Michael Fitz-Gerald.
For taking, and Robbing Two Ships, viz. the Robert, near
the Fly: And the Anne on the Dogger-Sands; With
several others. And many other Circumstances there very Remarkable: The
like Court having not been held for many years before.
Printed in the Year, 1675.






AN EXACT
NARRATIVE
OF THE
Tryals of the Pyrats;
AND
All the PROCEEDINGS at the late Goal-Delivery
of the Admiralty; Held in the Old-Baily,
on Thursday, and Saturday, the 7th and
9th of Ianuary, 1674/5.
CAptain George Cusack, sometimes called
Dixon, and at other times Smith, with se|veral
of his Confederates, having been de|tained
above Six Months Prisoners in the
Marshalses, in order to their Tryals:
Which at last was appointed to be on Thursday the 7th
of Ianuary Instant, at Iustice-Hall in the Old-Baily, as a
Place most convenient for that purpose. But this

Captain, being it seems Conscious to his own Merits,
and apprehensive of the Danger; on Munday before
in the Night-time, broke Prison; Getting first down
a Chimney into a lower Chamber, and then by a
Rope into a Garden, and so Cleverly made his Escape:
And could not be heard of till this very Thursday, just
as the Court was going to sit.
At which time, Diligent Enquiry having been
made all wayes, and Rewards promised for his Disco|very;
News came, That there was notice of him at
a certain House towards the Upper end of Holbourn.
Where immediately after he was taken in Bed with
a Woman; who was brought along with him, forth|with
to the Old-Baily, and was by some reported to be
his Sister. The other Prisoners were brought over
the Water with a strong Guard.
The Court was held by a Special Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, and Goal-Delivery, directed to
Honourable Persons of the Court of Admiralty; and
several of his Majesties Justices of the Courts at West|minster,
c. A Silver Oar was born before the Iudge
of the Admiralty; And Three Anchors put upon a
Cloth above the Kings-Arms, over the Bench.
The Judge after the Commission read, gave his
Charge to the Grand-Inquest, in an Excellent Ora|tion,
acquainting them with his Majestie's Right of
Soveraignty over the British Seas; even to the very
Shoars of his Neighbours. That they have alwayes
been accounted, The Royal Chambers of our English
Monarchs: Whose Jurisdiction extends to punish all
Outrages, Violences and Offences whatsoever, com|mitted
thereupon, by any persons, (whether his Sub|jects,
or Strangers,) upon Ships, Persons, or Goods, of
our own Nation; or others in Amity with us. Then

he shewed the heynousness of the Crime of Pyracy;
That it was against the Law of Nations; Destructive to
Commerce: and therefore particularly branded by our
English Laws, by being excepted out of the benefit of
Clergy; allowed in other cases. Dividing the Of|fences
he had to give them in Charge, as the subjects
of their Enquiry at this time, into things against the
Statute Law; and things contrary to the Laws, Customs
and Usages of the Admiralty. On each of which, he
particularly enlarged. And amongst other things,
declared the Ceremony of the Flagg, to be our King's
Indubitable Right; whereby all Ships whatsoever, in
those Seas, are bound to strike to those of his Majestie's,
where ever they meet them: And that all that refuse
so to do, are severely punishable by the Laws of the
Admiralty, c.
Immediately after this, Six Prisoners were brought
to the Barr, viz. George Cusack, William Coundon, Ger|rard
Stack, Symon Harcourt, Henry Lovewell, and Wil|liam
Collingwood; Who were Indicted, For that on the
Third day of Iuly last past, they Pyratically, and Fe|loniously
did set upon a Ship called the Robert, near a
place called the Fly, on the Coasts of Holland. And by
another Indictment, That they had Feloniously stoll'n se|veral
Goods out of another Ship, whose name to the Iurours
was unknown. To both these Indictments they pleaded
Not Guilty. But upon the Evidence, the Case appeared
to be in effect thus: Cusack, and others of his Company,
having a Design to Rob this Ship, and understanding
the Master wanted Sea-men, set Two of their Confe|derates
to offer their Service to him. Where they were
entertained; and at last betrayed the Ship into his
hands: which he carried it away.
The Captain at the first took some exceptions to the

Jury; not for any prejudice against any particular
men of them; but because they were Citizens; who
did not (he said) understand Maritime-Affairs. And
that it was necessary, Sea-Captains, and Masters of
Ships should have been Impannell'd. Upon which oc|casion
he cryed out, We will be Tryed (my Lord) by men
of our own Trade! Which being understood in another
sence, made not only the Audience, but his fellow Pri|soners
to laugh heartily. But being over-ruled in this,
he next insisted on a Commission from the French King.
Which was read; but was found to be directed to an|other
person: But he alledged, it was his Kinsman, who
had the Grant of a Commission at the same time; and
that by mistake the Commissions were changed: and so
his Kinsman's Commission sent to him from Callice to
London; where he paid a Sum of Money for it to the
French Resident: And that he not being able to read
French, could not perceive the Errour, but acted by it;
not doubting but that it had been his own. And that
this Ship the Robert, was never made any free Ship of
England; but the Owners were Dutch, and lived in
Rotterdam: and that he hoped the Court would allow
of his Commission.
The Court told him, The Commission was nothing
worth. For if it had been directed to him, (as it was
not) there was yet no power given him thereby to
seize Ships of England, as this proved to be. Besides,
they ask't, How he durst take a Commission from any For|reign
Prince, directly contrary to the late Treaty, and his
Majestie's Proclamation? To which he Replyed, That
his Commission bore date before that Proclamation. And
besides insisted, That whereas by the Indictment he was
charged with an Offence committed Super altum Mare,
upon the Sea; This Ship was taken in one of the Dutch

Ports, and so not appertaining to the Iurisdiction of the
English Admiralty. But this the Witnesses refuted,
proving she was taken Three Leagues out at Sea, from
the Fly.
This Mr. Cusack appeared to be a Person of a Clear
Courage, and good understanding: he pleaded very
well for his life; but the matter was too foul to be
washt off with good words.
The Court having withdrawn about an hour, re|turned
to give Judgment. Which was performed in
most Grave and Solid Speeches; setting forth the na|ture,
and aggravations of their Crimes; and advising
them to prepare for death, c. Captain Cusack pre|sented
a Petition; wherein he begg'd his life very pa|thetically:
Recounting his former Services; and of|fering
himself to the Service of his Majestie's Gallies at
Tangier, till by his future good Demeanour and
Services, he might wash off the stains of his late ill
Actions, c. Most of the others presented Petitions
also, desiring Mercy and Favour of the Court: who
proceeded to give Judgment. Which against Captain
Cusack, and the Seven others, before mentioned, to be
Convicted for Pyracy and Robbery, was, That they
should be hang'd till they were dead.
FINIS.






