




THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.
Written in ITALIAN, BY The Count GVALDO PRIORATO.
Containing all the Memorable Actions IN FRANCE, AND Other Neighbouring KINGDOMS.
The Translation whereof being begun by The Right Honourable HENRY, late Earl of Monmouth: Was finished by WILLIAM BRENT, s
LONDON: Printed for William Place, at Grays-Inne-Gate; Thomas Basset, Thomas Dring, and Iohn Leigh, in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXVI.




To the Right Honourable and Truly Noble LADY, MARTHA, COUNTESS of MONMOVTH.
MADAM,
_I Have in obedience to your Ladyships Commands turned into English so much of the Count Gualdo his Book, as your Noble and Worthy Lord and Husband (being prevented by Death) left un|translated.
I am not ignorant how great a rash|ness and presumption it was heretofore accounted, for an unskilful Workman to attempt the finishing of Apelles Table; but I shall hope the meanness of my Stile will give your Ladyship no cause of offence, when you consi|der that the defects thereof are so far from prejudicing your Lord's Work, that like a Foil they may serve to adde something unto the Lustre of it: And I am confident I shall deserve from the Reader his Thanks as well as Pardon, for blundering at the remainder of the Book, since 'tis the cause of publishing the rest, whereby our Nation may have the benefit of being acquainted with all Designes, Intrigues, and Affairs of State, transacted in those years whereof it treats, delivered to them by the choice Pens of two persons so accomplished as were the Author and his Lordship.
And howsoever, I have resolved rather to expose my self un|to the danger of any Censure whatsoever, than be wanting to the profession I have made of being,
MADAM, Your Ladyship's most obedient Servant, William Brent.



THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE READER.
_AMongst those changes which the vicissitude of Worldly things hath in this our Age produced, I believe there are none either more worthy to be remem|bered, or that can better satisfie our Curiosities, than a clear knowledge of the late Revolutions in France, and the War between the Crowns of France and Spain, which still continues: for whether we consider the Slights and Policies used by the different Factions, to advance their several Parties, or the multiplicity of Intrigues, occasioned by those Contests; or the great Waste and Spoils committed by the Armies in their Marches, of which the bloody marks do yet remain in several Provinces; or the sad Consequences of that Craft, Envy, and Emulation, wherewith all Treaties have been managed; or lastly, the deep Prudence, Care, and Foresight, whereby the mischiefs thereby designed have been avoided: I may with confi|dence affirm, no time or place can furnish us with better instances touching all those matters, than the Transactions in those Civil Wars.
I therefore, who (from my first coming to look into the World) have always thought no employment could be more Noble, than that of setting down all memorable Actions of the present Age for the Instruction of that to come, (since History may well be termed the Nurse of all Illustrious Actions, and the onely life of Fame and Memory) have endeavoured to ob|lige Posterity, by giving a sincere account of what hath passed; that they may thereby be in|vited to imitate what is praise-worthy, and avoid those things that deserve blame.
And since it concerns every man, who makes Truth his object, to use great diligence in the discovery of her, because this beautious Lady seldom appears in publick places; I resolved therefore to make a Voyage into France, as I had done before to Germany, Flanders, England, and other Countries where action was, that I might (being an Eye-witness) be better able to give a true relation of all passages, wherein I can hardly express the diligence and cau|tion I have used, not being satisfied with a superficial knowledge of things, but endeavouring to penetrate into the true Motives, Ends, and Interests of those that acted.
As for the manner of my Writing, it is the same that I have always used, rude and un|polished, suitable to the Profession of a Souldier, wherein I have the honour to serve the famous Commonwealth of Venice, as my Ancestors have done before me, in the principal Employments under the command of that Republick. This I assure the Reader, that as these my Relations are not adorned with any Flourishes of Eloquence, so he will finde them void of Passion or private Interest; no party having ever gratified or disobliged me; and the onely end I have in writing, being to give a true account of what hath pass'd unto Posterity.
I make use of the same freedom in relation of all actions, as well praise-worthy as blama|ble: neither hath that been ever the least hindrance to me, which hath deterred many, viz. The publishing a History of persons whilst they live; and therefore if there be any who thinks I am too sparing in his praises, I desire he would impute it to my want of skill, and would also consider, that brave Exploits bring their own Triumphs along with them; and Vertue is the best reward unto it self. If any one be Censured or Reproached, he must blame not the Copy, but the Original, since History performs the Office onely of a Glass, and like an Eccho doth but redouble what hath formerly been spoken. And if I have mistaken any thing in this Relation, I shall be ready upon better information to rectifie it, during his Life, by acknowledging my errour in the reprinting of this History; which is a Right can never be afforded unto any per|son after Death,
FAREWEL.s





THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.1648. The FIRST BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The general state of France: Its Alliances. How the Parliament of Paris is composed. The great Council. The Chamber of Accounts. The Court of Ayds. The Paoletta. Selling of Offices. The rise of the Troubles. The increase of Masters of Requests. Monsieur Emery. Means used to discredit the Cardinal. Masters of Requests unite. The Queen sends to reprove them. The Parliament meets, notwithstanding the Prohibition. Deputies in the Chamber of St. Lewis. Emery's Office taken from him. The Parliament provoked to higher designes. The Frondeurs, or Slingers. The Cardinal maintains the Kings Authority. The Council lay aside complying. Proposi|tion to imprison some of the Parliament. The Cardinal dissents. Brousel arrested in his own house: His words to his Children. President Blanmenil arrested. Charton escapes. Commotions in Paris. The Court prepare to maintain what they had done. The great danger of the Chancellor: The Parliament desert him: Marshal de Milleraye relieves him. The Chancel|lor's Coach assaulted: He is graciously received by their Majesties: His Saying. The tumult increaseth. The Chancellor's house plundered. The Parliament desire freedom of Prisoners. The first President's Speech. The Queen's Answer. People furious. First President couragious. The Cardinals opinion: He is incognito. Parliament at Palais-Royal: they resolve to continue. The beginning of the War. Chavigny imprisoned. Di Gaulas banished. President Nicola his Speech. The Parliaments desire. The Answer of the Prince and Queen. Decree of the Council. Deputies civilly recei|ved. The Duke of Orleans his Speech. The first President his. The Duke's Reply. Resolutions for the peoples ease. Endeavours to straiten the King, Treaty of Noysy. Duke of Longueville's disgusts. Debates in the Kings Council. The Cardinals opinion, seconded by Milleraye. Proceedings in Flanders. Treaty at Munster, begun by Pope Urban 8. Richlieu dies, and the French King. Protestants at Osnaburgh. Deputies for the several Princes. Hollanders for their own ends. The Swede constant to their Allyes. A Truce propounded. Bavaria for the French. The Hollanders conclude a Truce a|part: change it for a Peace. Zealand excepts against the Peace. Sum of the Peace. Modena his disgusts with Spain. The King of Spain marries the Emperour's Daughter.

FRANCE continued in the same Fortune and Condition the Year of our Lord 1648, that King Lewis the Thirteenth left it: And was in the highest and happiest Posture that she ever had been in the Reign of any whatsoever other King; being wholly united, and all of a

piece: She extended her Conquests from the Banks of the Mosel, to be|yond the Rhine in Germany, and beyond those of the Iberi in Spain, by the possession of Flix and Tortosa; and scouring throughout the Mediterranean with a powerful Fleet, was both dreaded and respected. Lewis de Bourbon Prince of Conde, as famous for War as any of our Age, having continued his Victories in Flanders, had filled all those Provinces with Dread and Fear. Marshall Turenne by his preserving of so many places taken, and by his seeral Deeats iven to the nemy in Germany, hd penetrated be|yond he River Lec in the  of Bavaa, and made the French Fores formiable thrugh the who Emire. Count Plessis Palin joyning with Francis Duke of Modena, declared to be General of the King of France his Forces in Italy, occasioned no little apprehension in all those Princes, by his Siege laid to Cremona; it being evident, that if he should succeed in that Enterprize, the French would get footing in the State of Milan. The Armies were composed of Warlike People, all of them almost of the same Nation, which by Vivacity and Courage makes her self as fit for the managing of Arms, and effecting of great Enterprizes, as any other Na|tion; and her Commanders were most part of tried Valour, and conspi|cuous as well for Birth as Courage.
France was Confederated, in Germany, with the Swissers, and with the greatest part of the Protestant Princes; the Peace not being yet concluded with the Emperour: and in Italy, with the Houses of Savoy and Modena; and kept excellent Correspondency with almost all the other Princes of Italy. In Spain, the Catalonians continued constant, and the Portuguezes confident. Nor could she be jealous as then of England or Holland; the former being busied in Civil Wars, and the latter willing to enjoy that Peace, which she had obtained at the expence of so much Money and Blood. Europe being a Spectator of these her Prosperities, looked upon this her Prepotenza with the same reflexions as she had looked upon the Success of the Emperour Charles the Fifth's Forces, when Fortune smiled most upon them. Nothing appeared wanting to crown her Felicity, but a Moderation in some of her Natives, who were guided by Ambition, and by Spleen against him, who manged this so great weight: So as these natural, and almost unalterable defects being taken away, she might peradventure not have found any thing to withstand her in her highest and most generous Designes.
For the better knowledg of what hapned in these times, it will be requi|site to look a little back, and take the beginning and true reasons of the first Revolution in Paris, which afforded Fuel to raise the Flame of Civil War a little higher: And because this had no other rise, but his fortunate gui|dance who directed the Kingdom, which won him so much credit, as awake|ned jealousies and envy in those who saw themselves not so much respected; we must attentively examine the Motives, that we may the more clearly deduce the Fallacies of the Conclusions.
King Lewis the Thirteenth leaving the Queen, his Wife, Regent when he died, left a great share of managing the Affairs to Cardinal Mazarino; mo|ved thereunto by the trial he had often had of his Loyalty and Worth in divers difficult Emergencies. And he may be truly said to be even now one of the greatest Ministers of State that France ever had. For Fortune favouring his designs, made him not only effect unexpected Enterprizes, but won him Applause throughout all Europe. It is rather incredible than strange, that an Infant-King, a Queen of a Rival Nation, a Forreiner chief Minister of State, have not only been able to resist the Contracts of so many

divers Opinions, amongst a People so lively Spirited, but being badly looked upon by so many Princes and Lords at Court; but have at the same time won so many Battels, taken so many Towns, and dilated the French Dominion on all Sides, having no reason to envie the fortunate Government of the late King, nor the Administration of the ever-memo|rable Cardinal Richelieu.
The most Christian King advancing amongst so many Conquests to his Majority, it is hard to relate what confusion arose amongst those that were enemies to his Crown, who found cleerly, that notwithstanding the Peace concluded between Spain and Holland, the affairs of France were grown to that height, as had it not been for Novelties introduced by the French themselves, the Spanish Monarchy would have been reduced to very bad terms. For if you will consider Italy, Cremona was besieged by the French; which if it had been taken, would have put the State of Milan in much danger: and the Kingdom of Naples would have been indangered by the Fleet at Sea, that Kingdom being more in the power of the people than of the Spaniards: and Tarragona might have been blockt up by the same Fleet, when the French had taken Tortosa; so as there would have been but small hope of preserving that place, the loss whereof would have made way for the French to have entered into the Bowels of those Kingdoms, and would have kept the Spaniards from entering into Catalognia. And in Flanders, the winning of the Battel of Lens by the Prince of Cond, made it be known, that the French were sufficient to get the better of the Spaniards best For|ces, without any diversion of the Vnited Provinces. But because by how much the King's Authority grew greater, so much more did the jealousies and apprehensions of some few Male-contents increase, who feared the loss of Favour and Authority, and began to be sensible how slowly Fa|vaours were conferr'd upon them, which they desired more than became them; they thought, that in the conjuncture of the pressing occasions of Court, they might advance their designes by causing some rents in Court, before the King should be out of his Minority: They therefore took a seeming pretence of the common good; and under the specious asserting that the King's Authority ought to be bounded within the terms of moderate Domi|nion, they began to invent plausible pretences, under which they masked their true and secret ends, and won upon the peoples affections, who are incapable of any reason, save what sutes with their own likings.
These Male-contents were most of them the chiefest Lords of the Court, and some of their Adherents in Parliament. For the better knowledge of whom, and to inform those who are not fully acquainted with the Affairs of France, we will tell of what the body of this great Assembly doth consist, which hath afforded so much Matter to this present History.
The Parliament of Paris is the first of all other Parliaments of the King|dom, and consists of Dukes and Peers, who are born Councellors. I say Peers, because those that are not Peers, are not admitted thereinto, though they be Dukes;  for their admission their Peerage must be proved. Of six Presidents, which are called del Mortaro, by reason of a Cap of Velvet with a Gold Gal|lown-lace, which they carry in their hand, in shape like a Mortaro, the which they put upon their heads upon any Solemn day, or great day of Ceremony. Of Masters of the Requests, who are also born Councellors, and whereof onely four sit at a time in Parliament. Of Church and Lay-councellors, which are divided into many Chambers, or Classes; as, into the Great Chamber, the five Chambers delle Iuchieste, or of Enquiries; the Chamber della Tornella, which takes Cognizance onely of Criminal Affairs; the

Chamber dell' Editto, which dispatches the Controversies or Law-Suits onely of Hugonots. There are moreover three other Chambers, but not Soveraign, or Supream, though they be of the body of the Parliament: to wit, the Chamber of Requests for the King's House, and two other Chambers of Requests for the Palace. Councellors of Honour have also place in Parliament, who usually are great and deserving men, and for the most part chief of the King's Council; to whom his Majesty gives Letters Patents to be Councellors of Honour, and who are afterwards receiv'd in presence of all the Chambers assembled together, and are next to the Dukes and Peers. After these come Counsellours at Law, who having served twenty years in that Employment, keep their place, though they have sold it: and all these Dukes, Presidents and Councellours may amount to about the number of two hundred.
There is then another Supream Body, which is called the great Council; this enters not into Parliament, but walks hand in hand with it. It hath sometimes been ambulatory, as it was in these last Conjunctures, wherein it followed the King; but usually it keeps in Paris, and meets in the Cortile of St. Iermains Auxerrois. It consists but of one onely Chamber, the Pre|sidents whereof ought to be Masters of the Requests. The Jurisdiction of this Council consists in distributing matters of favour, gli Indultarii, and judging the Contests between the Praesidiali, or Magistrates, which are sub|ject to the Parliament.
The Chamber of Accounts is also a Body apart from Parliament; and the incumbency thereof is to review the Accounts of all the Financiers: All the Treasurers of France are under it; and there are of these Cham|bers in divers Provinces.
The Court of Aides is another supream Jurisdiction, whose Power ex|tends to Gabels, Taxes, Impositions, and Excises. They have under them the Magistrates which are called Eletti: And of these Courts there are divers in many parts of France.
The King's Exchequer being much exhausted by so long War, the Council was forc'd to think upon ready and feasible Expedients to raise Moneys; which gave occasion to the Male-contents to mask their indiscreet Zeal, and to make use of this publick necessity, so to undertake with more bold|ness pernitious novelties.
Divers means were proposed to raise Moneys; but all means requiring time, and being in some sort grievous to the people, and therefore not cer|tain whether the Councils resolutions would be approved in Parliament or no; Monsieur Emery, Superintendant of the Finances, proposed the taking away of the Paoletta, or Annual Right, upon designe either to make the Parliament more submiss, and more obedient to the will of the Court, and consequently less averse to pass the Edicts of the Council-Royal; or else to renew the Annual Right in some other form, which might be more advantagious, and more proper to raise ready Moneys. This as it had a fair appearance, and came from one who was reputed to be of a high Spirit, and of a great reach, pleased many Lords of the Council; but the Cardi|nal would not have this fallen upon in haste, but wisht it might be more maturely examined. So by reason of some other Emergency which arose, it was laid aside.
Antiently, and before the Reign of Francis the First, who was he that brought in the selling of Offices, Places were by the King conferr'd onely upon well-deserving men, and such as were capable of them. In the time of Henry the Fourth, one named Paoletto propounded a means of raising

two millions of crowns yearly, by permitting all Counsellours and Officers, as well of Justice as of the Finances, to convey over their Offices after their death to their Heirs, or to sell them to others, reserving a certain an|nual sum to be duely paid. This was embraced and agreed unto, that upon payment of a certain annual sum, according to the worth of the Place, the Office or Place was to descend to the Heir; or the Possessor, if he pleased, might sell it whilst he lived, to any one that was capable of it. And that if any one should die without having paid this Annual Right, his Heirs should not enjoy the benefit of the Place, but that it should be left to the King's disposal. This Contract was to last for nine years onely; which time being expired, the Priviledge was to be continued, or abolished; as the King should please. Thus from this time forward, taking the name from the inventor of it, this Annual Right was called la Paoletta.
Emery's Intention was, that the nine years of the Paoletta being expired, the King should totally abolish it; and that if any of the Officers should desire to dispose of their Offices after these nine years, he should make a new Agreement, advancing some considerable sum: By which means he thought to raise good store of Money, whereby the expence of War might be supplied without grieving the people.
This might have taken effect, had it not met with some opposition in the Parliament of Paris, by some troublesome Spirits, who had other par|ticular ends. It was therefore thought fit to exempt it from the said aboli|tion; which condescention, through weakness, was the cause from whence arose licentious Resolutions, which confounded all good Government.
But the Counsellours having adherences, friends and alliances with many other Lords and Officers of the Kingdom, suspected lest this being introduced into the parts farther off, might by little and little creep into their Employments; wherefore they began those Novelties, which shall be the subject of the ensuing Narrative.
Yet neither were the alteration of the Paoletta, nor the Grievances, nor the Gabels, the sole occasions which caused Disobedience: for such burthens were quietly suffer'd, and received without any innovation, under the management of Richelieu, who making use therein of the King's Power, maintained them by severity and force, as thinking Rigour to be a better way than Gentleness, whereby to govern a Nation naturally as apt to forget Injuries as good turns. But the proposal in the Edict of augmenting the number of the Masters of the Requests, every of which Places were sold for more than 60000 Crowns, was the true occasion of those troubles which interrupted the Prosperity of that Kingdom, and hastened the Revo|lutions, though under other reasons and motives, which seemed to aim more at the publick good, than at the private end of some particular men. These Masters of the Requests are conspicuous persons, who after having sat as Counsellours in Parliament, are admitted into that Order: They are admitted into the King's Privy Council, they practise much in Court, and are imployed in Embassies in Provinces, and in Armies for Justice, and for the Finances; so as they usually prove men of Courage.
All men were troubled and scandalized at the increasing of this number, the price being lessened thereby to those who were in the Places, being con|siderable persons: For nothing sways more with men, than their particular Interest and Advantage. They used therefore all means to keep the Car|dinal from attempting this Novelty; thinking, that as he was the first Mi|nister of State, he was the first motioner or promoter thereof. The Car|dinal knew, that to touch upon what concerned those of the Parliament,

was but a slippery business, and therefore he did not in his heart approve entirely of the Proposal: but the business of Moneys being urgent, and the rest of his Majesty's Council not thinking to meet with any repugnan|cy in those who had such dependancy upon the favour of the Court, and who desired to deserve those Employments which were wont to be con|fer'd by the King in Armies and in Provinces; the Edict stood good in substance, but was somewhat moderated by the Cardinal, who was forc'd to yield to the common desires. These Lords having acquainted the Car|dinal with their Grievances, they turn'd upon Emery, and reproving him as the contriver of this Plot, they bitterly threatned him; but he stood constant to what he had propounded, as thinking it most adequate to the necessity. Emery was a man of great Wit, and of a profound and lively Spirit: He was brought into the Finances by Richelieu, who sought to gratifie him for services which he had received from his Father. Being found to be a man of a deep reach, he met with Envy immediately; but though he was accused by his Enemies of many faults, he overcame all dif|ficulties, and got great experience in the Finances: wherefore the Lord Bullion being Superintendent, knowing his ready Wit, and peradventure en|vying his Abilities, he endeavour'd to keep him at a distance from the Employment; and thought it better to fix him Embassador from the King in Savoy, than to have him neer himself. When Cardinal Mazarine enter|ed upon the Affairs of France, Emery made use of the acquaintance he had had with him in Avignon, and in Piemont; to which the great esteem which was held of his capacity and understanding in the Court being ad|ded, he got at last to be Superintendent of the Finances; where thirsting after greater Fortune, it was said he aspired after more advantages: and he was accused of having intended to shoulder out the Cardinal, by fomen|ting them underhand, who went about to discredit him with the Queen; and that having these Objects before him, he had leaned to the late Prince of Cond his Party, and afterward to that of his Son; befriending many persons who were well thought of at Court, by whose means he ever and anon acquainted the King, that it was true, the Cardinal was of a refined Wit, of a high Spirit, and very understanding in forreign Affairs: but that having never been vers'd in the Finances, he wanted such Indowments as were requisite thereunto: whence it arose, that he went less in the esteem he had hitherto maintained himself, with many, who knew not the truth of the business. Moreover, some, that they might render him odious to the Parliament and to the People, gave out that he (as being the prime Mi|nister of State) was the first Author of the abolition of the Paoletto, and of creating new Masters of the Requests, though he had always withstood them; and that Emery was the onely occasioner of them, being backt by the rest of the Council: And they did this, intending that the Parliament resenting this, might make the Cardinal's conduct be ill thought of, and that by his fall, Emery thought to succeed him. These suspitions were increa|sed by some conversation which he held with Peter Brussel a Counsellour of the Great Chamber, poorly spirited, but popular; and who instead of judging Processes, was always busie in publick Affairs. He willingly took upon him the Petitions of the Poor, either out of real or feign'd Charity; and he was hereunto incited by Peter Longuile a Counsellour of the same Chamber, who spent all his talent in Intrigues and Cabals. Brussel apply|ing himself to Longuile's Genius, though he were ignorant enough, and not very capable of what he went about, which made him be believed by those who knew not his true ends, to be a well-minded man: But being

displeased with the Court and Cardinal, for that his Son who was Ensigne to the Guard, was denied a Lieutenants place that was vacant, he set him|self to beget an ill opinion of the Cardinal. This mean while the Masters of the Requests fearing lest if any of them should die, their Heirs might not succeed unto them in their Office, by reason of the distaste which they had already given unto the Queen, they publish'd a licentious Writing, whereby they did reciprocally oblige themselves to pay for the Place of any that should die, for the Heir of the deceased; which was thought a very bold thing. Nor did their designes cease here, but finding themselves not able of themselves alone to make good their party, they presented a Request in the name of the Publick, for the union and joyning of the whole Parlia|ment; representing, that it was necessary for repairing the Ruines of the Kingdom, occasioned by the ill Administration of the Finances, which were more imploy'd in the profit of a few particular men, than for the use of the Crown, from whence the peoples grievances did proceed; by which ap|pearances they made the people believe, that their end was onely to ex|empt them from all Impositions. The Queen being hereat highly displea|sed, she made them be sharply reproved by Peter Segnier the Lord-chan|cellour, a well-meaning Gentleman, and of great Integrity; telling them, that such Assemblies were rash, destructive to the State, and disloyal: And she expresly forbid them coming to the Council till they had revoked all their said Declarations, and torn them in her presence. Wherefore all the said Masters of Requests went joyntly to the Palace-Royal to acquaint the Queen with their grievances, who sharply upbraided them with baseness, taxt them with temerarity in opposing the King her Son's will; and by her treating them thus, did much mortifie them. For there was not then any Faction on foot; and this would hardly have held good, had it been di|sturb'd at the beginning. But the Duke of Orleans thinking it fit to apply Remedy to the Evil before it grew too contagious, interposed himself, and wrought with the Queen that she would permit them to exercise their places: But they not being herewith content, grew more insolent, belie|ving that many who did not openly applaud them, would afterwards joyn with them in lessening the Cardinal's power; which was envied by many, and privately practised against, as was suggested unto them by those who did but wait a time to give the blow. They therefore continued their con|tumacy; and not long after, notwithstanding the King's inhibition, the joyning of all the Bodies of Tribunals was decreed, and met, where Brou|sel, Blammenil, Charton, and others, spoke without any regard, against the Court-government: An Act of great Disobedience, and contrary to all Laws and Practice; all the Bodies not being accustomed to be called toge|ther nor to meet, but by extraordinary order from the King. But those who sought a propitious conjuncture of time to inhanse or exalt their pre|tended Authority by lessening that of the Kings, being desirous to winde themselves into the Affairs of State, laid hold of the pretence of wasting of the King's Finances, and gave way to this fatal Union, wherein they were applauded by many, not onely for the novelty of the Act, but out of hopes which other Male-contents and their idle followers conceived, that they should be eased of their Grievances by the punishment of those who imploy'd the King's Moneys ill, and that they should thereby have Peace, which they said was retarded out of the Officers particular ends. That which these Supream Companies did, (for no Appeal was to be had from their judgment) was, to send many Deputies, who marched two and two through the City, being invironed by an infinite company of people, to

shew the King that they were met to provide, during his Majesty's Minori|ty, against the bad administration of his Finances, from whence proceeded the Kingdoms ruine, and the emptiness of the Exchequer; fearing lest they might hereafter be blamed by his Majesty for carelessness, when he should come to his Majority; as (they said) Charles the Fifth had done, who complained of the Parliament of those times, for not having hindered the miss-spending of his Revenue in his Minority. And to this purpose they chose some of their Deputies to meet in the Chamber called St. Lewis; which is an extraordinary Congregation, which meets onely upon urgent and grievous occasions; which are unpleasing to the King, for that therein things contrary to the Function of Parliament are treated of; and where the Counsellours as well of Parliament as the Chamber of Accounts, the great Council, and of the Court of Aids sit: The power of which Deputies when they are met together, reaches no farther than to examine and give their opinions upon such things as they treat on; which are afterwards to be reported to the Soveraign Courts, wherein they are either approved, or rejected.
These Broulieres continued on the Parliaments side by keeping together, and by often meeting; as on the Courts behalf, in impeding them, and cros|sing them, till such time as the Court lost as much esteem as the Parliament got; and till it was necessary for the King's Council to take away the Super|intendency of the aforesaid Emery in that Office, though it appeared neces|sary in that emergency of time, he promising again to furnish moneys for some time, to maintain that War. He was ordered to retire from Paris to his Country-house, in appearance of sacrificing him to the satisfaction of the people, and to rid the Parliament of further trouble, by preventing them in their Decrees, which it was thought would be by them shortly thun|dered out against him. This his deposing, which was done contrary to the general belief, served to provoke the Parliament and the Male-contents to yet higher thoughts, whereinto, upon like occasions, humane insatiateness doth usually fall. The Chambers therefore forbear not to meet, nor the People to murmur; they railed openly against the King's Ministers of State; they cri'd out aloud against the Government; they made it appear that instead of seeing that State restored, Misery and Ruine did still increase, though France was then more powerful and victorious than it had been known to be at any time before. And in sequele of these giddy attempts, which are the usual food of the petulant Vulgar, it happened that Monsieur di Bachaumont Son to President Coigneux, hearing his Father speak in the Parliament in behalf of the Court, being one night at Supper in Monsieur di Paris his house, Mareshal of the Field, and discoursing there with divers Friends touching the present Commotions, said jeastingly to his Compa|nions, with whom he began to sport, throwing Oranges at one another, That he had a designe to sling to some purpose at his Father's Opinion. This jeast was taken notice of, and thereupon when one declaimed boldly in pleading against any person of Quality, men would say, that he slung soundly that morning: so passing from one Jeast to another, he that railed most against the Government, was called a good Slinger. And this went through every ones mouth some months before there was any talk of the Faction called la Fronde, or the Sling; but the rise thereof was taken from the Boys, who sometimes slung Stones under the new Bridge when the wa|ter was low; whence the forenamed Bachaumont took occasion to say, that he would sling at his Father's Opinion, comparing the Whizze of a Sling to the force of Discourse in Rhetorick.
The chief men that declaiming in Parliament were first called by this Nick|name of Frondeurs, which is as much as to say Slingers, which grew as com|mon as that of the Gueuses, or Beggers did in Flanders, whence so great disorders arose there afterwards, were the Presidents of Novion, Viola, Blau|menil, Charton, the Counsellours of Browssel, Longuille, Coulon, and di|vers others of a turbulent disposition, and desirous of Innovation; but in time some few fell from that Faction, and finding their errours returned to their Duties, from which the chief Lord President never budged, who was a man of a settled and undaunted Spirit, and who did always appear unconcern'd, knowing how to make use of his Credit in Parliament (in the Affairs whereof he was very expert) for the service of the Court, wherein he carried himself with much Integrity and Courage.
As all these things were a mighty prejudice to the King's Soveraignty, and of very bad Example, and a great scandal in Subjects who were bound to obey; and the Cardinal being therewith sorely netled, took a firm resolu|tion to defend by all possible means the Authority of the Minor-King, which was recommended to his trust: and very well knowing what sad fruit might proceed from this seed, employed first his most refined Judgment to keep it from increasing, making use of milde ways, spinning on the time, till the conjuncture of Affairs might afford him opportunity to make use of more powerful means: But this fair way doing no good, the Malady grew more contagious; which made him at last aware, that without making use of Fire and Sword, it would dayly take deeper root; for the Courts Lenity was interpreted Weakness, and the pride of some of these Gown-men (who were blinded by Passion, and by hope of bettering their condition by the mine of others) grew to such a height, that being cloy'd with living quietly, they began to plot all the ways they could how to arrive at their desired end. That they might therefore irritate the hatred and fury of the peo|ple, they thought it necessary to appear Vindicators of their Grievances, and to lay the fault upon those that govern'd. Wherefore they began to allure them by hopes of a present good, and by fear of an approching mischief; attributing the continuing of War to the State-Ministers, that they might thereby provide themselves of Moneys squeezed out of the poor Subjects. So as an universal Impression being made by these colou|rable pretences, whereby Affairs were carried on to open Sedition, the King's Council thought it fit to lay aside all Lenity, and to put on more vigorous and rigid Resolutions. Wherefore they thought fit to make some of them an Example, thereby to make others more respectful and obedient: and because the famous Victory of Lens in Germany happened at the same time, for which Te Deum was sung in the Cathedral Church, the King and his Guards being present, it was thought now a fit time to imprison Brousel, Charton, and President Blanmeneile, who were thought worse minded than the rest; since they could not do it otherwise without a great Army, espe|cially upon old Brousel, who was protected by the people, with whom he had won such credit as if he had been a New Cato.
The Cardinal dissented from this; who looking more inwardly into the bottom of the business, found it to be dangerous, and exposed to great diffi|culties; wherefore he thought it better to temporize, till the next Campagnia being ended, the Army might be free to be disposed of as occasion should re|quire. But Count Chavigny, who in Cardinal Richelieu's time was one of the prime Ministers of State, and was imployed in all Affairs of greatest Impor|tance, was not well pleased to be detain'd from his wonted Honors. Wherefore seeking how to raise Rumours, and to put the Court in a commotion, that he

might fish in troubled Waters, and make the Cardinal run upon some Rock. He perswaded the Queen that her Majesty was bound to make use of some valid Expedients before the Malady grew greater, and by the Examples of her Husband the late King, to make her self be feared. She approving of Chavigny's Opinion, wherein many others of the Privy Council did joyn, obliged the Cardinal not to gainsay it, saying, That great Mischiefs required speedy and strong Remedies. The Cardinal obeyed, though con|trary to his judgment; but first he protested against it apart to her Majesty, saying, That the time was not yet fit; and foretold her punctually of all that did afterwards fall out, making her see that Chavigny's Councel aimed at somewhat else than her Majesties Service. Which succeeding just as the Cardinal foretold, was one of the chiefest reasons which made him be the better believed afterwards, and made him be known to be as able for Go|vernment, as he was passionately affected to make the King a great Mo|narch: Which made the Queen confide so much in him, as she raised him to the highest pitch of estimation afterwards, and for the future did intirely credit his Councel.
The duty of the day being over, and their Majesties being gone from Church, Monsieur Cominges Lieutenant of the Queens Guard was sent with some Souldiers and an Officer to Brousel's house, to acquaint him with the Order which he had from the King to conduct him where his Majesty had commanded him. Brousel said he would obey; and turning to his Chil|dren, who were at Table with him, said unto them, I have purchas'd you some Honour by my Actions, see that you preserve it: Farewel, I think not that I shall ever see you any more. He went down stairs, got into the Coach; and the Guards holding their Pistols at his breast, the Coach-man drove on space. The Coach being come into the High-street, where the Militia stood in order, Cominges advanc'd towards the new Bridge; and it was noised abroad by a Lacky of his, who had never lost sight of the Coach, that Brousel was carried away Prisoner in that Coach: which breaking by chance between the publick Palace and the new Bridge, Cominges making use of necessity, made the President Dasts of Bordeos his Wife light out of her Coach, which he met by chance, and went therein along the River, where but few people pass, and came safe to St. Germains. President Blan|menil was arrested in his own house, and carried to the Castle of St. Vin|cent. Charton hearing of this, had the fortune to escape. This News slew presently through the whole City, where presently Clamour and Commo|tions arose, the people crying out, that the Common Safety was betray'd, their Liberties injured; that they were all threatned with eminent danger; that the Court made publick thanksgiving for having committed outrage not onely against private persons, but against the Publick Faith. All men raged, and like so many mad men fell to lamenting, to protestations, and to threats. Some ran one way, some another, exciting all they met to rise. They scoured all their Halberts and other Weapons; all Trades-men ran in with their Axes, Hammers, Knives, and with what came first to hand. Women, like those of former times, ran up and down like so many Bacchi|nali, inciting their Husbands and Friends to revenge their Injuries. All the Streets were suddenly chain'd up, all Shops were shut up: The most couragious were confounded at the hearing of the peoples noise and fury. The Parliament met that night highly displeased, and agreed to meet the next morning, and to demand their imprisoned Members from the Queen.
But the Court being in part satisfied with the success of what they had done, and not at all moved at the begun Commotion, prepared boldly to with|stand

the peoples violence, and the Parliaments resolutions. The Guards were increased. All the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of the Court met at the Palais-Royal: They consulted all that night touching what was best to be done in this confused Hurly-burly. They resolved to stand to what they had done, left they might seem to injure the King's Reputation by retracting it. They therefore ordered, that the Chancellour should go the next morning, it being the 27th of August, to the great Chamber, and absolutely to forbid the Parliament in the King's Name to debate touching what was done: But the King's Power was now too little esteemed, the people were grown too head-strong and passionate; the jollity of the Male|contents too much increased. The Chancellour got into his Coach, not re|garding what danger he ran, though he foresaw it, and went to the pub|lick' Palace. When he was come to the midst of the new Bridge, he found all those ways full of armed people, and the Chains drawn up, yet he would pass on: he took a further compass about by St. Augustino, but finding the Chains drawn, and the people in arms at St. Michaels Bridge, as he endeavor'd to continue his Journey he was known, and was pursued with Out-cries and impertinent Threats. The Coach-man perceiving this, that he might preserve him from some evident Disaster, drove furiously into l'Hastelle de Suinas, which by good luck had the Gate open. The Chancellour went to the top of the house, accompanied by his Brother the Bishop of Meaux, and by his Daughter the Dutchess of Suille, who would partake of danger with him. They hid themselves in a Closet, where they were not seen, though many people past and repast by it, crying out, Where is the Chancellour? where is this Traytor? let us kill, let us kill him. He hearing these Threats, which denounced assured death unto him, you may imagine in what a case he was. This mean while the news here|of came to the Parliament, which was already met; where a friend of the Chancellours represented the peoples shameful Riot, detesting the Insolen|cy, and hoped that they would send to appease the Tumult: but although he had many particular friends there, and that they all appeared bound to serve him in so exorbitant a case, yet not any one moved in his behalf, so hated were the State-Governours grown. At last Marshal Milleraye got on horse-back, and going with some Souldiers of the Guard, and some of his and the Chancellour's friends, past, without hindrance, over the new Bridge; and being come to St. Austins, sent some Souldiers and Gentlemen to bring the Chancellour out of that Palace. Monsieur d'Ortis, a Lieutenant of the Guard, went to the house, took the Chancellour by the hand, and brought him out of the Closet, and put him into the Coach, together with the Bishop of Meaux, and Dutchess of Suilly; and instead of going by Porta Nela, re|turned by the new Bridge: and the Marshal followed after the Coach on horse-back in Military order; but as they past by the Brazen Horse, the people made several shot at the Coach, where the Chancellour was miracu|lusly preserv'd, some being slain, The Coach was shot thorough in many places, and the Dutchess of Suilly received a slight hurt, while with much generosity she thrust out her arm to defend her Father. At last the Chan|cellour came to the Palace-Royal, and was graciously received by both their Majesties. The Regent could not praise him enough, wondring how he had escaped. The Chancellour answered, That Loyalty and Obedience towards the Prince, ought to be the onely Object of every man of Honour, and that that had been his chiefest comfort in that danger; he being to be held happy, who dies gloriously in his Masters service. The Tumult still increasing, the City was still in greater disorder, and the safety of the streets was provided for,

not onely with Chains, but by Barricadoes in every place. Every one brought somewhat to fortifie themselves. On the King's side, the Guards stood in Battel aray. The people cri'd round about the Court, that they would have Brousel set at liberty: they threatned to burn and kill all but the King's person.
When it was known that the Chancellour was found, and that he was gotten unhurt into the Palace-Royal, it is not possible to believe how the incensed people raged about the streets. They returned headlong to L'Ho|stelle de Luines, and in great fury plunder'd it; wherefore the more weal|thy Citizens, not thinking themselves safe from the licentious Tumultuaries, made Barricadoes at the ends of every street, and plac'd good Guards there, as well in the Suburbs as in the City; so as that year was afterwards cal|led the year of Barricadoes. Thus did this day pass over in Tumults, Skirmishing, and in making Barricadoes. The Parliament amidst this con|fusion, resolved to go the next morning to their Majesties, and to desire that those that were imprisoned might be set free. The Councellors mar|ched on foot two by two, the first President going with his Officers about him in the front, and the other Presidents after: The Rabble-rout followed in the reer, armed, bawling out, That they would either have Brousselle set at liberty, or they would put all to the Sword.
According to Custome they had Audience. The first President spoke very efficaciously against those who had advised to imprison his Compa|nions. He told the Queen, That Kings were the true Image of God on Earth: That they ought to commiserate their People, as Fathers do their Chil|dren, and hear their just Intreaties: That in Affairs wherein the Publick Good is concern'd, good men ought to speak freely, according to their Con|sciences, and not according to Self-interest; dissimulation and subterfuges being in such cases the ruine of Kingdoms. That her Majesty ought not to suffer her self to be counselled contrary to the Publick Good, since there is no falser Maxime than that, which teacheth to exasperate the minds of Subjects. That people in Arms ought always to be feared, but dreaded when they are armed with blinde fury, and void of discretion. That as she was a merciful and gratious Princess, he beseeched her in the name of all his Companions, and in the Peoples name, that she would give way to the releasing of his Fel|low Members out of Prison; which was the best way to calm an incensed people.
The Queen answered in a few words, according to custome; and then the Chancellour said, That their Majesties would advise with their Council what to do in the business speedily, touching giving satisfaction to their desires.
The Parliament-men returned from the Audience in the same order as they came; and when they came to the Barricadoe before L'Hostel de Scom|berg, the people met them armed, and in a furious manner, demanding in a mutinous manner whether or no they had obtained Brousel's freedom? and they answering, that they could not absolutely say yes, a Plebeian who was more Hair-brain'd than the rest, held his naked Sword at the first Presidents breast, and had him go back again to the Court and get Brousel set at liber|ty, otherwise he and all his Fellow-Members should be cut in pieces. The Presidents and Counsellours were hereat so affrighted, as many of them ran away and hid themselves, some one where, some another; but the first Pre|sident, not at all abasht, returned presently to the Queen, followed by those that tarried with him, and told her, That this was no time for delays: That it was necessary to obviate the fury of an exasperated and incensed peo|ple, with whom no fair means nor reason would prevail. He said, There was

no way to prevent greater disorder, but by setting the Prisoners at liberty; and on his knees beseeched her Majesty, That by being gratious, she would recover her former quiet.
The Queen called her Council unto her, and told them, that some proper expedient for the present Emergency must be taken. Those who had ad|vised to this Resolution were mute, not knowing whereupon to ground their ill-given Councel. The Cardinal and Mareshal Villeroy ponderated the business, and were of opinion, that as affairs of great importance ought not to be slightly undertaken, so when they were once taken they were to be made good, there being no so bad resolution as to succumb to incon|stancy.
Their opinion therefore was, that if it were possible they should stand to the first Sentence, and shew no signe of weakness: but if this were not to be done, it would be an unpardonable pertinacity to run with folly head|long upon impossibilities. Mareshal Milleray being much incensed at the Parisians iusolence, propounded, that if two Field-pieces could be got, and five hundred Foot, they should make their way to the Bastille, figh|ting and assaulting the Barricadoes, firing such houses as should use any ho|stility. This resolution was not embraced, for many reasons; particularly by reason of their Majesties goodness. The Cardinal not believing the confusion to be so great as was given out, resolved to be an eye-witness thereof himself, and went incognito into the streets of Beusenfans, and St. Ho|nor, where he found the Rout making more use of their tongues than of their hands; he therefore kept two nights on foot undauntedly, and care|ful to defend himself, and to use such means as should be fittest for the pre|sent Emergency.
The Parliament should have considered the Regent's Answer in the ac|customed great Chamber; but not being able to get thither by reason of the peoples fury and insolency, who peradventure might have used some outrage against them, the Counsellours were desired to meet in the Gallery at the Palace-Royal, a thing unusual: Here met that Soveraign Assembly. The Chancellour spoke in behalf of the Court, declaiming against the rash and misbecoming behaviour of the people, and perswaded those Gentle|men not to adhere to so rash an action.
The Counsellours were sumptuously feasted and entertained by the King; which being interpreted by them to be an apprehension which the Court had of them, made them put an higher esteem upon themselves. Several were the opinions which were held by the King's Council, touching the setting of the Prisoners at liberty. The Cardinal who was against the for|mer resolution, with reflection to what did punctually happen, would have still detained the Prisoners; and by removing the King and Court from Pa|ris, would have done that which necessity forc'd them to do afterwards. But the same reasons which made against the first resolution, were those which made the second the harder: For it was impossible to force obedi|ence from so numerous a people without an Army. They therefore re|solved to let the Prisoners loose; and the King's Letters, together with his Order, were sent to the Parliament in the Gallery at the Palace-Royal, and given to those that were next akin to the Prisoners; and the King's Coach was sent to bring them back to Paris. The Parliament returned thanks to the Regent for her clemency, and every one return'd home well pleased, tel|ling in the streets, that the King's Coaches were already sent to bring back Brousel, whom they hould suddenly see safe and free. He was so fortunate in this his misfortune, that in the present Commotions of Paris, mention

was onely made of him, President Blammenil never being named. Yet for all this the rumours ceased not, but both sides continued to have fears and jealousies.
The people being guilty, and contumatious, expected to be punished; and the Court feared the peoples insolency: the Inhabitants continued there|fore their Guards and Barricadoes, and the Court their Guards; but with such inconveniency to the Souldiers, as they could not get Bread for money from the Bakers, who assisted in the sedition. Friday-night being past over in Arms, the next morning Brousel appeared in the King's Coach; and as he past through the Gate St. Honor, and through the streets which led to the new Bridge and to Nostredame, he was received with much joy and ac|clamations by the people, who flock'd from all places to see whether it were he or no; for he appeared like another Messias, and the people cried out Viva le roy, viva Brousel.
The Counsellour Blanmenil came the same night from the Castle of St. Vincent, but with much less acclamations. Thus the Tumults being appea|sed, and the Parliament knowing how prejudicial the Barricadoes were to the commerce of the City, which were not yet demolish'd, though the King had commanded it, ordered it to be done after Dinner.
During all these Tumults, the Duke of Orleans sided with the Court, keeping good correspondency by means of the Abbot Rivere, who was his favorite, with the King's Officers, who for his Highness sake used the like respect towards the Abbot, and as had been observed in Cardinal Riche|lieu's time; whereby the Abbot got to be worth 40000 crowns a year in Ecclesiastical Livings, and aspired at the Cardinals Cap.
But forasmuch as people having once broke the Reins of Obedience, are hardly brought within the limits of Duty; The seditious Ring-leaders knowing that the Cardinal was the chief Obstacle between them and their desires, spoke freely against him, accusing him of many failings in his ma|naging of Affairs, to discredit him with the Vulgar; hoping by his depres|sion, to see way made for compassing their desires. Yet they fearing that the Regent being exasperated at their licentious proceedings, would hinder their meetings, agreed secretly to continue their Assemblies, notwithstanding any opposition that should be made. And to the end that the Court-party might not blame the Parliament for arrogating an unlawful Authority, and contrary to Law, they would ask her Majesties permission: To which pur|pose they sent Monsieur Fouket Procurator-general, who was of a ready wit and sound judgment, to her. The Queen wrought upon by necessity, and not being able to do otherwise, gave way to their sitting for fifteen days more; wherein nothing being likely to succeed, but what would be very prejudicial to her Administration, she went on Saturday the 12th of September, together with the King and the whole Court, under pretence of taking the Air, to Ruel three leagues from Paris, upon the way to St. Ger|mains; which did much trouble those of the contrary party, not onely out of fear of what they might thereby expect, but for that the Cardinal was now out of their hands, and that he might still grow in more favour. Many of the people, set on by those who begun to take upon them the name of Frondeurs or Slingers, met presently about the Palace, and in a threatning manner solicited the Parliament to provide speedily against the eminent danger; not onely by sending Messengers to the Regent, to soli|cite her to return together with the King to Paris, but by proceeding in the Decree against Forreigners. And so ignorantly obstiate were they in this, as they foolishly believed, that as soon as the Decree should be out, the

Cardinal would be presently destroy'd; and if you would ask them by what Forces, they answered, That above 50000 armed men would make the Decree be observed in despight of the World. And thus they began that unhappy War, which being disorderly begun, every wise man knew would disorder all things. The Cardinal ceased not to labour this mean while to reduce the Subjects to their due obedience by fair means. He gave order that 4000 Germans, old Souldiers, the remainder of Weymar's men, who were now under General Erack Governour of Brisack, should presently advance towards Paris; and divers other Troops, Officers, and Gentlemen, that were known to be well affected to his Majesties service, were likewise sent for from several other places: And it being known that Count Chavigny, who was not well pleased with his present condition might very much prejudice the King's Affairs by holding intelligence with the publick Enemy, and with the chief of the Frondeurs in the Parliament, he being a Parisian, he was made Prisoner in the Castle of St. Vincent by order from the King, by Monsieur Drovet Captain of the Guard. And thus was he kept from contriving such Plots as he indeavoured to do, whereby to put himself into the same condition he was in Richelieu's time, and from whence, through too much ambition, he was fallen.
Monsieur di Gaulas, Secretary to the Duke of Orleans, was also banish'd by means of his Enemy the Abbot di Riviere, who knew him to be inward with Chavigny, and therefore equally subject to suspition. By these procee|dings at Court, the Parliament grew hourly more jealous. They met on the 22 of September, where President Viola said, That the people feared lest Paris should be besieged; that the Court was full of hatred and revenge against the Counsellours of the Chamber, terming them Tumultuaries, dis|loyal, and the causers of all Disorder: That the Publick Safety was exposed to Imprisonment, Exile, and to other Violences, wherewith they were severe|ly threatned, who seemed to be most concerned in the Common Safety: That therefore it was now time to pull off Masks, and without delay to provide for their own Indemnity: concluding, that before they should put on any further re|solutions, they should send some of their Members to the Regent to intreat her to bring the King back speedily to Paris; and that since it was now known who was the principal Author of all the Kingdoms troubles, all the Princes and Officers of the Crown should be sent to the Parliament to revive the De|cree of the year 1607, whereby all Forreigners were inhibited receiving any Honours or Dignities in the State, or any part of Government.
Viola was not well pleased with his own condition, though he was suf|ficiently provided for by Monsieur Lambert; and particularly he appeared an Enemy to the Cardinal, thinking that he had kept him from being the Queen's Chancellour. Blanmenil maintain'd and back'd Viola; he moved, that the Cardinal might be made to give an account of the Money that were sent into Italy and elsewhere; and that he might purchase the name of an honest man, he put himself into the number of the Iansonians. President Novion plai'd his part also amongst the Frondeurs.
Amidst all these Agitations, the Parliament resolved to intreat the Queen by way of humble Remonstrance, that she would be pleased to return toge|ther with the King to Paris, and put an end to the peoples Jealousies by her presence; and that she would keep the Souldiers away that were coming. The Duke of Orleans, the Prince of Cond, who was then returned from Flanders, the Prince of Conty, the Dukes and Peers, were sent for to come the next day to Parliament, to use necessary Expedients for the safety and good of the State; and the Provost of Merchants, and the Consus were

sent for to receive such Orders as should be given them. They sent a Presi|dent and two Counsellours to make their desires known to the Princes: but the Answer was not according to their desires; for they said, They could not, nor would not do any thing without the Queen's consent. Orleans told the Deputies, That he would come no more to Parliament, whilst they did li|centiously advance their pretentions too far against Reason, and against the Laws, as they had done by their bold and scandalous Proposals that morning. Cond said, That the Parliament had nothing to do with State-affairs; that he neither could nor would go thither; and that he would be obedient to the Queen, though it cost him his life. Conty said onely, He would not go. Longueville told them in somewhat more milder words, That they had trans|gressed the bounds of Duty, and that the discourses made by the said Presi|dents were too passionate, and did deviate from conveniency. The Depu|ties hearing this, were extremely amazed, and without making any Reply, return'd the same day to Paris, where the Frondeurs were no less troubled, fearing that they could not do what they intended, without the assistance of some Prince of the Blood, whose joyning with the Queen hindered all their intentions.
The first President and the other Deputies were gone to Ruel, to ac|quaint the Queen with the Parliaments Remonstrance; who returned answer, That she wonder'd at their incongruous desire of having her return to Paris: That she used every year to go abroad and take the Air: That she valued more her own health, and that of her Son's, than any vain ridiculous suspition of the people. That they might be ashamed to make such desires to a Soveraign King, whose satisfactions were to be had in Reverence, and not examined by his Subjects. And forthwith a Decree was past in the Coun|cil of State, full in the teeth of all that the Parliament had done the day before; commanding them to keep within their due bounds, and not to meddle any more in such resolutions, contrary to the Law, and to Regal Authority.
Notice was given of this to the Parliament the same day that they met to hear the first President's Report; which being diversly discuss'd, they re|solved to make a new Remonstrance to the Queen, not by word of mouth, but in writing: And they began to take fitting course for the safety of the City. The Provost-Marshal was ordered to send to all places seated upon the River, to get Grain and all things necessary for the sustenance of so numerous a City, from thence to Paris. They resolved that the Inhabitants should keep in Arms for a publick Guard, and that the next day they should proceed to a Decree, like to that of the year 1617. Though this was not the means to extinguish, but rather to increase the fire, yet the Parliament did so flatter themselves with an imaginary pretention, and with the esteem they put upon themselves, as by the fomenting of some few seditious peo|ple, they suffer'd licentious resolutions to be hatched; thinking that they might easily gain them in the King's Minority, under the government of a Forreigner, and in the present juncture of times.
The Queen apprehending these proceedings, and fearing left the seditious people might detain her Son the Duke of Anjou, who was in Paris sick of the Small-pox; she made him come from thence late that night, and the Dutchess of Orleans went also out. It was the chief indeavour of the Court to allow time, and to interrupt the Decree which the next day was to be made by the Parliament. It was therefore resolved, as to the point of Forreigners, and as the most expedient means, that the Duke of Or|leans should write to the Assembly, That the best way he could think upon

to come to a good agreement, was a Conference; and that to that purpose he desired them to send some Deputie to the Queen, to treat of such things as were fittest to fulfil the King's will, which was well affected to Peace and Quiet, and to obviate all inconveniences. Monsieur de Choisy was sent with this Letter, who was to supply by word of mouth what was wanting in the Letter. Cond wrote to the same effect, excusing himself that he could not be present at their Assembly, by reason of his great occa|sions: but howsoever he advised them to send Deputies, as the most adequate means to remedy the evil which increased. And he told them, that he would really make known how desirous he was that the Assembly should be satisfied; which Assembly he hoped would not abuse those Records which tended to the Publick Good.
These Letters being read in Parliament, they all wondered at the diffe|rence between these Writings and the last days words: And though the Frondeurs grew prouder hereupon, who the more they were gratified at Court, grew the more insolent, yet they thought the Forces were sent for from Flanders, onely that the Court might extort that by force which they could not have of good will. They were notwithstanding troubled that they could get never a Prince to head them; wherefore that they might not exasperate the Duke of Orleans, nor Prince of Cond, who by this their alteration of proceedings they hoped might change their inclination to the Court, and be more partial for their Interests, the Parliament seemed willing to follow their advice; and laying all Novelties aside, Choisy, and La Riviere, who had brought the aforesaid Letters, were sent back, with promise that Deputies should be sent to St. Germains the next day, to treat and resolve with those Princes touching what should be best for the Com|mon Good.
They did this with intention to win the Princes over to them, or to make the Queen jealous that the Princes held secret Intelligence with the Coun|sellours of the said Chamber. Being come thither, they were civilly re|ceived, and sumptuously entertain'd; which being interpreted weakness in them, and not grace, caused more disorders and licentiousness. The first President being in a place where the Queen was, thought it decent to visit her; where being admitted to Audience, he reiterated his former Asser|tions, that he was most constant to their Majesties Interests. The Queen received him with her usual chearful looks, saying, That he was welcome, and that she desired that Concord and Agreement which was much desired by her from his sencire Affection and Wisdom. He answered with an expression of great desire to serve her, That he would employ all his indeavours to that purpose: That her Majesty might safely build upon his uncorruptible Loyalty, and upon the sincere Affection of the whole Parliament towards the King's service. Taking his leave of the Queen, he went with his Associates to Dinner, which was sumptuously prepared; after which he went to the Duke of Orleans's Lodgings, where were the Princes of Cond, Conty, and the Duke of Longueville, and no more. The Deputies desired that the King's Officers might not be there, thinking that they would stand too firm to the Cardinal's instructions. So this was granted, with but little decency to the Court, as appeared afterwards; the intention of the seditious party of the Parliament aiming at nothing else but at the dividing of the Court, that so they might usurp that Authority, which in the Union of the Court could not be, but according to the Example of former times. Yet the Princes did carry themselves so, as it could not be hoped by the Deputies but that they would continue their Duties to their Majesties, notwith|standing

which, the warier sort were perswaded that in time they would be more ambitious and less respectful: Nor were they deceived, for from these beginnings they began to pretend higher things. The Prince of Con|d after his Triumphant return from the Battel of Lens, changing his former Maximes, suffer'd himself to be born away to resolutions, which being oppo|site to the King's free Authority, were the occasion of the ensuing Evils.
The Duke of Orleans spoke first, and shewed, That the occasions of the troubles which had hapned in Paris by their means who were no friends to quiet, ought to be wisely weighed; for it would be unwisely done to allow time to the malignant humours which grew daily worse, and would darken the Majesty and Glory of the Crown, unto the maintenance of which all good French-men ought to contribute their utmost. Devotions and Endeavours, by plucking up these scandalous seeds of discord and diffe|rence at the very first. The first President answered in the name of all the rest, recounting the chief things that had hapned since the 15th of May, which was the day that the Parliament met: That the Parliament had la|bour'd much in finding out the best means to ease the people of their unsup|portable grievances: That to this end they had made several Decrees and had made many Remonstrances to the Queen, and particularly in St. Lewis his Chamber: That her Majesty had given her approbation thereof, and had used all means to finde the best way out for the general ease; and appeared willing to put forth a Declaration upon all the points and parts of the Con|ference; which not afterwards well liked by the Court, which whilst it seem|ed to grant much, did in effect grant nothing, but in lieu thereof the Mem|bers of Parliament were violently snatch'd away, the King privately carried out of Paris, the Souldiers made to approach, and the City threatned to be be|sieged: and that though these might be thought to be but vulgar Whisperings, yet violence did dayly increase, Count Chavigny being then imprisoned, a person of great esteem, and one who for the space of twenty years had done the Crown good service.
To this the Duke repli'd, That he did not dissent that the Parliament might take Cognizance of what concern'd the Peoples ease, and that they might take course to remedy it; for the Queen inclin'd to take away not onely the fourth part of the Subsidies, but more, if the present state of Affairs would permit it.
That as for the King's going out of Paris, it was not to be wondered at, since he went every year out of the Town about the same season to take the Air. For what concern'd Chavigny's Imprisonment, the Parliament had no reason to be concern'd therein, he being no Member of theirs; and that he was de|tain'd for important reasons, known onely to the King's Council. To this the first President repli'd, It was true, he was no Member of theirs, but that he had always, in all his imployments, been advantageous to them; which made it be the more suspected.
The Prince of Cond retorting his Argument upon him, said, That this Argument made against him that alleadged it; for if the memory of so ma|ny good services done by Chavigny were not able to excuse him, it was the more probable that his faults were great.
Then stept out President Viola, and said, That if Chavigny had erred, he should be proceeded against and punish'd by Law. He said, that there was but one Imprisonment lawfully permitted in France, called La Conceirge du Palais; and that if any other course were taken, the publick liberty was in|jured. The Duke of Orleans interrupted the Discourse saying, That peo|ple of better condition than Chavigny had been imprisoned: That the late

Prince of Cond, Father to this present Prince, had been imprisoned in the Basteile, without any notice taken by the Parliament.
The first President said, All this was true, and that it was not long since this abuse was introduced, and that an Illegitimate Order ought not to pass for Law. Thus the Deputies retired re infecta, and adjourn'd their Meeting to the 29th of the said Month; on which day they appeared again, and the Prince of Cond assuming great Authority, by his means almost all their Pro|posals were granted, unless it were the freedom of the persons imprisoned, which the Parliament pretended should be within the space of twenty four hours.
Whereupon the Queen was content that none should be imprison'd for State-affairs, without Process, for above six months: but the Parliament not allowing so long a time, took a middle way, restraining the time to three months, and said, That the Queen could not make any Declaration thereupon, but that they might take her word. The rest were not herewith content. President Blanmenil would not allow of three months; saying, That no king of France, by any priviledge of the Crown, can keep their Subjects Prisoners without Process at Law; for that would be prejudicial to the Publick Safety, and a hazarding of the Princes themselves, and of the Crowns Officers; since seve|ral means might be found in three months space to make away whom they lifted, before they could be proved guilty before competent Iudges. It was therefore said, That either the King must have absolute liberty to imprison men as long as he would, or but onely twenty four hours; in which time no Prisoner could beput to death, without evident signe of Violence or Ty|ranny. All men whatsoever being herein concern'd, it was decreed that no man should be kept Prisoner, without Process at Law, for above twenty four hours.
At the same time that this business was discussing in Parliament, Francis Dutchess of Vendosme gave in a Petition to the House, desiring that the Parliament, as the Sanctuary of persecuted Princes, would cause Process to be made in the behalf of the Duke her Husband, and of the Duke her Son, who had been deni'd to have their Process pleaded, not onely for three or six months, but for many years. But this being a private business, the Parliament received the Petition, and said it should be argued when the more weighty publick Affairs should be over.
Finally, after many meetings and debates in Parliament, a Declaration was issued forth for the re-establishment of Justice, and for a moderation of Grievances. The abuse of Accounts was regulated, the Tax of ten Millions of pounds Turnois was taken off. The people were eased of se|ven Millions which was paid to Officers and Souldiers who assisted in ga|thering Taxes and Impositions. The Officers of the Kingdoms Salaries were established. The Tax of a Crown for every run of Wine that came into the City, was taken away. The price of Salt was lessened, and two Millions upon what entered the Gates of Paris.
But the supream Authority of France being onely in the King's person, and no Decrees made in Parliament being valid, though for the publick benefit, without the King's assent; this Declaration was carried some days after to St. Germains, to have its full Vigour given it: but the Cardinal considering how prejudicial the lessening of above two Millions of Pistols yearly would be to the King's service, and how much the King's Authority would be diminished by bereaving him of so great a part of his Revenues, and of forgiving faults, as it would have been if the Institution touching Imprisonment for but twenty four hours had been put in practise, opposed

himself thereunto with all his might, shewing that if when the King had power to punish faults, so many were committed, it would be worse when his Majesty should be deprived of that power; and that the power to pu|nish made more for a Prince, than the power to reward: for people fear less to offend those they love, than those they fear; and rewards meet of|tentimes with ingratitude, when Punishment maintains Obedience. But the Parliament's designe being to deprive the King of means of continuing War by keeping him from Money, and so to force the Cardinal to agree unto a general Peace, or otherwise to weaken him so as he could not any longer pursue the course of his Victories, that they might have occasion to accuse him, and deprive him of his Administration; the King's Council was at last forc'd to give way unto it, with such disadvantage to regal Au|thority, as that from hence arose all the disorders which did afterwards trouble the tranquillity of that powerful Kingdom.
It is very certain, that two members of Parliament expressing upon some occasion the like conceit to Cavelliere Luigi Contarini, who mediated the general Peace; he wisely answered, That he liked it not: for if the Car|dinal should want moneys, and consequently means to make War, it was to be considered whether Spain would admit of Peace, when France should be reduced to such weakness.
This so prejudicial Concession being granted, which followed on the 28 of October, contrary to the Cardinal's opinion; Peace was published by means of the rest of the Council, whereby the Princes purchased the peoples applause, they having gotten their chief ends.
A while after Count Chavigny was released from Prison, where he was so afraid of being poysoned, as he eat but one Egge a day. The King par|doned him to gratifie the Parliament, and he was sent to a Castle of his own in Turenne. The Court used this means with patience per force to|wards the Parliament; so as it was easie to foresee, that enforc'd favours would prove at last but little advantageous to the receivers.
It being therefore thought that the Parliament could now decree no|thing against the Cardinal, since they had received whatsoever they could pretend unto, the King returned to Paris on the last of October, with the general applause of all the people.
But as by this divorce of the Parliament from the Court, all the Male-contents had a good occasion to endeavour their own satisfactions; Anne Princess of Bourbon, Sister to the Prince of Cond, and Wife to Henry Duke of Longueville, a Lady as handsome of Body as she was full of ge|nerous thoughts and lively Spirits, began to contrive not onely how she might satisfie her own pretensions, but to make those fail of theirs, with whom she was not well satisfied. The distaste which she pretended to have received from the Cardinal, was, for that she thought the Duke her Husband had been deluded by Count Serviente in his Embassie to the Assembly as Munster, by hindering him from reaping the fruits of his labour, in com|pleating the general Peace; and taking Serviente to be a creature of the Cardinals, and one who kept the War on Foot, She contracted friend|ship with the Count d' Avaux, a declared Enemy to Serviente, and endea|vour'd to make him joyn with the Duke her Husband against him; which he very wisely refused to do. She likewise complained that the Prince her Brother had not received that Declaration from the Court which he pre|tended to, of being Heir to his Brother-in-Law the Duke of Bres: So a coming from Munster to the Court, embittered against the Cardinal for these reasons, She spoke her opinion plainly touching the Peace, and

somewhat bitterly; whereat the Cardinal was much displeased, so as their hearts were ulcerated; and the Dutchess being resolved to be revenged, went about Autumn from Normandy to Noycy, where she spoke with the Duke de Rets, Brother to the Coadjutor of Paris, who was already enga|ged in the interest of Parliament; by which Duke's means she held Intelli|gence with the said Coadjutor, who used all the means he could to draw over the Duke her Husband to side with the Male-contents, which the Duke did at first wisely refuse; but at last being set upon on the one side by the Coadjutor's forcible perswasions, and on the other side by his Wives flat|teries and allurements, he was perswaded to pass his word (wherewith the Duke de Rets acquainted the Coadjutor, and he some of the chief Fron|deurs) that he would be for the Parliament always, provided that the Parliament did not fall upon the Court. And the same Dutchess having a great power over her Brother the Prince of Conty, a Youth of about se|venteen years of age, who might be said to enter but then into the world, she wrought him to be of the same mind, and made him make the same pro|mise, though he had no reason to be displeased with the Court, nor with the Cardinal. But the said Dutchess thinking that it made for her House and Family, that they should all enter into this Faction, she made the Co|adjutor (without taking notice that she had any hand therein) endeavour to bring her Brother the Prince of Cond also to their Union. The Coad|jutor undertook the business, and went to Noycy, together with the Duke of Longueville, and some of the chief Frondeurs, where they established that Union amongst themselves, which did yet more disorder all things.
The Parliament having obtain'd the aforesaid Declaration, grew more considerable; and Cond began to make friends therein, of whom he might upon occasion make use, and become more considerable in Court; and with the Duke of Orleans, who then discovered the pretences which Abbot Riviere had to be made Cardinal, as shall be said in its proper place. The Prince knew that the chief of the Parliament did distrust the Cardi|nal, were it either out of fear that he would deal ill with them whilst they dealt ill with the King's Authority, or for that they were resolved to main|tain the advantages which they had got by the Declaration of the 28 of October; pretending to remove him from his Administration of Govern|ment, as being a Forreigner.
Cond began therefore to look favourably upon the chief of the Parlia|ment, and to let them know, that he did not differ from them in their de|signe against the Cardinal, though his true end was, to make himself more necessary to the Court by so doing, and to oblige the Court (lest it might loose him) to follow his intents: for he found that the Frondeurs Animo|sity was such, as they would allow him but a limitated power; and by siding with them he should increase Orleans his Authority, who joyning with the Court, would become Arbitrators of all Affairs, and a powerful counter|poise to his designes: Wherefore to win credit with the Parliament, he made a publick Visit to Brousel, and had many particular Conferences with Longueville, who was then in great esteem, and suggested to his Compa|nions what they should do. President Viola, who had highly offended the Cardinal, and who was a Kinsman and an intimate friend to the Duke of Chastillion, by his means made known to the Prince that he might do well to grow great with the Parliament, to the cost of forreign Ministers of State, who had many enemies in France. He spoke himself afterwards with the Prince, who told him, as he had done Longueville, how he was inclined to joyn with the Parliament in their designe; but that they must allow him

time to make use of occasions which might happen, without hazarding any thing. This being somewhat ambiguous, they would know what he did really intend. The Coadjutor, who was of great esteem in the Assembly, made a motion upon occasion of the said Declaration, of suppressing all the Loans which were wont to be made by the Partisans unto the King, under pretence that all the Revenues of France were consumed by the U|sury of more than 25 per Cent. his Majesty not making any advantage thereby; that notwithstanding, the devouring War had obliged the Court to take up moneys from the Partisans upon the same Interest. The Coad|jutor wrought it so, as that the Doctors of Sorbon should give their opinion touching this detestable Usury. The Parliament took the same occasion, pretending that it was plainly contrary to the aforesaid Declaration. The Frondeurs striving to attempt something against the Cardinal, under so specious a pretence, and which was so generally approved by the publick, labour'd by these means to bring the Court to an extreme and inevitable necessity, if their machinations should take effect. For a long time was required to gather up the King's Revenues, and the Expences did the mean while dayly continue. So as having propounded unto themselves to send the Cardinal out of the Kingdom, they were necessitated to desire Orleans and Cond to assist them. Those who hoped that Cond would joyn in the designe of desiring the King to send away the Cardinal, thought it good to feel the Prince his pulse therein. So as Viola when he shewed the pre|judice which the Publick received by the Negotiators borrowing, as he touched upon other disorders of the Kingdom, said, That it was not to be remedied without searching the bottom of the business; but that it was to be hoped that the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Cond, who were pri|marily concern'd in the States preservation, would employ such remedies therein as were requisite, and was expected from their wisdome. The Prince thought himself much injured by these words, fearing lest because he went often to his house, and was inward with Chastillton, the Court might think that he himself had made him to say this; and that therefore having discovered his hidden ends, he would in time endeavour to cross him in his ways. He therefore interrupted him, and said, That it became not the Parliament to meddle in such Affairs. Viola's friends, and such as were dip'd in the designe, could not brook this the Prince's interruption; and therefore a great murmure was made in the Assembly, with but small shew of respect born to Orleans, or Cond, though they were both present. The Prince could not contain himself, but changing his colour grew angry, and by a gesture of his finger, which is natural unto him, seemed to threaten the Assembly.
Hereby the Court perceived that many of the Parliament meant no good; and fearing lest Factions might increase, and that the people being encou|raged by her Enemies, might begin to make new Barricadoes, began to li|sten to those who wish'd that the King would go out of Paris; being therein encouraged by the Prince, who was much scandalized at what had been said.
The Dutchess of Longueville seeing that the Prince her Brother, and Head of her house, would not joyn in the common Cause, (for so it was termed by many) thought it advantagious for the Cause to have her House divided; since not being able to make it do what she would, it behoved that one part thereof should withdraw it self from the hatred of the peo|ple, and might be put into a condition of rising to such greatness as the present times seemed to afford. The Prince of Conty was already won over

by his Sister. Thus did the Treaty of Noysy end, whereinto but few were admitted, for the more secresie. Prince Marsilliack, who was afterwards Duke of Rochsaucot, and Governour of Porctou, was presently acquainted therewith, who was very intimate with Conty, and Longueville: and not being well pleased with the Queen for being denied some Honour which he was promised, and which he pretended unto, he willingly listned to the invitation, left his Government, came to Paris about the end of the year, and entered into the Union; and the Dutchess of Longueville being great with Childe, and Conty of a tender Complexion, the chief management of Affairs lay upon him.
The Cardinal discovering these Plots, sought dextrously how to escape the Blow: But it being impossible that his Glory should not be envied, since neither Goodness, Wisdome, nor Rewards are a sufficient fence against Ambition; Cond, who was all Life and Spirit, had projected with himself how to become necessary to the Court, as well by Actions as Advice; and being desirous of that power which he hated in others, he suffered all things to run to ruine, that so he might have occasion of compassing his ends.
But because together with the known reasons of Duke Longueville's di|stastes, there were some more secret ones, and of greater importance, it will not be amiss to make this Digression.
Whilst in August the aforesaid Tumults were in Paris, Duke Longueville sent Monsieur Priolo, a confident of his, to the Cardinal, to assure him of his service to him, and to the Court, ofering to come and bring 2000 Gen|tlemen with him, who should carry him into Normandy. The Cardinal seemed very well satisfied with this offer, and bad Priolo tell the Duke that he should also receive all satisfaction from him. Where it is to be observed, that but eight days before, the same Priolo had desired the Government of Havre de Grace for the Duke his Master; and was answered, That it could not be done without discomposing the State.
Priolo told the Duke, That the Cardinal, to boot with other Comple|ments, assured him that he the Duke should receive all content from him. 'Tis well, said the Duke, then I shall have Havre de Grace. Priolo said, The Cardinal had not spoken any thing to him concerning that Place, and that his Grace might do well to speak with the Cardinal and thank him, that so he might know his intention more clearly. The Duke answered, He would not do so; and that when time and place should serve, he would make him declare himself more fully.
The King being afterward, gone to Ruel, the Prince of Cond as he re|turned from Flanders was met by Longueville at Chantely, and said, That now any thing might be got, and that he had got Havre de Grace. The Prince was surprized thereat, who when he came to Ruel, told the Cardi|nal of it; who plainly denied it. The Prince acquained his Brother-in-Law with it, who from that time forward declared himself dissatisfied; and this incited him to novelty, and engaged him therein. This mean while the Male-contents, who were Enemies to Peace, as thinking they should never fill their unsatiateness thereby, gave out to the Citizens and Merchants of Paris, That Commerce decay'd, that their Purses were emptied by the continuance of War, which was still maintained onely because the Cardi|nal was an enemy to Peace. They set on foot two things: the one, that the Parliament should renew the Decree against Forreigners, which was made in the time of Marquiss d' Ancre; by which the Administration of Go|vernment would be taken from the Cardinal: And the other, that they

should endeavour to interest more Princes and great men of the Kingdom in their Faction.
Whereupon, by the Coadjutors counsel, who by appearing Piety strengthned his politick ends; giving large Alms to the Poor in the Streets and Churches, whereby he got the Prayers of the meaner people; as oft as the Parliament sat to treat of this Affair, those that were most seditious ap|peared accompanied with multitudes of mutinous people, who cri'd a|loud to have the Government taken from the Cardinal, threatning all that were against it. And this they did, because this Proposal being several times on foot in the Parliament, it was not approved of, as being inhumane, and contrary to Law, which doth not allow that people should be pu|nish'd before they are proved guilty by Process; so as the Negative Votes were more than the Affirmative. The designe of these discontented Lords, who were incited to Novelty onely out of ambition, was, that if their Ma|jesties should not grant a Reformation in the Court, according to their de|sires, the Prince of Conty should head the people that were to rise; that the Coadjutor in his Pontifical Robes should foment the Sedition; and that every one betaking themselves to violence, they should bereave the Queen of her Regency, imprison the Prince of Cond, and rid their hands of the Cardinal, and of all others that should oppose their designes.
But this Designe being precipitous and undecent, the Duke of Longue|ville, who was of a more composed minde, appeared somewhat cool and irresolute therein. He made some difficulty touching the new half yearly Parliament of Roan, which being almost wholly composed of Parisians, of such Families as were interested in the Court, would never have consented to such Novelties: But the old Six months Parliament composed of antient Counsellours, who were disgusted for Injuries suffer'd formerly by Cardi|nal Richelieu, seemed readier to accept of all violent Councels. The Duke would therefore have the Conspiracy carried on till the first were gone, and till the Army being engaged in the Field against the Spaniards, way might be made for any Tumult.
The King's Officers perceiving these designes, and knowing that a speedy Remedy must be found out for this spreading Malady, the fittest Expedients were propounded, and diversly discust in the King's Privy Council. Every one knew that the Declaration of the 28 of October struck dangerously at the Regal Authority, since Rebels and seditious people could not be pu|nished, nor the War be continued in its wonted Vigour, the Revenue being so sensibly diminished, when there was greatest need of it, and when these destructive designes were plotted by the Frondeurs in their secret Meetings. The Prince of Cond being desirous to increase his Reputation in Paris, and in the Court, as he had immortaliz'd his Glory in the Field, prest that the King and Queen might remove from Paris, and that the City might be besieged; promising that it would be forc'd to comply with their Majesties in all their desires, within fifteen days. This Opinion was back'd by Secretary Tillier, saying, That if Pane Gonezza, bread from Gonezza, were but twice wanting, the City would soon be in confusion, as not being able to subsist without abundance of Victuals. Gonezza is a Town seven Leagues from Paris, where there are many Mills and Bakehouses, which furnish so great a quantity of Bread twice a week, as serves to feed half that numerous peo|ple of Paris.
The Cardinal knowing that Paris did abound in Corn and other neces|saries, and that all Provisions could not be kept out without a numerous Army, considered that the Siege might be a business of length, and

subject to some bad accidents, and that the innocent people ought not to be punished for their sake who were guilty: he therefore propounded that the Queen should go to the Arsenal, pretending to go to her Devotions in St. Mary-Church, which was neer hand; that the King should also go thither out of the City, as if he meant to go hunt, accompanied by all the Princes and great men of the Court, as also all the Officers of the Treasury, upon u|sual pretence of Negotiating therein with Marshal Milleray, who was Go|vernour of the Arsenal, and Superintendant of the Finances; and that bringing the Army to several quarters about the City, the people should be told, that their meaning onely was, that some few of the Parliament should come out of the City; which when it should be done, the rest would easily be kept within the bounds of duty, since the Cardinal was not generally hated, and that they were but a few who excited by ambition did cavil against the Government.
This Opinion was seconded by Marshal Milleray, a friend to bold reso|lutions; and had been embraced, had not the necessity of expecting neces|sary Troops which were some leagues off, and the assembling of the Re|giment of Guards which was quartered in several places, rendred the bu|siness somewhat knotty: For at every least stirring, the people would have taken up Arms, and drawn their Chains, as they were like to have done some days before, upon the meer Advertisement that six Companies of the Guard were assembled together before the Louvre, to receive Captains in the places of those that were slain at the Battel of Lens. They were there|fore forced to put on such resolutions as shall be said in the following Book: Though when the tumultuous Frondeurs heard afterwards of this, they grew so bold as to laugh at it, declaring, That they valued not the King's Forces, and that Paris was well enough stored with People and Provision: So that as soon as the Decree should have been out, there would have been above 50000 men in Arms ready to have put it in execution; and if the Court should have attackt the Parisians, there would have been two Armies of 50000 men apiece ready in an instant; one to have followed the Court whithersoever it had gone, and the other to have armed the Frontiers of Flanders against the Spaniards, to the end that they might not make use of these civil Discords. And these insulting Speeches were utter'd without any manner of shame, even by many who were well reputed in War, and in civil Government; by which it is seen, that Humane Judgment hath no more de|formed Disease than that which blindes the eyes of the Understanding.
Whilst Affairs went thus in Paris, Mareshal antzaw hearing that the Spaniards, after the blow given them at Lens, were got together at Stein|chirk, a Village within a league of the Village Furnes, marched towards them; but not being stay'd for, he took the Abby of Duns, and drew neer Furnes, intending either to take it, or to oblige Marquiss Sfondrao, who was come into those parts to rally the remainder of the routed Troops, to retreat: from whence Monsieur di Voubecourt, Camp-master, advanc'd from Burgues St. Venaux to Bulcamp, and the Marquiss di Chastelnau Ma|cuisere, who was also Camp-master, fell upon Iaquesburg with other Soul|diers taken out of Dunkirk; and joyning all the Troops together by Bridges thrown over those Channels, he forc'd the Spaniards who were at Steinchirk to retreat from thence by night to Dismuda; so as the way be|ing open for the French to assault Furnes, they advanced towards it: And the Prince of Cond as he went with Erlack's Troops to visit the Trenches which were already open the 4th of September, was hit with a Musket-shot, the force whereof being spent, it made onely a contusion in the upper part of his thigh, and did him no more hurt.
The ninth at night Arnault lodg'd on the right side, and Castelneau on the left of the Brink of the Ditch, and forthwith began to pass over it, and to fall upon the Walls of the Town; but the besieged wanting both Meat and Warlike Ammunition, capitulated the next day that the Souldiers and Officers should remain Hostages in the hands of Marshal Rantzaw, to be exchanged for such French as were taken the year before in the attempt made against Ostend: to which effect five Officers of the Garrison of Fur|nes were suffered to go to Newport to negotiate the Exchange. And about 1000 Souldiers went out the same night, and were lodged in the French Quarters, having good Guards upon them. And thus did the Campagnia end that year; for Cond hearing of the Tumults that were in Paris, were it either that he might assist there by his Authority, or that he might make use of the present conjuncture of time to advantage himself whilst the Court was weak, or that he thought it not fit to engage the Army in o|ther Enterprizes, whilst he saw there was occasion of making use of it against the Parisians, pursued the Victory no farther, but went to Court (as hath been said) leaving the Army at Estre upon the River Lis, under the command of Marshal Grammont.
But if the Events which hapned in so many Kingdoms and Provinces af|forded matter of Memory, the Treaty of Peace at Munster ought certainly to have the Precedency; it being a business of such weight, as if we consi|der the time that was employ'd therein, the Princes that did negotiate it, and the difficulties that were to be overcome, it will be known that there hath not been any business a long time amongst Christian Princes, of greater reflection than this: For in it the means were discussed how with safety to the reputation and to the satisfaction of the greatest Princes of Christen|dom, those Arms should be laid down, which have so long consumed and wasted so many Cities.
The Treaty was introduced by Pope Vrban the VIII. and by the Vene|tians. The Congress was established in Cullen upon the Rhine. In the beginning of the year 1637, Caesar's Plenipotentiaries and those of the Catholick King came thither, and tarried there till the year 1643, none appearing there for the French, but the Count d' Avaux, who pass'd quickly from thence to Hamburg, to renew the Confederacy with the Swedes: Thither came the King of Denmark who was named to be Mediator, and Count Curts, the Emperour's Plenipotentiarie; where they made divers desires to the French Agents, and to the Swedes, that they would make some Overtures. Preliminary to the general Treaty, Signor Salvio the Swedish Plenipotentiary gave his consent thereunto without any reserva|tion, save that France would concur therein also. The King of Spain also gave the Emperour leave to chuse Plenipotentiaries in his name; whereunto the Count d' Auspurg was chosen, and by common consent Pasports were sent to such as were to come thither.
The French interposed difficulties to procure delay, which they say they did at the instance of the Swedes, who to keep it from being known that they were Authors of the delay, by openly refusing the King of Denmark's Mediation, their natural Rival, made the occasion seem to proceed from the French, who though they had given way first that the Meeting should be at Cullen, yet they desired that it might be removed to Munster: where|unto the Austrians consented, and sent their Deputies thither; but when they began to treat, it was found that Avaux was not sufficiently impowred to enter into the Treaty, whose first pretension was, That Munster should be free from making any Oath to Caesar, or to the Bishop thereof: which

was yielded unto. The greatest part of the Pasports being sealed up by the Cardinal Infanta, the French raised a doubt, whether in case he should die, they should be of Validity: Nor were they satisfied with the offer made by Don Francisco de Melo, who succeeded in the Government, that he would ratifie them. So they were fain to send for Ratification from Spain; which made the Spaniards suspect that the French sought pretences of de|lay, and that they did not much care for Peace.
At last, after much debate, the Preliminary Agreements were assented unto, and reciprocally underwritten; but yet the main Treaty did not be|gin: for Avaux instead of going to Munster, declared that he would wait for the Ratification of the said Preliminary at Hamburg; which the Austri|ans gave way unto. The French still interposed difficulties, and demanded three weeks space to examine Writings: And they also disputed the King of Spain's Ratification, because it did not specifie the Transaction of Ham|burg, verbatim. And the Count d' Auspurg required the King of France his Ratification from Avaux, and found it not so particular as that of the King of Spain.
In this mean while Cardinal Richlieu died; and the King of France be|ing very desirous of Peace, by Cardinal Mazarin's advice (in whom he did greatly confide) did more advance the business in two months, than he had done in four years before; and the business had been concluded, had not the King himself died, which disordered all, and raised better hopes in many of obtaining their desired ends in his Son's Minority.
The Assembly commenc'd not till the beginning of April the ensuing year, when the French came also thither, who took a further compass about by the way of Holland. For thinking that the best way for Peace, was to be ready for War, they would first agree with the States, and with the Prince of Orange, how to employ their Arms that year; whereat the Spaniards quarrelled, for that instead of coming readily to the Meeting, they trea|ted at the Hague how to put more stops to the business.
Whilst the French Agents treated in Holland, the Court of France de|sired that the Pope would remove the Mediation of Cardinal Ghinetti, as being suspected to that Crown; and Cardinal Rossetti was substituted in his place; and afterwards instead of him Monsieur Fabio Chigi, Bishop of Nardo, and the Pope's Nuntio in Cullen, a person wholly unconcern'd, and famous for exemplary conditions; who when he had implored a blessing from God by a solemn Procession through Munster, entered into the Trea|ty, together with Cavalliere Luigi Contarini Embassador extraordinary from Venice to this Meeting. At the very first they fell upon stops, by preten|tion of the States of the Empire, who were called together at Frankfort, whereof the French were accused to be the Authors; who preparing in all places for the continuance of War, confirm'd the opinion, that they had no minde to Peace.
Together with Munster, the City of Osnaburg was deputed for a Rendez|vous to the Agents of the Protestant Princes and States, to the end that they might discuss there between themselves the Interests of the Crown of Swethland and of the Princes of their Religion, as was desired by the Swedes, in point of Precedency; especially since the Pope's Agents did in|tervene there.
Count Lodovick di Nassaw, and Doctor Isack Wolmar, came to Munster for the Emperour; and the Count of Auspurg, and Doctor Iohn Crane to Osnaburg; it being the custome of Germany in such-like Cases to send a Per|sonage of great Birth, who was a Souldier, to maintain Decency, and a

Doctor to regulate affairs with Learning, and by the Pen. Count Lam|berg did soon succeed Count Auspurg, who was sent for to the Court; Don Diego Salavedra, and the Bishop of Boisteduke, who was afterwards made Bishop of Cambray, the Marquiss of Castel Roderigo Governour-general of Flanders, and Doctor Antonio Brown, came thither for the King of Spain; after whom came Count Pignoranda in the beginning of Iuly 1645, who found Count Zappata dead, and sent Saravedra back to Spain. From the King of France, the Counts Avaux and Servient; and at last the Duke of Longueville, who pretending to be called by the title of Highness, caused much hindrance in the carrying on of the business. The Elector of Bava|ria sent Baron Haslare thither as his Embassador. All the other Potentates of Europe sent their Deputies, for there were but few who were not in some sort concern'd therei: So as the multiplicity of affairs, the weight thereof, and the hardness of the pretences, (some whereof were ever and anon altered according to the success of Arms) was the cause why the Mediators, being drawn from off the main point, lest the affair involved in such difficulties as are not yet overcome.
The French being confederated with the Swedes and Hollanders, inten|ded that their Interests should be treated on joyntly; but the Swedes de|clared that they would have nothing to do with Spain, and the Hollan|ders intended not to meddle with what concerned the Empire; so as France was forced to change her form of proceeding; the Princes with whom she was to treat being divided into two Classis, the one whereof in|cluded the Swedes Empire, and Emperour; the other the Hollanders and the King of Spain: and yet this division wanted not difficulties, which were almost insuperable. For the Hollanders would not as then listen to any more than a Truce; and the Swedes and other Confederates with France, declared they would have a Peace. Castel Roderigo offered a Blank unto the Hollanders, which they might treat of at home.
The Hollanders pretended Truce onely, and not Peace; for that their Commonwealth being maintained by Arms, thought it would be dange|rous to reduce it to Idleness, which they had by experience found to be so: To this the Prince of Orange his Interest was added, who getting great advantage by War, would not willingly listen to a long peace. They inten|ded also to make this Truce so, as that if France should enter thereinto, she should oblige herself upon any breach to reassume War. But though the other Confederates did not correspond herein, the Treaty of Truce was continued, which was afterwards converted to a perpetual Peace.
New Articles were therefore agreed upon between the Counts of A|vaux and Servient, as they passed thorough Holland to Munster, on the one side; and the States General on the other: Wherein the parties did reciprocally binds themselves, not onely not to treat of any thing without the assent and participation of the other Colleague, but that the Treaty should be carried on so equally, as if one of the parties should see the others business advance more than its, it should desire the other to proceed no fur|ther till its affairs were equally advanc'd.
The French inclined to Peace, because it made for them to have Peace in such a conjuncture of time, as they could not be more glorious, nor more powerful: and it proved very advantageous for them; for thereby they eased the Kingdom of the vast expence they were at by War, and se|cured themselves from the Conspiracies and Troubles which usually arise in France in their Kings minority. It is true, they pretended thereunto upon such advantages as they thought became them, by reason of the

great Forces they were Masters of, and by the Intelligence which they held in Germany, and elsewhere. The French Agents ends were these; nor would they ever be drawn to any thing apart from their Confederates con|cernments. The Swedes, and Princes and States of the Empire, were of the same minde. The Hollanders, who supposed that by their abundance of Shipping they might assume unto themselves all Traffick during the War between the two Crowns, and thereby swallow up all the Wealth of France and Spain, seemed not to insist upon their Colleagues sene for as a Com|monwealth, which measures Affairs onely so far as they tend to their own ad|vantage, they knew they could not advantage them more, than by the dis|advantages of the two Crowns, leaving them engaged in War; and there|fore they seemed to steer a course differing from the rest, and it was thought that thereby they did very much prejudice the business, which was otherwise in a fair way.
The Spaniards did really desire Peace; for being weary of so many long Wars, and depressed by the Revolts of their own Dominions, they loved once to put an end to the inconveniencies which people feel by the long course of sinister fortune; and the rather, for that the Kingdom wanting Male succession, the people were less willing to contribute to the Grandezza thereof, they applied themselves to more adequate means, whereby to mo|derate the high pretences of the French, and sought to break the Union of their Enemies, that they might make them more pliable to fair and honest things. They therefore endeavoured to make Caesar treat with the Hollan|ders apart, not including the French; but the Queen of Swedeland and her Council carried her self with much faith and constancy towards her Col|leagues. They found matters better disposed with Holland; for to boot with the aforesaid Reasons and Interests, the business was to be managed by particular men, and more subject to be corrupted. And the French gave out that here was the Rent; for some of the Holland-Deputies were bribed by Count Pignoranda, but none were found guilty, but Myn here Niderolfe, Deputy of Guelderland.
In the first Proposals the French projected, that the King of Spain should call himself no more King of Portugal, nor of Navarre, nor Prince of Cata|lonia; that the Elector of Treves should be set at liberty: And they toge|ther with the Swedes, pretended that the Deputies of the Cities and States of the Empire should assist in the Assembly.
Caesar would not consent hereunto, thinking that it became not his Vas|sals to appear as Soveraigns in these management; he demanded the ma|king good of the Treaty at Ratisbone the year 1632. The Spaniards re|quired what had been taken from them, upon the example of the several Peaces made at Cambray, Crespy, and Vervins; and they would not by any means have that the Duke of Braganza should be included in the Peace, who had usurped the Kingdom of Portugal; and that whilst the King of France was in his Minority, wherein they hoped that the face of Affairs might alter: and for their greater security, the Parliament of Paris was to take Cognizance of the whole Affair. The War between Sweden and Denmark being hereunto added, the Treaties slept for eight months. This War was made by the Swedes, not so much concerning the Sound, as to keep the King of Denmark from medling with their Affairs, as Mediator of Peace, whom they held to be their antient Rival.
The Mediators did at this time demand the Deputies, that they would shew their Plenipotentiary Patents. The French denied to deliver theirs, till those of the Emperour and the Swedes had delivered theirs; which was

thought to be a pretence to prolong time, whilst by reason of the War with Denmark, they had not been delivered at Osnaburgh, and their Mediator was wanting.
The Plenipotentiary Patents came at last to the Officers of the Crown, as was agreed upon by the Mediators: and from Ianuary to Iune, the time was spent in general Propositions. Upon Count Oxenstern's coming to Munster to agree the Proposals which were to be joyntly made by the Swedes and French, the Confederate Crowns took advantage by the Vi|ctory had at Tabore, and by other proceedings of the French and Swedish Forces, and obliged the Emperour to set the Elector of Triers at liberty; which caused much prejudice afterwards; and they protested that unless this were done, they would be gone, and leave all things unperfected.
The Emperour gave way thereunto, and restored all his possessions un|to him, except it were Philipsburg, which being in the hands of the French, was not spoken of by them; and this was thought to be the effect of haste which they made to have him freed, to oblige that Elector, and that he might speak no more of that place. It was moreover granted that the States of the Empire might be called at Munster and at Osnaburgh.
In the beginning of December, the Imperialists and Spaniards gave in their Propositions: the French did the like; and upon these the business lasted for three whole years: for when the Articles were to be concluded, they were disturbed or altered by accidents of Arms.
The Spaniards said that the French did sometimes grant, sometimes gain-say things that had been agreed upon. The French said that the Spaniards did sometimes assent unto, sometimes make difficulty of Proposals that were yielded unto.
The Writing which after a long time the French gave in, contained: That all the Confederates of France should be satisfied, and have tehir Inte|rests decided together with those of the Crown: That for the affairs of Italy, the French were ready to agree unto what the Pope, the Venetians, and the other Potentates of that Nation should think fit, whilst they should not be pre|judicial to his Christian Majesty: And that the Princes and States of the Empire, and of Italy, should be bound for security of these Treaties.
The Spaniards thought this Writing rather likely to break the Treaty of Peace, than to continue it, since the number of the Confederates with France were not named; and some Chapters thereof were not to be ad|mitted of by the Spaniards, whilst it was therein mentioned, that neither the Princes of the Empire, nor those of Italy would be bound to maintain the Peace between the two Crowns; nor that the Pope nor Venetians would accept of the Office of being Councellors to France: All which the Spaniards said were unsubstantial, and denoted with what designe that Instrument was made. They therefore did briskly oppose it, and preten|ded that the Mediators themselves did know the rubs which were cast in by the French, and that they had desired the Mediators to moderate them, who wisht they might not be forced to that, till the Duke of Longueville should be come. In which interim they exhibited the new Plenipotentiary Patents in the same form as was judged by the Mediators to be agreed upon on the 20th of November, 1644. This was also found by the Spaniards to differ in nine points more than the Nuntio and Cavalier Contarini had contrived.
A Truce was propounded by the Mediators to Count Pignoranda six days after he was come to Munster; as well for that it was necessary to the better negotiating of Peace, as that they might assist the Venetians, who

desired help against the Turks, to the benefit of Christendom: But nothing was concluded therein; for though the Spaniards seemed willing to assent thereunto, the Interests of many Princes, besides the French, were so dif|fering, as they could not agree therewith.
The Spanish Agents offer'd to remit all to the Mediators; but the French suspecting some deceit, said, That they had no authority to make compro|mises, but that they had order to make Peace, which they were ready to do. They tried all their power with the Mediators and States of the Empire to have the Portuguese admitted, and were very earnest herein, that they might not abandon their Friends; which the Spaniards complain'd mightily of, saying, That this was to puzzle the whole Treaty; for they knew if this were done, the Spanish Agents had strict orders to forego Munster pre|sently.
The French were at this time more feared than loved in the Assembly; for their continual Victories made all men apprehend that they might end in the common Prejudice. Their Demands were obliquely fomented by the Elector of Bavaria, who desired the Protection of France to be maintained in his Electoral Title, and in the possession of his Dominions; which the Swedes did sorely threaten, who were worse satisfied with this Prince than with any other, for having broken the Peace which he had made at Vlm with the French and Swedes apart from the Emperour; which was the right way to bring on the general Peace at Munster.
The Prince of Orange, who knew the States inclination, wish'd the French that they should not care for making the Deputies of the Vnited Provinces come so soon to the Assembly, but that they should first seek their own advantages by other means with the Spaniards: for otherwise they would be deceived by the Holland-Deputies, who were already won by the Spanish Agents; and that they should no sooner be come to Munster, but that the Peace would be concluded apart, as was by them desired; and that it would be better for them to treat in Holland, where about the Religion and civil Government they would hardly agree. The French suspected this advice, considering that he might give it for his own particular Inte|rest, in keeping his Command, and in making the War continue. They notwithstanding continued their desires by their Deputies to the Assembly, and thought that if they were come with a real resolution of cooperating friendly, according to the establish'd Covenants, they might expect a glo|rious and good Peace. The Council of France foresaw therefore, that though the Spaniards should conclude of Peace upon any whatsoever con|ditions, yet since it made for their interest to make use of those disorders which usually arise in a King's Minority, they might break it upon some new pretence, upon any troubles in France, especially when they should be sure of the disunion and disarming of the Colleagues; it seeming almost impos|sible that these two Rival-Nations should continue long together in Peace. Count Servient came Extraordinary Embassador into Holland, and made it appear plainly to the States, that the true way to make a firm and lasting Peace, was to binde themselves in an undissolvable Union, and in obliging themselves to take up Arms each other for their Confederate, in case that the Agreement should by any accident be broken.
This business was treated of above three months: for though the Hol|landers should assent to the Proposal, yet they did not understand themselves obliged to take up Arms, unless the Spaniards should break the Peace in Flanders. But Servient insisting, that they should be bound to concur, if it should be broken upon the Interest of Catalonia, Italy, or Lorrain, it

was at last carried for the League, or Guarrantian Peace; so called, because they were both of them obliged to defend one another. Servient having obtained this, he returned to Munster much praised for his good carrying on of this affair, and the French reassum'd the Negotiation.
Affairs being reduced to this condition, the Swedes and French Victori|ous, and Bavaria wavering; Count Tratmondorf, who was already at Mun|ster, a full Plenipotentiary from the Emperour, following the Spaniards example, endeavoured likewise to captivate the States of the Empire, and to separate them from the Interests of their Friends; but he mist his aim. He fought to divide the Swedes from the French, but could not. At last, seeing himself in great straights, Bohemia like to be lost, together with the rest of the Hereditary States whereinto the Swedes had got, he offered Pinniarolle, and Moienueck, both which were Feudatory to the Emperour, though possess'd by France; the full Dominion of the three Bishopricks, Mentz, Tull, and Verdune, which for a hundred years last were held by the same Crown. He offered two Millions of Gold to the Swedes; and the City of Stralsund in pawn, till full payment should be made. To the Pro|testants, the possession of the Ecclesiastick Goods for some more years than was mentioned in the Peace of 1645. To Bavaria, the Electoral Vote, together with the upper Palatinate. To the Prince Palatine, the lower Palatinate, together with the eighth Electoral Vote. The French added, that they would have Alsatia, Sangovia, Briscovia, the four Wallstadts or Cities of the Forest, Brisack, and Philipsburg; but this onely in prote|ction: At which all were greatly amazed, and the Swedes grew jea|lous.
The French spoke high, being fomented by the advantage of their and their Colleagues Forces every where. In particular, the taking of Cour|tray and Dunkirk infused apprehension into all men, and particularly in|to the Hollanders; to whom the change of Dunkirk, for the enterprize of Antwerp being propounded by Servient, they would not assent thereunto; considering that the Spaniards being engaged in so important a division, it might so happen, that the King of France his forces might make further progress. And that Republick seemed not to like to be made to confine, by new acquisitions made by the French, upon that Nation, which was now become so considerable, for the largeness of its Dominion, for the number and quality of its People, and by the union of Forces; so as these politick respects increased, and the rather by the Prince of Orange his sickness, and succeeding death, who did mainly oppose this Peace, though his Wife was won over by the Spaniards. On the 11th of Ianuary 1646, the Hol|land Plenipotentiaries came to Munster, being thereunto prest by the French, who doubted not but to make an advantageous conclusion by their Union.
The Hollanders interposed presently in the business between the two Crowns, and were allowed of by the Spaniards, though their Enemies, and were treated by them as Agents to a Crown'd Prince; for Pignoranda was willing to oblige them, whilst they kept joyned to the French. 'Twas propounded to the French, that they would deliver up Hesden, Beaupaw|mes, Landrecy, and Danvilliers, with all that belonged thereunto. These as the Spaniards said did highly disdain the Proposal, and laboured that the States of the Empire would declare that they would treat with France without comprehending Spain, nor what concern'd the State of Millain a Fee of the Empire, nor the States which make up the Circle of Burgundy; which they did, with intention to divide the Interests of the

King of Spain, not onely from the Empire, but from the Emperour him|self.
Then the Mediators endeavoured that the Spaniards should cast in some other places, putting them in good hope, that if they would do so, they trusted that the Peace would be concluded. They therefore condescen|ded to yield up whatsoever else the French held in Artois, or in the County of Rossillion; but this would not suffice, declaring by the Writing presen|ted on the 24th of April, that in case they would not admit of all the points and conditions therein express'd, which they held to be just and grantable, they held themselves not bound to observe any thing that they had yielded to, and that they would make higher demands.
The Hollanders made new desires, and assured the Spanish Agents, that notwithstanding this Declaration, they did firmly believe, that if they would adde Graveling and Theonville to the other Towns which they had already granted, there would be no doubt of an Agreement. The French said it would be folly to restore what they did quietly and without dan|ger possess, whilst they were in a condition of making yet greater acqui|sitions; Wherefore they absolutely refused, and were not at all satis|fied.
These Deputies of the Vnited Provinces insinuated, that the French-men's being so averse to make Peace, was the onely occasion of retarding the Agreement: So as thinking they had done what belonged to them, by having brought the Spaniards to reasonable conditions, which would not be accepted of by the French, who continued to protest that they held not themselves bound to observe any thing; the aforesaid Plenipotentia|ries were the more stedfast in their opinion of continuing Peace with the Spaniards, apart from the rest: But before doing this, they made new of|fers to the French of the County of Rossilion, of a Truce for 30 years in Catalonia, of all the Towns taken in the Low Countries and in Burgun|dy, and of the reciprocal restitution of all that they held in Italy apper|taining to the Dukes of Savoy or Mantua: to all which Count Pignoran|da yielded, the promise being kept, which, as he said, was made by the French, that no Speech should be made of Portugal, that the Duke of Lorain should be satisfied, as also the Empire and the Emperour. Two of their Deputies went to signifie thus much to the French Agents at Osna|burg, who were there to put on the Treaties with the Emperour and Em|pire, joyned with the Swedes, and excluding the Spaniards. Here they found things so well ordered, as they hoped all would end well; and an|swer was made, that they would return within two daies to Munster, and that they would joyntly subscribe with the Duke of Longueville. When they returned, new troubles arose; for the French pretended that Roses and Cadaches were comprehended in the County of Rossilion, and not in Catalonia. The Spaniards refer'd this to the Arbitrement of the Media|tors; which was not so soon agreed, but that the French Agents presented another Writing, containing, That a proviso must be had that Cassal must never return to any of the House of Austria: That the Portion of the In|fanta Donna Catherina of Savoy should be paid: That the Treaty of Chie|rasco should be observed and maintained by Arms: That the Grisons and Valtolines should return to the condition they were in, in the year 1617. That Don Duarte of Portugal should be set at liberty before the Treaty were ratified: That all the Goods that were formerly belonging to the house of Aquavia in the Kingdom of Naples, confiscated by Ferdinando King of A|ragon, should be restored to Seignior de Angliere the pretended Duke of

Atria: And that the pretensions to the Kingdom of Navar should be reserved to the King of France notwithstanding the Peace. Some dispute arose hereupon, which the French said was made by Pignoranda to spin on time, and to con|clude nothing; for they said they had been already determined, and that they were now mention'd only to know how they might be established. The Spa|niard said that they were new additions; but that notwithstanding they were contented they should be decided by the Mediators, by whom at last they were adjusted in the end of February, 1647. The Hollanders wrought it so, as the Spaniards accepted of an Instrument of Peace presented by the French, which contained 76 Articles; amongst which they included Por|tugal; which the Spaniards absolutely refused, and the French were forced to leave it out; but with addition of something else, which the Spaniards thought to be contrary to the Declaration of the 17th of September, 1646. which the Interpositors had made, which made it be yet the more believed that the French Agents thought not of any agreement, building upon the assurance they had from the Hague, that the States would not treat sepa|rately. The Spaniards would by no means yield up Piombino and Porto|longona: the Count of Avaux who was an Enemy to Count Servient, and did not square with Longueville, insisted upon the detaining of Portu|gal.
This mean while Count Pignoranda made new offers to the Vnited Pro|vinces, as well by means of their Plenipotentiaries, as by two Writings gi|ven in on the 13th of March, and on the 11th of April; which occasioned that some of the Deputies that were returned home, were ordered to be in a readiness to return to Munster; and they writ to all the Provinces that they should send their Deputies to the Hague, to take a final resolution touching the Treaties begun in Spain.
On the fourth of May the French declared that they had received or|ders from Paris, that the King of France intended to be at liberty to as|sist the King of Portugal; and that if Pignoranda did not presently accept of this Proposal, he would demand a Truce for Portugal for 30 years, and perpetual Peace for Catalonia.
Whereupon the Spaniards declared, that if the French held themselves free not to observe what they had at first propounded, to the end that they might occasion Novelties in the affairs of Portugal; that it was also fair for Spain not to maintain what she had offered.
The Mediators, that the Treaty might not break, told the Spanish A|gents, that it would farther the business much, if they would admit of a new Instrument which they had delivered to the French, wherein they insinua|ted how the third Article of the already-thrown-out Writing touching each parties assisting their Confederates might be regulated. To which the Spaniards answered, that that Article was so well established already in the first Instruments of Peace, as it needed no further explaining.
Notwithstanding this Negative, the Mediators did still Negotiate; and on the first of Iune they framed a rough draught of a Clause, which might be severally given, touching the manner how the Confederates might be assisted; which being refused, the Treaty was suspended till the midst of August, at which time they did reassume it, resolving to read distinctly all the Instruments which had been presented by both parties the second time, and to pick out all the contentious points; in which the Spaniard said that the French had added, that whilst a League was established between the States and Princes of Italy, for the security of the Peace between the two Crowns, they might reciprocally retain the Towns which they were possest

of in the States of Savoy and Mantua; which was refused by the Spaniards, who were resolved that each party should have that which was theirs re|stored; affirming, that since Savoy and Mantua could not dispose of the other Princes of Italy as they listed, they ought not to be bound to expose themselves to the prejudice of no restitution till a League were made, which depended upon the Will of others.
After this, whilst the Mediators were negotiating very hotly, the French on the eighth of September declared that they had received orders not to treat any longer, unless Spain would first consent to abandon totally the Duke of Lorain's Cause: which the Spaniards absolutely refused; com|plaining that the French would be at liberty to assist the Portugal, who was an unjust Usurper, and that they must not defend Lorain, who was unduly driven out. These things altered as occasions altered; the French were confident in their opinions of being seconded by their Confederates to make use of the weakness of Spain, which was at this time not a little threatned by what had hapned in Sicily and in Naples; and they were strong Reasons to make them lay hold of a conjuncture so propitious for them. But that which appeared to be a powerful Antidote, proved pestife|rous Poyson: For the greater that populous and Warlike Nation grew, they raised the more apprehensions in their Neighbours, nay in their Friends.
This was one of the chief reasons which was thought made the Hollan|ders forego their Engagements and Agreements with the French, and which made the pretension good of treating apart from their Colleagues; wherefore the next Iune, without making it known to the Mediators, they concluded a Truce, not much unlike that of the year 1612, to the great distaste of the French, as contrary to their Conventions; whereat they were highly scandalized, and sent to Holland to complain thereof. Embassador Pau, who was Deputy for Amsterdam, did so much, as this City of and by her self made good what was done, against the other six Provinces. These would have saln to some other resolution; but the proceedings of France made the Hollanders so jealous, as they bethought themselves of their bu|siness: and being afterwards left by the Spaniards to their own free will, to accept either of Truce or Peace, the Truce was at last changed to a perpetual Peace, as being that which establish'd them to be a free and 80-verain State, excluding all pretensions which the King of Spain or any of his Heirs could have thereunto.
They therefore appointed the 30th of Ianuary for the subscribing of this their particular Treaty: Whereupon the French put in their Protesta|tion before it was published; which made the Hollanders desire a further time from Pignoranda; but he foreseeing that if the business were disco|vered it might easily be diverted, declared not onely that he could not give way thereunto, but that they should establish it before they went out of the House where they were, or that the Treaty should be for ever broken, and all the Writings burnt.
They therefore signified to the French Agents by two of their Col|leagues, that if they should not admit of the advantageous Conditions which were offered them by Spain, they could not defer the concluding of this their Treaty apart. The French demanded 15 daies time to dis|patch away an express to the Court; without the consent whereof, this being a new thing, they could resolve nothing. Whereupon the Hollan|ders desired the Spaniards that an authentick Act might be made, where|by they might be bound to keep the same Conditions with France concer|ning

Peace, for two months, which were already granted them; and this was readily granted.
Two days after, the Duke of Longueville return'd to Paris, and the Ex|press which was sent being come thither before him, the Queen sent for the Marquiss of Bagni, who was the Apostolick Nuntio in France, and for Cavaliere Michel Morosini, the Venetian Embassador, that they who were very intelligent persons might examine the Conditions of Peace which were newly exhibited, and should speak their opinions therein. They had se|veral meetings hereupon, and having well weighed the business, told her Majesty, That they thought them very fair and advantageous: whereof the Mediators were soon advertised; who visited Count Pignoranda, and told him, That the French were ready to continue the Negotiation; and to and all Controversies, they in the name of France offer'd to refer the Six undecided Articles to be terminated either by the Queen of Sweden alone, or by her joyn'd with the States of the Empire, or by those alone, or by the Vnited Provinces.
That therefore they might begin the Articles which were refer'd by Pig|noranda to the Arbitrement of Holland, and reassume the Treaties where they were left in November and December the year 1647. the Count an|swered, that he was first engaged with the Holland-Plenipotentiaries, and that he could not condescend thereunto, till they should free him of his word, or that the French should again declare that they did not assent to that Interposition.
Cavaliere Contarini assured him that the French were resolved not to admit of it, knowing that the Holland-Plenipotentiaries were won over by the Spaniards; and so he pass'd on to discourse upon the undecided points; which were, That the Spaniards did not intend to yield up the Territories of the Cities which were granted to France in Flanders, and in Rossion. That the French should not be suffer'd to fortifie themselves in Ca|talonia, nor in Cassal, during the Thirty years Truce: That Portugal should not be therein comprehended, nor the freedom of Don Edward di Braganza, who was Prisoner in the Castle of Millain: That Piombino and Porta Longo|ne should be restored: That the Fortifications at Nancy should not be demo|lished; and that the time wherein Cassal should be restored to the Duke of Mantua, should be specified. Upon these differences Pignoranda told the Mediators, That if France did not readily accept of the Conditions which were offer'd, he conceived himself to be at liberty, and not obliged to any thing which had been formerly exhibited.
The Hollanders ratified the concluded Peace, with no little diminution of the opinion which the French had of them; since is to satisfie their Col|leagues; as they were bound to do, they had forborn ratifying but for fifteen days, the French believed the Spaniards would either have agreed with France, or else would have subscribed to any Conditions. Pignoranda was aware, that the Department of the French might have made the States to be of this Opinion; wherefore as there is nothing which more facilitates the effecting of any thing than necessity when advised by fear, 'tis said that he protested to the Holland Agents, That if they had forborn this Ra|tification any longer, he would have made Peace with France upon any terms. Wherefore it was thought that this consideration being added to what hath been said, was of great force to make the Council of the seven Vnited Provinces at the Hague ratifie what they did.
For all this, Pignoranda shew'd himself prone to a suspension of Arms the next Cmapagna, which was thought proper to draw on a good end of

the Treaties; which he signified to Seignior Maynersuich, who was the one|ly one that remained at Munster for the Vnited Provinces. But Servient, who was also the onely one that was now at the Assembly, for both Lon|gueville and Avaux were gone, being angry at the Hollanders proceedings, and thinking himself deluded by the Spanish Agents, refused it, thiking it but a trick to make advantage of the time, and to make it be believed that the French desired Peace, which they dreamt not on. He therefore refused another Proposal made by the Hollanders; That notwithstanding the two moneths should be expired, if they would accept of what was at first offered them, they would endeavour that the Spaniards should grant it: but he published a sharp Writing on the 14th of May, (as he had good reason to do) and within a few daies went to Ofnaburg, to solicite an end with the Emperour and Empire, excluding Spain and Lorain.
The mean while, on the 16th of May 1648, the mutual ratification of the Hollanders was perfected; and on the 22 of Iune a new Proposal was made, to facilitate an Agreement between the two Crowns: But Ser|vient refused all both in Words and Writing, that they were but tricks to deceive the World; and so he retired from Munster.
The Spaniards conceiving this mean while high hopes to make great ad|vantages of having thus separated the Union between Holland and France, thought their designes would succeed the better, for that they found cer|tain Gabals arise of some of the Parliament and other Malecontents, against the Regency, and to pull down the Cardinal.
Pignoranda finding that all the French Agents were gone from Munster, and that there were none left for him to treat with, he also went about the end of Iuly to Brussels, much praised for his wife Conduct of those affairs. He left notwithstanding Don Antonio Brown, a person of great capacity, with the same Plenipotentiary-power to continue any Treaties that might be made of new; declaring that there was no more need of any meeting, since the Assembly was broken by the French Agents, having abused the opportu|nity of a rational and fair Accommodation. Don Lewis de Haro, Conde Duca d'Olivares, the King of Spain's chief State-Minister, declared, that it was better it should be said that the Spaniards had refused Peace, than to have made it with so much prejudice to the Crown, just when Fortune, glutted with the prosperity of France, began to turn the Wheel.
Cardinal Mazarine hearing that the Treaties were embroiled, and being resolved to make Peace with credit and advantage to the Crown, forth|with reassumed the business, and made the Nuntio write to Pignoranda, offering him a meeting wherein the business might be quickly discust and ended. The Nuntio writ on the 7th of August 1648, to the Count, who accepted the invitation, and answered by the Pope's Internuntio in Flanders, that he would always be ready. The Cardinal caused it to be signified again on the 21 of August, and replied on the fourth of Septem|ber, that it would be best for the preparing of the business, that Pigno|randa should send some body to Paris; who answered, that he knew none on whom to trust more than on the same Nuntio, and on Cavalier Moro|sini the Venetian Embassador: but the Cardinal seeming not to be there|with pleased, the Count thought good to employ Francisco Galleretta, Se|cretary of State in the Low Countries for his Catholick Majesty. The Affair was agreed upon; Galleretta came to Paris in the beginning of Octo|ber, and had conference with the Cardinal, who told him that anci Lo|ain should be restored to Duke Charles, and that the Towns of Stenay, Ianitz, with what belonged unto them, should be reserved for the King of

France; and that the Walls of Nancy should be demolished. The Secre|tary answered, That this was to alter the first Propositions; and without any more ado, continued on his Journey: whereof the French did highly complain, giving out that the Spaniards building upon the troubles of France, did in their effects correspond to what they made shew of, making use of the Peace concluded with Holland; which though it were not very honourable for them at the first aspect, was in effect very advantageous for their interests, for that the chiefest reputation of Princes lay in what made most for their advantage: That it was glorious for the Hollanders, but not much advantageous, since it was known to be contrary and dangerous to their condition, not to keep long in a Government which is Popular, of several Religions, and various Interests, as theirs is; which to keep united, needs nothing but the dread of a powerful Enemy.
The Province of Zealand made a great bustling, nor would they ratifie the Peace for a long time; blaming Knut their Plenipotentiary for having exceeded his instructions, and for being corrupted by the Spaniards: for which, Process was made against him, and he was banish'd.
The Affairs of the two Crowns being interrupted by the making of this Peace apart by the Hollanders, the French joyn'd more firmly with the Swedes; and being secretly fomented by the Elector of Bavaria, they grew more servent in making an Agreement with Caesar, and with the Empire; excluding the King of Spain, whose Agents did no less endeavour to se|parate the Crown of Swedeland, as they had done Holland from France. They bad the Imperialists consider, That as the Union of the two Houses of Austria was the onely way to make Peace between the two Crowns, so on the contrary the separating of their two Interests, was to make the War perpetual between those two Potentates: That the Swedes Army was much diminished, and the Emperour's much increased: That the Ene|my might be easily driven out of Bohemia, and out of the other Provinces which they possessed, and that the Peace might afterwards be made upon better Conditions; and the rather, if civil Discords arose in France. But the Imperialists fearing to loose Bohemia, and being all of them weary of War, said, The Prejudice which flourishing Bohemia and many other Pro|vinces had suffered, was very great by the prolonging of Peace: That the Coffers were empty, the Armies discontented, the Provinces too much bur|thened: That all the afflicted Subjects cry'd out for Peace; whereunto they were perswaded by good and unconcern'd friends: That the Peace with Germany did put the Emperour in peaceful possession of the Empire; whereas he was in danger of loosing what he had yet there by War: That by Peace many Princes would be restored to their pristine Splendor, who were likely to undergo greater miseries by War: That Peace did comfort many distressed people, whom War made miserable.
As for Religion, which ought to be the Rule of all Humane actions, it was to be considered that wise men ought to believe that Religion is setled by Doctrine, by Disputation, and by Integrity of life; and that it may very well subsist without being upheld by interest of State, their Affairs being totally different.
But all these considerations would have been pass'd by, had not another greater been added, which was, that the Germans being weary of War, long'd for Peace; particularly the Elector of Bavaria, having the French and Swedes upon him, declared openly for Peace, though with the Exclusion of Spain.
The French desired an end of War, as well for the apprehension they

had of Civil war, as fearing that the Swedes when they should see France embroiled at home, and therefore not in a condition to assist Forain Wars, should resolve to make Peace without them.
Other important reasons were added to these, which made Cardinal Mzarine write to Servient, that he should employ all his power in ap|peasing the Swedes, who declared themselves irreconcilable Enemies to Bavaria; making them see that the Interest of both the Crowns requi|red that this Prince might not onely be preserved, but that his Dominions should be augmented, as being the only Catholick who could dispute the Empire, and take it out of the House of Austria. Thus by the French mens means the Duke had not onely the Electoral Title, but was put in possession of the upper Palatinate; and on the other side, by his means, who fomented the French underhand, they got the important Town of Bri|sack.
By these and the like considerations, an end was put to the Wars of Germany which had lasted so long, with the adjustment of Spain apart; and by a multiplicity of Articles, Peace was concluded between the Em|perour and Empire on the one part, and the Swedes and their Confederates on the other part, in Osnburg, on the sixth of August, with this caution; That it should not be taken to be of effect, unless Peace were made with France; which was made between them and the Empire and Emperour in Munster on the 24th of October following.
The chief sum of the Peace was, That all the Princes, States, Cities, and Lordships of the Empire should have the free possession and exercise of their Religion, in the form and manner as was in the year 164. That the Crown of Swedeland should for ever enjoy all Pomerania Citerior, vul|garly called Voorpomeren, together with the Island of Rugen, containing the same limits as were held in the Dominion of the other Dukes; and in the further Pomerania, the Towns of Stetin, Gratz, Ga, Golnaw, the Island Wuolin, the three Imboccatures or Out-lets of the River Oder, to wit, Pfien; Divenaw, and the Towns adjacent to the one and the other part, from the beginning of the Territories of Riga, to the Baltick Sea, and to the Eastern Banks, comprehending the City and Haven of Wismar, with the Fort Wolfeck, the Jurisdiction of Foel, and of Nevemcloster; the Arch-Bishoprick of Bremen, the Bishoprick of Werden, and the City and Juris|diction of Wilshawsen, together with all the Rights possess'd by the last Arch-bishops of Bremen, in the Chapter and Diocess of Hamburg, with the Priviledges and Grants which they were then possess'd of; (the fourteen Villages which were held by Frederick Duke of Holsatia di Got|torpe, and by those that descended from him, in the Jurisdiction of Holsatia; Tritoico and Rimbeck being for ever to remain to the said Duke F|derick.)
To the Elector of Brandenburg, the remainder of the further ost Pom|rania; and in lieu of that part that was granted to the Swedes, the Bi|shopricks of Magdeburg, and Minden, together with some lesser Lord|ships.
The Palatine of Rhine was restored to the lower Palatinate, and to all the prerogatives injoy'd therein before the Rebellion of Bohemia; and an eighth Elector was to be made, which was to be the said Palatine: the up|per Palatinate, and County of Cmb, with the Title of Elector, was gi|ven to the Duke of Bavaria, he being to renounce his pretensions to the thirteen Millions, and all other claims upon the upper Austria.
Six hundred thousand Dollars were to be paid to the Lantgrave of Hs|sen

within nine months space by the Electors of Mentz and Culen, for restitution of the Towns taken in these Wars.
That the Town of Brisack, with all the Territories thereof, the Lant|graveship of the upper and lower Alsatia, and of Langaw, the Provincial Jurisdiction of the ten Emperial Cities in Alsatia, viz. Hagenan, Colmar, Slecstat, Weisemberg, Landaw, Oberstein, Rosheim, Munster in St. George his Valley, Kaiserberg, and Tarinhaime, should for ever be incorporated into the Kingdom of France; and the King of France might keep a Garrison perpetually in the Town of Philipsburg, he being to pay three Millions of French Livres in three years, which were to commence when the King of Spain should have subscribed the Treaty; and the rest of the Cities and Towns that were taken, were to be restored unto him.
The Emperour and Empire were to relinquish to the King of France the right of Soveraignty which they could pretend unto in Pinarol in Italy; and to take away all occasions of further Ruptures between the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, the King of France was to pay 494000 Crowns to the Duke of Mantua, which were promised him by the late King at the discharge of the Duke of Savoy, to whom the Emperour was to give the Investment of the Fee-farms and States which were adjudged unto him at the Treaty of Chirasco; Caesar promising moreover never to molest the Duke of Savoy in his right of Soveraignty in Rocaverano, Olmo, and Cesol, and what belonged thereunto, as if they were wholly indepen|dant upon the Empire.
Five Millions of Dollars were to be paid to the Crown of Sweden, at three limited payments, with due Cautions.
Many other Articles were specified in the Articles, to the satisfaction of other Princes, States, Cities, and interessed Seigniories; and in this Peace, all the Confederates, Friends, and adherents, as well of the Emperour and Empire's side, as of the French and Swede's, were comprehended: And this Torent of Miseries being thus ended, all those parts were full of joy and content.
The Nuntio Chigi, who had carried himself zealously in the Peace be|tween the two Crowns, conceiving when they should be agreed the Prote|stants would not be so high in their pretensions, as also in the other between the Emperour and France; when he knew that in this Setlement certain Conditions were inserted, which were prejudicial to the Catholick Reli|gion, he accounted all his labour and mediation ill spent: Out of Zeal to God and the Church, he forbad the Plenipotentiaries to speak to him any more of that Peace; he shut up his House where all the Meetings had been held, and protested against the Agreement made in Osnaburg; he made his name, and the names of Pope Vrban and Pope Innocent, be cancel'd out of the Instrument of Peace; he protested against the Subscription made at Munster on the 6th of October; and he also protested against the Ratifica|tion between the Emperour and the King of France made in the February fol|lowing, as he had protested against the Peace of Spain with the Hollanders, by reason of the prejudice that was therein done to the Catholick Religi|on. And this Nuntio, who had never mediated in the Protestant Treaties, but was against them always, that he might as much as in him lay, restore and sustain the Catholick Religion, and Pontifical Authority, sent back the Presents made him by the Emperour and King of France, to the value of more than 14000 Crowns, for reward of the pains he had taken; de|claring, That he would have no hand in a Peace which was made to the prejudice of the Catholick Religion, the honour whereof he preferr'd be|fore

any particular advantage: whereby he merited so much from the Holy Sea, as he was made Cardinal, and afterwards Pope.
But because Polititians value appearance much, as that which makes good or bad impressions in peoples minds, who are not capable of the se|cret dealing of Statists; the Spaniards denied what had been divulged a|gainst them by the French, blaming them for having broken the Treaty without concluding Peace, and giving out both in Words and Writing, that the carriage of the Cardinal, of Count Servient, and of other of the King's Agents, did not correspond with their appearances.
So as it was easie to make them be thought little zealous of the publick Quiet, and to be hated by those people who wish'd for nothing more than to have an end of their miseries; from whence it arose, That it was not hard for those who sought for disturbances, to augment such a pretence, and to cause the Revolutions which are the subject of this History.
The Spaniards did also reiterate their complaints against the Emperour's State-Ministers, for not disswading their Master from separating himself from the Union of their King, now that the Hollanders were no less appre|hensive of the French greatness than were the English; so as it was to be believed, that as the one had fallen off from the French to avoid their fur|ther fomenting their unsatiateness, the others would apply themselves to op|pose so vast presumptions.
They blamed the Caesarian State-Ministers of unadvisedness, and pointed particularly at some of them, as if to the end they might possess Lands and Lordships in the Country which was possess'd by the Swedes, they had been easily perswaded rather to make Peace with them to recover what they had lost, than to do what was good for their Master. And for these reasons they were a long time resolute not to restore Frankendal and other Towns which they possess'd in the lower Palatinate: But the Dutch, who were open enough in their actions, not listning to such Whispers, seem'd to be content with Peace. They said, It was better for a wise Prince to pur|chase assured Peace to his Subjects, though upon some disadvantage, than to continue War with uncertain hopes of profit. They observed religiously what they had promised, and thereby won applause.
The French on the contrary said, They needed no justification where there was no fault; and did therefore refer themselves to the judgments of such as were best inform'd. Cardinal Mazarine did in particular give a very conclusive proof: For Process being severely made against him by the Parliament in this point, nothing could ever be justified. Nay, the Coun|sellours of Parliament who were appointed to make Remonstrances to the Queen, being with Duke Longueville, who was then a profess'd Ene|my to the Cardinal; and it being commonly said, That amongst other things he complain'd that Mazarine had taken from him the glory of making Peace; that being solicitated to attestate this publickly, that so they might convince the Cardinal, and prove him guilty; The Duke's Answer was, That his Honour and his Conscience were dearer than all other Considera|tions, and that therefore he was bound to aver a truth; that in the instructi|ons given him by the Cardinal, and in all the Orders which he had received from Court, he had not onely found the Cardinal always inclined to a fair Peace, but that the Cardinal had also employ'd all his industry to obtain it, though without effect; for the Spanish Agents pretending to such advan|tages, as could not then with honour be granted by France, they had never corresponded to that intent, save onely in shew, but always kept a hole open to escape out at, so as he could never know at what rate they desired it.
Cavalier Contarini spoke often to the same purpose, and particularly when, after the meeting at Munster, he met with some of the Parliament at Paris in the Garden di Renarda, to whom upon the like occasion he plain|ly answered: That the Cardinal was a good Minister for France, as they would finde when they had lost him.
The Treaty of Peace between the two Crowns was afterwards conti|nued by the Mediators, and all things seemed to be quieted, unless some things of small moment; for the Spaniards making use of the Tumults at Naples, of what had hapned at the Battle of Lens, and of the Siege laid to Cremona by the French and Duke of Modena; they seemed to have fail'd much in the hopes which they had built upon the Peace with Holland, and inclined to an Agreement upon lesser terms than before. But when they found the Tumults of Naples lessen, that they would quickly be appeased; when they heard that the French had removed the Siege from before Cre|mona, and when they knew that the Tumults of France were likely to last, and tended to a Civil War, and that therefore the pretensions of France began to grow somewhat less; the Spaniards slackned in their for|mer Proposals, and the Tune being changed, changed their Dance. They required new Treaties, and made it known that the true modern Maxime is, To know how to make use of the present times as far as they are advan|tagious; which according as they alter, those are accounted wise who know best how to make use of them.
Pietro de Weimbs Intendant of Luxemburg did also complain against the Articles of the Peace of Germany; saying amongst other things, that the King of Spain, so good a friend, and one who had always seconded the said party with unspeakable expence, and with hazard to his Domini|ons, was left out; and that he who usurped the Scepter of Portugal was called King in the Instrument of Peace; and that other Articles were there|in inserted prejudicial to the Catholick King.
Notwithstanding all this, the Court of Spain though it were thus aban|doned, and left to wrestle alone against so many Enemies, and obliged in|stead of being assisted by her own Subjects, to waste and consume them in defence of themselves, did yet undauntedly withstand and keep down the stoutest Forces of their Enemies, and in particular did vigorously defend the State of Millain, assaulted by Francis Duke of Modena, who was en|tred into League with the King of France, for those motives and Inte|rests, which that they may be the better understood, we will take from a little higher.
The Duke's propension towards the Spaniards began to cool, when by the Invasion of Castro he confederated with other Princes in the War a|gainst the Barbarini; hoping (as having deserved well of that Crown) to have them propitious to him upon those occurrences; but he failed of his hopes. These distastes were increased, when upon the same occasion, ha|ving leave from the Emperour to levy men in Germany, he was not suffered to do so by the bad Offices (as he said) of the Spaniards, and was served so a second time, loosing both his men and money: yet the Duke modera|ted his sorrow, and attributing the fault to the ill will of some of the Spa|nish State-ministers who were not well affected to him, he did not at all recede from his respect to that Crown. The difference of Castro being ended, in the Treaties whereof though the French appeared to have be|friended him much more than the Austrians had done, he forbore not not|withstanding to assigne over his Souldiers willingly to the Governour of Millain, who needed them; Arona being set upon by the French, who of|fer'd

him better terms for them than the Spaniards gave. But he was here cheated of the Moneys that were promised him for the assigning over of the same men; and not at all satisfied with the promise made him of a good sum of Money out of the Dowry of the Infanta Catherina Daughter to Philip the Second, due to him as Heir by Will and Testament to his Uncle Prince Philibert of Savoy: Not long after, the Spaniards treated of selling the Principality of Corregio to others, excluding the Duke from it, though it were assigned over to him for a good sum of Money due to him from that Crown. The Duke was much netled at this usage, and pretended that he would not go out of Corregio, till he were fully satisfied for the Debts due to him, and for his Charge in keeping it. And beginning to take up Arms, he communicated his intention to Count Lesly Captain of the Em|perour's Guard, then in Venice, as he was going to Naples. To these were added the distasts given to his Brother the Cardinal of Este at Rome, whom the Spaniards seemed to treat uncivilly, procuring that Cardinal Colonne was preferr'd before him in the Protection of Caesar's Patrimonial States. Hereupon the French took occasion to invite him over to their side, know|ing how much it would make for them to have a Prince of his parts and courage joyn with them in molesting the State of Millain.
Wherefore the Protection of the Affairs of France in Rome were commit|ted to that Prince Cardinal; which he accepted willingly, though the Duke seemed to be not content therewith; but the Spaniards did tacitly grum|ble, as if this had been done by the Duke's good will. These Jealousies growing dayly, the French offer'd the Duke all necessary assistance in case he would break with Spain. On the contrary, the wisest of the Spanish State-Ministers finding that to exasperate the Duke at this time, would be very prejudicial to the Interest of Spain, the same Count Lesly pro|pounded unto him, upon occasion of Count Alfonso Montecuculi's going to Munster, that the Emperour in token of the valuation he put upon his Excellency, would declare him to be his Vicar-general in Italy. The Duke appli'd himself willingly hereunto, the rather for that Duke Argos Viceroy of Naples had made some overture therein with the Dukes Resident in that City, and sent Don Vincenzo Tuttavilla to Millain to have intelligence with that Governour; who as he pass'd by Modena, found him ready to embrace the offer. But not finding the other Spanish Agents willing there|unto, the Proposals, after Tuttavilla was gone, were alter'd, the Effects prolonged, and finally the Viceroy's Offers were varied in the most essen|tial parts. So as dissidences began again to arise: for though the Duke con|descended to some advantageous Proposals, and press'd the performance, nothing was resolved of; so as he began to conceive that these things were given out rather to make France distrust him, than to fix him to Spain. Being therefore amidst these Rocks, he resolved not to loose the French, whilst he could not confide in the Spaniards; especially having such an opportunity offer'd him, as the risings in Sicily and Naples, which threat|ned the subversion of that Monarchy.
Cardinal Grimaldi was then going towards Piombino and Portolongone, with Plenipotentiary-power from the King of France, to negotiate with the Princes of Italy, and chiefly to binde up the Negotiations which were in hand between Mazarine and the Duke of Modena. At last, after seve|ral Treaties, the Confederacie was setled upon these terms: That the King's Council resolved to send the Neapolitan Troops which had lain long in Piobino and Portolongone by the order of Signior d' Estrades, who mar|ched with 4000 Foot and 1200 Horse by the way of Tuscany into the

Modenese, the Express not coming time enough which was sent from Court to Grimaldi with orders to make the Troops advance to Naples, whereby the Duke being recruited, he resolved to pass over the Poe, and to enter the Cremonese, which is a fertile Territory, wherein the Souldiers might be maintain'd with notable disadvantage to the Milanese. At the news hereof, the Marquiss Serra was advanced with 4000 Foot, 2000 Horse, and ten pieces of Cannon to Pomponesco, to keep the French from passing over the Poe; but they seeming that they would pass just over against the Spanish quarters, falling down lower at the same time in 17 Vessels, pass'd 1000 Foot upon break of day over the River, and not long after pass'd their whole body over, pursuing the Spaniards, who fled from Pom|ponesco to the Gates of Cremona; against which City the Duke would have made some attempt, had he not been obliged to forbear by the great store of Rain, by the bad ways, by the approaching Winter, and for that the Forces which he expected from Piemont were not yet come; so he was forced to Winter in the Enemie's Country, distributing his Troops, part in Cassalle Maggiore, which was abandoned by the Spaniards, part in Riverole, and the rest in the neighbouring Villages, where they lay quiet till the February following, at which time they began to draw into the Field: For the Count Haro who was made Governour of Millain, in|stead of his Father the Constable of Castile, mustered 6000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, wherewith he pretended to drive the Enemy from their quarters before more recruits could be brought to the Duke.
Which the French perceiving, the Duke, being so advised by Estrades, thought to advance 3000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and to keep the Spani|ards from beating up his quarters, to place himself between Bozolo and St. Martino. Haro advanced with such fury, as that he broke the Enemies Right Wing, on the head whereof was the Duke of Modena's self; who thinking he could not avoid a total Rout, advised Estrades, who guided the Left Wing, to retreat, whilst he hindred his own mens disorder. But Estrades thinking that the Spaniard would be the more encouraged by so sudden a retreat, and that greater mischief might ensue, advised the Duke to get behinde his Squadrons, wherewith he would withstand the Enemy till night, by advantage whereof they might afterwards both of them retreat joyntly. He straightway took the advantage of a certain House, and two great Ways, which were inclosed with thick strong Hedges, where the French fought manfully for three hours space, and till the Sun being set, they might retreat to their quarters in good order.
The Fight was fierce and bloody, many perished on each side; the action was glorious, all the Generals having signalized themselves with undaun|ted valour. Estrades received a Musquet-shot on his Curass, and had two Horses killed under him: The Duke won great glory. Both Armies being thus retreated, the French Wintered without any other considerable event; but the Duke having made new provisions for the next Cam|paigne, they reassumed Arms on the beginning of March, with successes of important consequence; for the Marquiss of Caracena, who was now Governour of Millain, resolving to give proof of his sufficiency in that place, after he had put all things in good order, went to Cremona, think|ing that by driving the Enemy from the greater Cassalle, he might the bet|ter defend the Passes over the Poe: he therefore took a little Island within the River just over against that part, and he with the rest of his Army quartered at Gazolo, three miles off, to assist to the maintaining of the Island that he had taken, which the French went to recover, but were

repulsed with some prejudice, and with the loss of their Boats; which made the Duke to gather all his Troops together, and with them; and those recruits which were then brought him by Marshal Plessis Pralin, ho|ped to make good Cassalle, and by the addition of those French which were landed at Lirici, and were already on their march towards him, to alter the face of affairs. Wherefore having furnish'd that place with Vi|ctuals, he prepared to assault the aforesaid Island, and to drive the Spa|niards out.
Caracena foreseeing the Designe, and the difficulty of maintaining the Island, drew his men out of it; and mustering his whole Army at Cremona, thought by drawing the Trench from Rebecco to the Ditch of the City, which was about twelve miles in length, to keep the French from advan|cing further, and to make them give over their first intentions: but at last the Duke's Army being grown to be fourteen or fifteen thousand men, he by the advice of the Marshal, and of the other Commanders, resolved to assault the Trench, and came within sight of it on the 30th of Iune in a glorious order; the Forelorn-hope advanc'd with some Volunteers, and assaulted the Enemies Trench in several parts, which though they were stoutly defended by the Spaniards, were notwithstanding quickly over|come by the French, and the Artillery taken, many Officers and Souldiers made Prisoners; amongst which Count Galeazzo Trotti Leiutenant-gene|ral of the Horse. Yet did the Victory prove bitter, by reason of the As|sailants loss, amongst which was a Son of Marshal Plessis Pralin, who ad|vancing courageously in the first Files, was slain by a Musket-shot. By this fortunate success the French should have fallen upon Cremona, which in this confusion would soon have yielded; but they forbore the attempt for two reasons; the one was necessity, for they wanted Victuals, and Artil|lery to batter: The other, for that the whole Council of War agreed that it would be better to pass over the River Adda without engaging in any Siege, and march into the bowels of the State of Millain, whereby de|priving the people of gathering in their Harvest, which was yet in the fields, they might ruine them: but they failed in this; for being forc'd to tarry for the getting of Victuals, they were forced to tarry at Cava longer than they thought to have done. Howsoever they attempted to pass over at Maeastorna, and at several other parts; but still in vain, by reason that the River was so swoln by the great fall of Rain, and by the Spaniards vigilant Guards. They therefore retreated to Crotta, and advanced to Spinadesco, and from thence with their whole Army drew neer Cremona, placing their Artillery against the Fortifications which the besieged raised at the Mills upon the Poe.
The Marquiss of Caracena was glad that the Enemies Army, which he feared would have pass'd over Adda, sat down before Cremona; for know|ing that he could relieve it as he lifted, he thought to make them wait their Forces there to no purpose. He therefore re-enforced the Garrison again, and failed not in the part of an expert and valiant Commander. Where|fore the French knowing how hard it is to take Towns that may be re|lieved by Water, they fought to keep the Spaniards from coming upon the Poe, but failed; for other Armed Vessels coming out against them, they forsook their Boots and got to land. The Duke of Modena would have fallen upon the City with all his Forces, as being but weakly walled; which being gotten, the Castle might be brought to yield the more easily, being to be invironed by a few men. He alleadged the Example of Tor|tona when Prince Thomaso took it; and was seconded in his opinion by

Marquiss Villa, who was then come thither with a recruit of 3000 Horse and 2000 choice Foot, accompanied by Marquiss St. Andrea, Lieutenant-General Mombrune, and by Marquiss Monte, who commanded in the third place. But Marquiss Plessis Pralin, and other French Commanders diver|ted them, making them resolve to fall onely upon the Castle, because they had not Foot enough to assault the large compass of the City in several parts, and for that the Castle being taken, the rest would soon be had. This advice prevailing, the French pass'd over the Water which runs by the side of the Castle, and advanc'd against the Half-Moon of Ambrosio, where they fortified themselves. Don Alvano di Chignones Governour of the Castle came out against them and fought them; many of both sides were slain: of the French, Monsieur de la Lieu Mareschal of the Camp, and Monsieur Guillotiere was mortally Wounded. And of the Besieged, Count Piatti, Don Giuseppe Monpavone, and Don Carlo Stampa were slain. The Duke then endeavoured to block up the Poe with a strong and long Chain, but did no good; for the Besieged sallying out ever and anon with many choice Souldiers, hindred them: amongst other Sallies one was remarkable, made by Don Diego Quintano, a Spanish Camp-master, by night, on the 19th of August, where both sides fought bravely, where the same Quintano with many other brave Officers were slain: and of the French, Count Vaian was slain, and Count Navayles mortally Wounded. Other actions past daily, wherein sometimes one, sometimes another had the ad|vantage; but the French fared always worst. They were chiefly preju|diced by Marquiss Villa his failing to pass over Ada, who went from his quarters to the Camp to advise with the Duke and Marshal, where whilst he staid expecting the springing of a Mine which the French gave fire un|to, he was slain by a Cannon, with much sorrow to the whole Army, and much grief to the Dutchess of Savoy, of whom he had deserved very well by his long and faithful service; yet the French continued the Siege more fervently than before; and though they were still worsted, yet they forbore not making attempts.
At length the expected Forces from France not appearing, who were re|tarded by the troubles which hapned in that Kingdom, the French Army being much lessened, and the Spaniard's increased, they resolved to raise the Siege. The French discamped on the 8th of October, and retreated to Castore; and when they had carried their Artillery, Baggage, and Sick folks to Monticello, they went to Rebecko. Thus did this Campaigne end unfortunately, which was thought at first would have proved glorious for France.
The Austrians happiness was afterwards Crown'd with the Marriage be|tween the King of Spain and his Niece Anna Maria Daughter to the Em|perour Ferdinand the 3d. She was first designed for a Wife to the Prince of Spain, who dying, and the King of Spain having no Issue Male, he resol|ved to marry her himself; and writ to the Emperour, that in remembrance of his Daughter the Empress, he had chosen her for his Wife, whom he in|tended for his Daughter.
The Marriage-Ceremonies were made by the Cardinal d'Arach; and the King of Hungary married her on the 8th of November in the King of Spain's Name.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.1649. The SECOND BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The Queen being displeased with the Parliament, goes out of Paris with the King and the whole Court; Retreats to St. Germains. Great Rumours arise hereupon. The People incited by some seditious people, take up Arms. Both sides prepare for War. The City is at last besieged by the King. Be|fore which several accidents happen. The Duke d'Elboeuf is with great applause chosen General of the Parisians. The Prince of Conty and Duke Longueville come to Paris. Conty goes to Roan, and Longue|ville is declared Generalissimo. The Siege continues with advantage to the King. Arch-Duke Leopold sends to offer himself to the Parisians. Victuals grow scarce. The Inhabitants are aware of their loss. An A|greement is endeavoured. Peace concluded. Agreement is made in Italy between the King of Spain and the Duke of Modena. The King of Eng|land is beheaded by the common Hangman. The Spaniards make divers attempts in Catalonia. Some proceedings in Flanders.

WAR being resolved upon against Paris by the King's Privy Council, consisting of the Queen, the Duke of Orleans, the Prince of Cond, the Cardinal, the Marshals of Milleray and Villeroy, the Abbot della Reviera, and Monsieur Tilliere Secretary of State; it was held expedient that the King, together with all the great ones of the Court, should go out of Paris; to the end that the Sun being vanished which illuminates the City, she might remain in that obscurity whereinto her own indiscretion had concentrated her. About the begin|ning of the year 1649, the Queen and Cardinal went in a Coach toge|ther after Dinner to L'Hostelle d'Orleans, to agree upon many things with the Duke touching their Majesties going out of the City, and how it should be done.
But it being hard that this should be done by so many Princes and Commanders in War, lest the people should take up Arms and hinder them from going out, (especially since it being in the dead of Winter, they had no excuse to go out for Recreation) the Twelf-night-Feast was thought a fitting time, when throughout all France, and particularly in Paris, great Feastings and Jollities are used to be had, as well amongst Plebeians as Citi|zens, at the solemnization of the King of Benes; it being supposed that

when all men should be intent upon their Cups, or going to bed, they might then effect their intent.
The hour and moment being appointed, the greatest difficulty lay in get|ting the King and Queen out. The business was given in charge to Mar|shal Grammont, who was returned from Flanders the very day of the De|claration made the 28th of October, with the French Guards, Swissers, King's Cavaliers, and Mazarine's Gens d' Arms. The Prince of Cond and the Cardinal went to his house to Supper, waiting for the appointed time. The mean while the King and Queen; and the Duke of Anjou, went out at the back-gate of the arden; and finding Grammont there, who had ordered all things with great secrecy, they got into Coach, and were conducted by the Marshal and some few Guards out at the Gate delle Conference, where were the Duke of Orleans, Cardinal, and many of the Court-Lords. They stop'd in the midst of the way, expecting Madamoselle d' Orleans, who was advertised somewhat late, and divers others, who had their Rendezvous appointed there. The Prince of Cond went after midnight to waken his Brother Conty, his Mother and Sister, who lay then in his Palace, all the doors whereof he caused to be shut, took the Keys himself, and acquainted them with the Courts designe, and that he was bound to follow it. Conty and his Mother prepared to go with him; but the Dutchess of Longueville re|membring that her Husband had pass'd his Parol at Noysy, saw that he was to make good his word; since it was the Court that fell upon Paris, in which case he was engaged to declare for the Parliament. She therefore thought that if she should go to St. Germains, she should anger the Duke her Husband. And for that cause pretended that being great with Childe, she was not fit to travel; and so without giving any cause of jealousie, she avoided going out of Paris. She notwithstanding advised Conty to follow his Brother, since he was not engaged to the Parliament, unless her Husband should first engage, who was then in Champagnia. Conty was advised by his Sister in this as he was in all things else, and sent a Servant to tell the Co|adjutor, that he followed the Prince his Brother, being forc'd by him so to do. And whilst he was at St. Germains, he received news every day from his Sister and the Coadjutor, by the means of his Vallet de Chambre Verbo|quet, who like a Country-Peasant went to and fro between the Court and Paris. It was good luck that Longueville was not at Paris; for if he had been there, the Court could not have resolved so soon, lest the Duke might have revealed the Resolution, and had caused the King be stay'd, or other|wise might have pretended to have tarried in the City. The Dutchess sent him word presently, telling him, That it was time for him to come to Paris according to appointment; but he thought it not good to declare himself, till the Parliament had openly declared against the Cardinal: for that o|therwise the Parliament might alter its minde, and he might be deceived. He therefore went to St. Germains to expect what would be resolved up|on; which caused great jealousie in Paris, where the bottom of his policy was not sounded. This was the reason why the Duke d' Elboeuf, of the House of Lorrain, elder Brother to Count Harcourt, declared openly for the Parliament, that by making himself Head of that Party, he might bet|ter his Interests in Court.
When their Majesties went out, they left three Gentlemen behind them to wish the Lords and Great ones to follow them. The Duke d' Elboeuf, Duke of Bullion, and all the other Princes and Gentlemen had notice there|of. D' Elboeuf went to St. Germains; but as it was thought, rather to ob|serve what the Court did, than to tarry there: for pretending that he had

not a convenient Lodging appointed him, and that his Mother, Wife, Children and Family were in Paris, he returned thither that he might assist them.
The Duke of Bullion lay sick of the Gout. Before the Queen went out, she writ two Letters, the one to the Arch-bishop of Paris, the other to the Coadjutor. She acquainted the Arch-bishop with the reasons which had induced her to go out, and recommended the Kings service to him. She wisht the Coadjutor to go to St. Germains the next day to treat of some important particular business. The Letters were delivered; the Co|adjutor shewing a readiness to obey, got the next morning into his Coach, but was stopt by the fury of the people, who flocking in great numbers about him, would not suffer him to go: But it was thought that this was done by agreement between him and some of the more popular sort. The next Morning by break of day the whole Regiment of the French Guard and Switzers went out of the Suburbs where they lay, with Drums beating, and pass'd Company after Company towards St. Germains, not be|ing hindred by any, though it was known that they went to trouble Paris; perhaps because they would not appear to be the first that should make the breach, especially being without a Head who might be capable to issue forth Orders. Yet towards night they shut up the City-Gates, and suffer|ed none to go out; the people being risen of themselves, who kept many of the Nobless and Courtiers from going out, and plundred and broke many Coaches, committing many other insolencies, whereby all that be|longed unto the Court were much endangered.
The news of the Kings going out of Paris being known the next mor|ning, the Frondeurs were amazed, the rather for that they saw the Princes of Conty and Marsiliack had followed the Court; and thinking that Lon|gueville would do the like, contrary to the Agreement made at Noisy: But they were a little better comforted afterwards, when they saw the Prince of Marsilliack, who returned to Paris, pretending some particular af|fairs, but indeed purposely to speak with the Dutchess of Longueville, and with some of the chief Frondeurs, to assure them that the Prince of Cond and himself would be as good as their Words, and that they could do no less than go out of the Town with the King, since they could make no open declaration till they saw the Parliament wholly engaged. Marsilli|ack prest them to make a Decree in Parliament, as they had done against Marshal d'Ancre in the year 1617. and leaving Gourville at Paris to solli|cite them, and to come and advertise them when it was done, returned the next day to Court. The Parliament met, and the aforesaid Decree was propounded; but of 200 that were there, there were but nine that voted against the Cardinal. For the securing of Paris and the Suburbs, they ordered such Guards, as none durst carry forth any Arms or Baggage either by day or night: That all Governours of Towns should suffer Victuals and other necessaries to be brought to Paris: And that no Cities should re|ceive any Garrisons or Souldiers.
These Orders were observed in Paris, where the people were bound to obey; but were laugh'd at by all every where else: but the greater part of the Parliaments of the Kingdom adhered to that of Paris; and had they sent out Letters, greater novelties would certainly have ensued.
Before the King went out of Paris, he writ a Letter to the Provost of Merchants, and to the Consuls, which was delivered them the next Mor|ning after he was gone; wherein he declared, That he would not have gone out by night, had he not been advertised, that some of the Parliament,

holding intelligence with others of the Kingdoms Enemies, would at|tempt something against him. This Letter was accompanied by three others, one from the Regent, another from the Duke of Orleans, and ano|ther from the Prince of Conde; wherein they affirmed, that it was they who had perswaded the King to go out of Paris, knowing for certain what Plots were in hand prejudicial to his Majesties service.
The next day the King sent a Letter by Monsieur Sordiere Lieutenant of the Guards, wherein he commanded the Parliament to remove to Montargis; but notice being had hereof, it was not received: and they decreed, That the King's Servants should return to their Majesties, to desire them to no|minate who they were that held intelligence with the Enemy, that they might be proceeded against as guilty of High Treason. Hereupon the Court sent to know whether they came resolved to render obedience, and to remove the Parliament to Montargis; but they answered, They had no other order but to desire his Majesty to nominate those who held intelligence with the Enemies to the Crown: So by the Prince of Cond's counsel, they were dismist without further Audience: For he, contrary to the opinion of all the rest, said, they ought not to be heard; for it made for him that there should be troubles, to the end that he might make himself necessary, and carry on his own Interests. But he seemed to be moved hereunto, thinking that the people would not be averse unto it, whilst Forniere one of the Sheriffs of Paris, coming with some other Deputies to have Audi|ence of the Queen, assured her, that the People were ready to render obe|dience; moreover, that Monsieur Bignon had private orders from the Frondeurs, that if he could not do otherwise, he should yield, and pass his word that they would withdraw; for they feared that the People growing desperate at the King's leaving of Paris, might turn against them, as the oc|casioners of this disorder. But the Court, by Cond's means, would give no Audience; which served for an occasion to the Frondeurs to make it ap|pear, that their Interests were defended by the Peoples publick cause, and made them take up Arms, and to oppose the King's Authority; whereby the Parliament being encouraged, they fell to make Decrees against the Cardinal, which put all things into confusion and disorder.
This removing of the Parliament was the first thing wherewith the King made the Parisians affraid: for next to the Court, this Parliament is of most advantage to the City, by reason of the many Presidents, Councel|lors, Advocates, Notaries, Proctors, and Sutors. The Chamber of Ac|counts was ordered to remove to Orleans, and that of the great Council to Orleans. The latter sent their Deputies to the King to acquaint him with their grievances; which not being listned unto, did exasperate mens mindes the more, and brought many over to adhere to the Frondeurs, who had been otherwise minded, finding what prejudice they were likely to receive by this removal.
The Frondeurs making use of this for their own ends, on the 8th of Ianu|ary, the Decree against the Cardinal being past in Parliament, he was com|manded thereby to be gone from Court, and to go out of France within eight daies, all men being forbidden to receive him, and every one permit|ted to persecute him. The execution of this was humbly desired from the Queen, as shall be said: and by the advice of Brousel and the other Fron|deurs, the Provost of Merchants, who is like our Lord-Mayor, and the Sheriffs, were obliged to chuse Commissaries to raise men, under the colour of conveying Victuals to Paris.
The Council of State made a severe Prohibition be presently pub|lished,

That none should sell either Beeves, or Sheep, or any other Vi|ctuals, to any Parisian.
To begin the Siege, St. Denis was presently seized on, a Wall'd Town two Leagues distant from Paris, where the King's Army was quartered; which quarter was commanded by Marshal Plessis P under the Duke of Orleans, who was the King's Lieutenant-General; and the Troops un|der Cond were quartered at St. Clou, a Town standing upon the River of Seine, at the same distance from Paris as St. Denis, commanded by Marshal Grammont. The High-Dutch having sck Bercy, were quartered at Cha|renton: these had express orders to deal moderately with the Parisians, and not to do any thing but hinder the carrying in  Victuals, without any noise or scandal, to keep so from irritating the People, who have o other fault but in too easily believing a few seditious folk wo are enemies to qui|et. Thus the passion of the Male-content predominating over the igno|rance of the common People who feed upon the desire of Novelty, all fair proceedings being interpreted the effects of fear, the resolution of con|tinuing War was established.
Paris may be called the Eye of the whole Body of France, a compen|dium of the whole Kingdom, a World in a little; for it abounds in all things desirable either for conveniency or delight. It is divided into three parts, the one is called the City, the other the Town, and the third the Vni|versity; which are divided by the Seine, which, taking her original in Bur|gundy, falls into the Sea at Havre de Grace. In the beginning of the City it divides its self into two parts, and then joyning again makes two Islands, one whereof is that of Nostre Dame, the other of the Palace. These three parts are joyned together by ten Bridges; of which those of Nostre Dame, the Exchange, and St. Michael, are worth observing, being all of them covered with Houses and Shops; but above all, the new Bridge, which was begun to be built by Henry the 3d, and was finished by Henry the 4th, is most considerable both for scituation and structure. This City is thought to contain above a Million of souls: it wants not stately Edices, richly furnished: it hath in it above 200 Churches richly adorned: it brings unto the King a yearly revenue of above a Million of Pistols. All Arts and Sciences do flourish there: In it are 59 Colledges, 18 es, 972 Streets, 25 Piazza's: It hath 9 Suburbs all very well peopled; there being in some of them above 30000 souls. It is environed with Walls partly an|cient, partly modern, but without any rules of Fortification. The strength thereof consists in the number of People, whereof there are above 100000 men inrolled under the Captains and Colonels of Wards. It abounds in all things; for the Country being every where fertile, furnisheth it with all necessaries; and there being plenty of Money, Merchandize are brought thither from the farthest parts.
And because at the first breaking out of the War, many Courtiers, Of|ficers of War, and Gentlemen were shut up in Paris, it was resolved that none of them should be suffered to go out; contrary to the use of Besieged Towns, where people are not forbid to go out, but kept from coming in. This was done, out of consideration that many persons of quality, and who were well respected at Court, and many of their Wives who were most ingaged for the Cardinal, and the kindred of those that commanded, the City might be the better dealt with by the Kings Forces. Moreover, no Munition nor Arms of any sort being suffered to be carried out, the King's Troops were much weakned, for there were not Arms enough to be found within an hundred Leagues of Paris; and the Court was no less

incommodated by the Courtiers having neither Cloathes, Money, nor Credit, as they use to have in the City by means of Merchants and Friends. But at last, most of those that would, went forth dignified in Clownish and Country Apparrel; Lords and Ladie past thus disguised, as if they went to the neighbouring Villages to sport themselves, but not without be|ing searched whether they had any Arms of Provision; which afterwards occasioned much, mith, at St. Germains, and many merry tales: Yet leave was given to many who desired it, to return to their own homes, thinking it better out to interrupt Commerce. Paris not being yet fully surroun|ded,  this interim many Cattle, much Corn, and Provisions of all sorts was brought into the City.
The Marquiss of Vxelles brought many of the King's Forces before Cor|bee, a Walled Town upon the Banks of Seine  Leagues from Paris; which Town they took without much resistance, and fortified it. Hereby it ap|peared how negligen the Parisians were, in not securing that place, which was of such importance to the preservation of Paris; but they excused it, saying, That they would not be the first that would break with the King. At this time came the Duke d'Elboeufe to the Parliament, where he sate as Duke and Peer of France; he was much sollicited by the Parliament and the City, that he would be their Protector, and head them; which offer he accepted, and offered his three Sons to serve them, the Prince Harcourt, the Courts of Rieux and of abona, all of them valiant and considerable men. This action was so applauded by the Parisians and Parliament, that the Inhabitants cried as he past through the Street, Vive le Roy, Vive d'El|boeufe. The next day he was declared General of the Parisians Armies, had  Oath given him, and his three Sons were made Colonels of Horse. He sought to ingage the Duke of Orleans in the quarrel, but in vain: Where|fore finding his Authority eclipsed by the Prince of Conty his unexpected coming to Paris, he thought to face about and serve the King; which he endeavoured by means of the Duke of Orleans, who wrought his peace with the Court, and into favour with his Majesty, to the great satisfaction of the Court, where he was prefer'd, was made one of the Privy Council, and was made Governour of Picardy.
The Dutchess of Longueville growing hereupon jealous, and in danger of being arrested, since it might be thought her Brother and Husband held intelligence with the Court; wherefore she thought to clear her self by the Coadjutor and chief of the Frondeurs, and to make known why those Princes came not; and together with the Counsellor Longueville, and the Son of President Maisons, told Gourville that he must go to St. Germains to acquaint the Princes that the Decree was past against the Cardinal, and that therefore they mu needs come to Paris that very day, where they should be waited for till an hour after midnight; for otherwise they were resolved to make the Duke d'Elboeufe Generalissimo the next Morning, who would use all the means he could to hinder their coming. Gourville went presently to St. Germains, and told how affairs went. Prince Marsil|liack went to finde out the Prince of Conty and Duke of Longueville, who was come thither the Thursday before; and they agreed to go all to|gether that very night to Paris. And Marsilliack having left his Horses, and those of Longueville, and of the Marquiss of Noirsmonstere, with his Groom in the Castle-court, he went to wait for them at Bevaratoio. Con|ty, Longueville, Rochefancault, the Marquisses of Ronsiere and Noirsmonstere went together with Gourville thorough the Yard, following the Marquiss St. Maigrin. The Prince of Conty's Hat fell off as he went thorough the

Castle-gate, which he recovered, not without danger of being known by Monsieur Tillier, who chanc'd to pass by at the same time; which was the cause why Prince Marsilliack went another way without them. It was strange that a thing done so publickly should not be observed: They came all about midnight to Porte St. Honor, and past freely through the Kings Guards; for Noirsmonstere was Marshal of the Army.
Marsilliack seeing Dongions Gate shut, (which is a Tower that stands over the Castle-gate, or Kings Palace) it being neer midnight, thought the Princes had been taken Prisoners, and thought to save himself: But not finding the Horses where he left them, he knew they were gone, so he went along the River that night to the Suburbs of St. Germains, where he found that neither Conty nor Longueville were come, and that the Parliament had already declared d'Elboeufe General; but being seen with the chief Counsellors of the Treaty of Noisy, and knowing what had past, the Prin|ces were at last received upon their Artestate; though the Duke d'Elboeufe's friends being jealous, gave out that Conty was come from his Brother to deceive them; which caused such jealousies in the Parisians, as they set a Guard upon L'Hostelle di Longueville, where they were all lodged. Con|ty sent his Secretary Baracine to Councellor Longueville, offering to go li in the publick Palace of the City as they did; and the Duke of Longue|ville sent for his Wife and Daughter thither, shewing thereby that he put himself into the hands of the people; which made them confide in him: and here his Wife was delivered of her second Son, called Count St. Paul, who was Baptized with great solemnity by the Coadjutor, and had the City of Paris and the Dutchess of Boullion for his God-mothers, and was named Charles Paris. The Dutchess of Longueville, notwithstanding she lay in, would always assist in Council; nay the people fearing, by reason of a false report that was given out, that she was gone to St. Germains, she rose out of her Bed, and shew'd her self at the Window, whereby all were appeased: and from thenceforth d'Elboeufe's credit decreased, and the Co|adjutors Faction grew considerable, and Conty and his Sister were much esteemed.
These Princes went the very day of their arrival to the Parliament, where one of them sate as Prince of the Bloud, the other by way of honour. And after some dispute Conty was declared Generalissimo, and Longue|ville equal General with d'Elboeufe; but he would not accept of it, not so much for that d'Elboeufe pretended precedency, as for that he was told the Parliament thought to detain him, whereat he was scandalized: Where|fore pretending to go to his Government of Normandy, he went from Pa|ris thitherward; which made the Court suspect that he intended to make himself Duke of Normandy, in case things should proceed as he imagi|ned.
Hence it was that when he came to Paris he began to conceive great dif|ficulties, and inclined too close with the Court. It is said that he left his confident Priolo at Paris to make his peace with the King; to which purpose Abbot Ondedei sent Francis Scappi under pretence of carrying a Procura|tion to Eluet Advocate of the Parliament, to save the moveables of his Chamber which were in the Cardinal's house. This Scappi was taken for a Spy, and being stopt at the Gate, was imprisoned; but was afterwards set at liberty by Eluet's means, that Ticket not being found about him which he carried to Priolo; for he had wisely swallowed it. He saw and trea|ted with Priolo often, under pretence of speaking with some of his acqain|tance of the Switzers Guard, but indeed to draw him over to the Pari|sians.

Having got a Pasport from the Parliament, he went to Ruel, and spoke with Ondedei, who together with Longueville's negotiations, disco|vered from Priolo whether the Prince of Cond did really hold any intelli|gence with his Brother.
The Duke of Bullion being with his Wife and Children at Paris, was won over by Longueville to joyn with the Parisians, hoping thereby to com|pose his affairs touching Sedan the better. He offered his service, which was gladly accepted for his great skill in commanding an Army; and being a Prince of high thoughts, and various resolutions, he fell to improve the confidence which he had long held with the Prince of Cond, whom he acquainted with what was done.
The Marshal de la Motte offered his service also to the Parisians, who was a friend of Longueville's, and had a particular pique to the Court, and particularly to Secretary Tilliere, by reason of his long Imprisonment.
The Duke of Bullion gave his Wife and Children, as Longueville had done, for pledges of his fidelity to the Parliament.
The Parliament being encouraged by so many Princes and great men, grew more confident, and in the presence of the Princes ratified the De|cree against the Cardinal; ordering all Captains and Souldiers not to come within 20 Leagues of Paris, and those that were advanced to retire presently to the Frontier-Towns, prohibiting the subministring of Victu|als or Ammunition, and gave out Commissions for raising of Horse and Foot. Monsieur di Berne was made Governour of the Artillery, and of the Arsenal of Paris; and a Council of War was chosen, with a President of the Grand Chamber, and two Counsellors, who were Brousels and Me|verdeau. They resolved moreover to fortifie the Suburbs; but nothing was done, save cutting Trenches at the ends of such Streets where the Corps du Guard were kept without the Gates. The City-council, besides what was voluntarily given by many particular men, imposed 50 Crowns upon every Gate whereinto a Coach might enter, or else a Man and Horse armed; and upon every little Gate and Shop ten Crowns, or else one Foot-Souldier. The Bastile was held for the King by Monsieur Trembley, who delivered it up to the Duke d'Elboeufe, desiring onely for his credit that a piece of Cannon might be brought before it; for which he was much blamed; and Brousel was put in his place, who made his Son Lou|vieres his Lieutenant.
The first Regiment of Horse (which was raised in two daies) was gi|ven to the Marquiss de la Bollay. And whilst all men wondered that they saw not Duke Beaufort appear, he came to Paris on the 13th of Ianuary, galloping through the Streets that he was not known; for he had not yet won that reputation with the Parisians which he got afterwards, but was rather thought to have made his peace with the Court, it being known how much his Brother Duke Mercurio had dealt and obtained at Court for him, and for the Duke his Father. For the better knowledge whereof, we must repeat from a little before what had passed to this pur|pose.
The Cardinals friends knowing that his greatness in France was not up|held by his own strength, but that it was protected by the Duke of Orleans, and Prince of Cond; and that therefore depending upon the abitrement of others, he must minde their satisfaction so much, as not to be able to serve the King so faithfully as one who depends not upon others, but onely upon the King; they insinuated into him, that not so much for his own In|terest, as for the King's, he must so root himself, as not to own his Fortune

from others, but meerly from the King, and from his own worth; mens mindes being too variable in Court, which he had not formerly considered; Since being an Italian Cardinal, he propounded nothing to himself at the first but how to serve the King, as long as his Majesty should have need of it, intending afterwards to retire, and peacefully enjoy the Glory and re|putation which he had won, and make it known how advantageous it is for the Kingdom to have a State-minister, who is unconcern'd in France, and a Forainer, who having neither Kindred nor Friends, minded nothing but the service of the Crown.
But as this did on one side seem to make his service acceptable, on the other side it met with so great oppositions, as his friends held themselves bound to let him know, that one thing which did authenticate the Male-contents boldness, was, that he should be in France without any tie of kee|ping there, since that being there himself alone, he might at any time withdraw, leaving both the publick and particular affairs in confusion. So as it being dangerous for Princes to change State-ministers, who were already instructed and capable of State-Affairs, do serve them faithfully, he was to take upon him Charges and Employments in the Kingdom, and to bring his nearest Relations into France, to give the greater assurance of his tarrying there, and of his fidelity to the King. He therefore resol|ved to send for three of his Nephews and one Niece, who came from Rome, though with no good will of the Pope's, who cared not for the Cardinal, for his having backt the Barbarini, and hindred the Decree against them, for being guilty of great misdemeanours against the Apostolick Sea.
The Cardinal had but one Brother of St. Dominick's Order, who was made Cardinal a little before, and two Sisters who were married in Rome, the one to Count Girolimo Martinozi di Fano, the other to Loren|zo Manzini a Gentleman of Rome. One Daughter of the first of these Sisters came into France, and two Daughters and one Son of the second's, who were very affectionately received by the Queen: so as those Gentle|men were happy who could enjoy their conversation, they being likely to be the most considerable Ladies of the Court, which occasioned envy; and hence grew distractions against the Cardinal's Government; not one|ly in such as thought that the moneys of the Crown would be largely ex|pended in their Portions, but which imported more, in the French La|dies, who seeing Strangers (who usually are worse looked upon in France than any where else) were scandalized that they should be more favoured by the Queen than they, and get richer and better Husbands. For the Cabal of Women prevailing much in that Nation, there was but few of them who were not mastered by their passions, as were also many Lords and Princes; So as it was no wonder if this grievance spread further. Duke Beaufort, and his Father the Duke of Vendosme being Prisoners, Duke Mercoeur who was the onely one of that Family that was suffered to remain in France, did all he could to get his Brother's liberty; but if he should work it underhand, and against the will of the State-ministers, it would cause no quiet to his Family, nor facilitate his Fathers return; wherefore he endeavoured by his friends means to let the Cardinal know that he might win over that whole Family to him, which was powerful, and of high bloud. Beaufort was got out of the Castle of Vincennes, who made known to the Cardinal by the Marquiss of Ampous, that he would be willing to side with his Eminency, and that he would ingage himself his Brother should do so likewise.
The Cardinal embraced the motion, and Mercoeur having by his Letters assured the Queen of his zeal to her service, divers Treaties were had touching his return to Court: her Majesty was well inclined to it; for she trusted in Mercoeur's quiet nature, but did not as then correspond with Mercoeur's desire, because the Prince of Cond was no friend to his Family, for Beaufort's having appeared against him in the beginning of the Regen|cy; and the Cardinal would conclude nothing in it without Cond's know|ledge, who returned victorious from the Battle of Lens, and seemed much averse unto it when he first heard thereof. Wherefore discovering Con|d's averseness, he let Mercoeur know by means of Madam d'Ampous, that he should not advance any further, he being come to Anet, a Castle belong|ing to his House; lest by Cond's means, who was denied nothing, the Court might be bound to order something against him. Thus Mercoeur was forc'd to keep away, and to go privately to Paris, to consult with his Friends how he might compass his desire. He conceal'd himself in Advo|cate Bluet's house; and resolved to let Cond know, that if he pleased he would be his friend and servant, and be obliged to him for his return. Marquiss Vieville, who was then great with the Prince, was thought to be a fit Mediator; he undertook the business, and propounded it to Cond, who at first seemed backward in it, remembring that Beaufort had not dealt well with him. But knowing that he had no reason to be angry with Mercoeur, and that he might take his Word, he was perswaded by Vieville, and did him good offices at Court; Which the Cardinal perceiving, he let Madam d'Ampous know that the Prince began to be more gracious, and that he hoped to work Mercoeur's return to Court within a few days: yet it was long in effecting, by reason of two things; the one, that though Beaufort had given it under his hand to his Brother, yet he propounded o|ther ways to the Cardinal by his Cousen the Duke of Nemours. And having some about him who perswaded him to make his Peace himself, without being beholden to others, he came incognito to Paris, and scorning his Brother's negotiation, crost the Treaty by means of Nemours and the Mar|shal d'Ostre whom he employ'd. The other obstacle was, because Cond would appear the Author of this Family's return, to the end that it might be the more obliged to him; which Mercoeur liked not, who was desirous to be obliged to the Prince, but not to own the whole favour to him, be|cause if he should be brought to Court meerly by his means, he could re|ceive no favour but by his mediation; Whereas if the Cardinal had a hand therein, he should receive the favour immediately from the Cardi|nal, without the means of others. Mercoeur's Friends were sufficiently trou|bled to think how they might carry on this business; and the means they found, was the Prince his own concernment; for Vieville told him, That if he would take upon him to bring that Family back to the Court, he would be obliged to maintain all the Interests thereof, and to prefer them before his own, which he could not mention till the House of Vendome was satisfied.
The Prince approved of this reason; he promised to favour his return at the present by his approbation, and to foment it vigorously if it came to the Council. Affairs being brought to this pass, Madam d'Ampous con|tinued her desires: The Cardinal resolved to end it, now that Cond with|stood it not, and told Madam d'Ampous that Mercoeur was much bound to the Prince for his manner of proceeding with him. Mercoeur kept still concealed in Paris, but was advertised of all things; but being afterwards to return to his Castle d'Anet, Beaufort having troubled this Treaty, the

Cardinal sent Abbot Ondedei, together with Advocate Bluet to him, who discoursed long with him. Ondedei wisht Mercoeur to write to the Cardinal to intercede with the King for his return: The Duke answered, that he had written often, but never received any return; and that therefore he need not write again: That his actions were caution sufficient for his serving the King faithfully; and that though his return to Court would be a par|ticular favour, which he would acknowledge from the Cardinal. But that notwithstanding he desired he would not be offended if he came not thi|ther unless it were to some purpose; for if he came, he must sollicite his Father's and his Brother's return; which if the Cardinal were unwilling to, he was ready to renounce all favour, and to return to from whence he was come. Ondedei found this to be so generous a resentment, as he perswaded him the Cardinal would grant it; which not being to be done unless the Abbot should return to Paris to acquaint the Cardinal with it, it was thought fit that the Duke should come thither also incog|nito, that Answers might pass more readily, and Resolutions might be more easily taken. Being in Paris in the house of Marquiss Vieville, he met there with some impediments by the intrigues of his Family; but at last, having overcome all difficulties, and the Cardinal being satisfied with what Ondedei had said, he received an Order from the King to return to Court; which he did, and lighted at L'Hostelle de Vendome, from whence
Ondedei brought him to the Cardinal's Lodgings; who after many Embraces and Caresses, brought him to kiss the King and Queen's Hand.
When he had spoken with the King, Cond took him by the hand, and was with him about a quarter of an hour in a corner of the Chamber, re|ciprocal shews of good will passing between them: But their Discourse was interrupted by the Prince his pretending too neer Friendship, and too strong engagements to his friends; and Mercoeur not being able o|therwise to give satisfaction to the Prince with Loyalty to the Court, went presently to Paris, and renewed the Treaty which had been formerly in hand touching his marrying Madamoselle de Guise Sister to the Duke of Guise; which business if there had been no other Irons in the fire, had been accomplished; but Beaufort cross'd it, who had no minde that his Brother should marry: Wherefore the Cardinal, by his Friends perswasion, began to think again upon what had been proposed by Madam d'Ampous, touch|ing the Match between his Niece Mancini, and Mercoeur: But consider|ing afterwards, that it might be more advantageous for him, that Duke Beaufort should marry one of his Nieces, whereby an alliance with two or three great Families might be made. For by marrying Beaufort to Man|cini, he might reconcile himself perfectly to him; and if Mercoeur should marry Madamoselle de Guise, and that the Court should approve of the match between the Duke de Ioyeuse and Madamoselle d'Angolesme; at one and the same time the House of Guise would be won, that of Angolesme gotten, and a new Consanguinity would be made with the Prince of Cond, who was neer allied to Angolesme. All parties were ell pleased with this, and the Proposal was approved: Madam d'Ampous writ thereof to Beaufort; he liked it, and at the same time answered his Brother, and gave him his Word that he would observe whatsoever he should promise in his behalf. But then, thinking that he might make better advantage by the troubles in Paris, instead of going to St. Germains, according to his pro|mise, went directly to Paris; where having concealed himself in President Conieux's house, after he was got out of Prison, he was sent for by the Frondeurs, and hoped to do Wonders: So declaring himself still to be a

great Enemy to the Cardinal, he came to the Parliament, where he was gratiously received, had place in Parliament as Peer of France, and was made one of the Generals under the Prince of Conty.
Beaufort did very much Caress the meaner sort of People; to which pur|pose he made use of several persons, amongst which the Curate of la Flesche, and Chappelle, who went blazoning forth his Worth and Gallantry through the Streets of Paris. Moreover, he hired certain people to make Songs and Verses in his commendations, whereby he did win the good will of many particular persons: For all this, he was held by others to be no wise Prince; and as being a great friend to the Dutchess of Monba|son, he acquainted her with all his Secrets; which made the other Gene|rals despise him, not revealing any thing of importance to him, lest he should divulge it: wherefore the Regent cared not to negotiate with him; for she knew all by the Dutchess of Monbason, which caused other inconveniencies, as shall be said.
And because the Marshals of France fit not in Parliament but when the King is present, the Marshal de la Motte was made Counsellor of honour, to the end that by that Title he might enter into Parliament. As for the employments in War, places were thus disposed of; Duke Beaufort and Marshal de la Motte had the charge of the Western part of the River to|wards Orleans: D'Elboeus, Bullion, and Marsilliack commanded the East|side towards St. Den~is: The Marquiss of Noirsmonstere was made their Lieutenant-General. The Prince of Conty, who was Generalissimo, being in an Ecclesiastick habit, and but of a weak constitution, went seldom into the Field, but assisted onely in the Council of War, which was held eve|ry day in the City's Palace. Count Fiesca was given for an assistant to the Duke of Longueville, who was to go for Normandy; for he sided a|gainst the King, as did also Duke Luines, Marquiss Vitry, and others who went to Paris, pretending still to be the King's Servants, but Enemies to the Cardinal.
The Duke of Longueville went from Paris with a Convoy of 500 Horse; he travelled all night by unknown ways, and concealed himself in a Wood three Leagues distant from Roan, treating by some of his par|ty who were disguised, to have admittance.
Which being granted, he went presently towards the River-side which was opposite to the Palace, together with the Marquiss de Beveron, who met him by the way; and passing over in small Boats, was received toge|ther with his Complices; and whilst Eghestote was ready to sit down to Supper, Longueville and Beveron entring into the house suddenly, said, they were come to sup with him. The Son wondered; but seeing his Fa|ther and the Duke, he was forc'd to be patient.
The first President Ris was told of this arrival the next morning by Monsieur di Miressa, Captain of the Duke's Guard; he was much ama|zed, and struck o less with Wonder than with Sorrow, for he was faith|ful to the King. When Harcourt, who by order from the King was ad|vanced with some Troops to keep the Inhabitants in their Duty, with whom he treated to be introduced, upon this news retreated to Point D'Arke, four Leagues off, where Monsieur Beaumont was Governour for the King.
The common people flocking together, and desirous to know News, ran to the Palace, and cried Long live the King, Long live the Duke: he an|swering that he was the King's Servant, and Cardinal's Enemy, came down, past with applause through the City, came to the Parliament, made there

his protestations and offers, solliciting them all to close with the Parisian party. The most of those Presidents and Counsellors, and the whole Ci|ty declared in his behalf, some few excepted; amongst which was the first President Ris, who after having tarried two or three days to try whe|ther he could do any good for the King or no, finding all his endeavours vain, went to the Court at St. Germains; and divers others went to Ver|non, a City upon the Seine, half way between Roan and Paris, whither the Parliament was removed by the King's Decree, who declared the Par|liament of Paris invalid.
The distastes of the Malecontents broke forth also in Poictou, for the whole Province turned against the Court, unless it were the Marquiss Rochespossey of the house of Chastegniere, which kept always constant to the King. For which the Bishop of Poictiers, one of the said Family, was besieged by the Citizens in his own House for 24 hours: the Abbot of Rochesposey, who was his Nephew, together with the Dutchess of Roan was deteined in Tours; and the Marquiss, who was head of the Family, and Lieutenant-General of the Province, was not safe in his own houses.
The Court was much troubled hereat, seeing that it was now between those two Great, Rich, and Popular Cities; not knowing what the end of so bold a beginning might prove. But Roan chiefly exprest her ill will, for the rest of the Kingdom was as then quiet, knowing that the happi|ness of Princes doth not consist in lesning the King's Authority. The o|ther Parliaments therefore answered that of Paris, That they liked not the Engagement, which was not the way to bring Peace to France, but to put her in a Civil War, out of the capriciousness of a few envious and un|quiet Spirits; whence nothing but Confusion and Ruine could be ex|pected.
The scarcity of Victuals and Moneys, which grew daily greater, was added to the troubles of the King's Council, who saw that many Princes and Lords declared for Paris and Roan. Nor was the Cardinal less trou|bled for jealousie of Orleans, who seemed weary of the War: Nor was he a little cruciated by Cond's unquiet disposition, whose constancy in this enterprize he apprehended, who was of a more fiery and lively spi|rit than the other: but the Cardinal watched him carefully, knowing how apt the French were to change opinion. He was informed that Cond treated with the Frondeurs; and he was troubled at his being two days out of St. Germain: especially it being said, that he was turned over to his Brother's party; which though it were false, yet it smelt of suspi|cio. The Cardinal did therefore double his diligence in observing the Prince his actions: and thinking that he had suffered some Victuals to be carried into Paris which he might have hindred, the Cardinal sent a Confi|dent of his with a small party of Horse to discover if he did so; which Con|d being aware of, took very ill.
On the 16th of Ianuary, Lagne was taken, a Walled Town standing upon the Marne seven Leagues from Paris, by Monsieur Persan Camp-Ma|ster; and the High-Dutch who were quartered at Charenton were remo|ved thither. Some Polacks got also into Meuden, where there was a fair Castle not far off, belonging to the Duke of Guise, whose Inhabitants held for Paris; Whereat the Parisians were much vexed (though it was no considerable Pass) to see the King's Forces come so neer Paris. They therefore offered to recover it, but in vain; for the Souldiery in Paris were neither enough in number, nor sufficiently Disciplin'd.
The Coadjutor raised a Regiment at his own expence; which was called

Corinthian, he being Arch-Bishop of Corinth; and being more desirous of Glory and Greatness than the rest, he desired to carry on his designe by appearing popular, and a friend to the Publick. His chief end was to make the Court affraid of him, which through too much goodness sought to win upon these unquiet and turbulent spirits; of which number the Coadjutor was thought to be one, who having Eloquence joyn'd to his Learning, upon the celebrating of St. Paul's day, which is done on the 25th of Ianuary, resolved to preach in St. Paul's Church, upon the pre|sent occurrences, rather to win Credit with the common people, than to perswade them to Peace.
The Family of the Gondi, one of the noblest Families of Italy, came from Florence into France with Queen Catherine of Medici; the chief where|of rose to a great fortune under her Government, who was Wife to Henry the 2d, and Mother to three Kings. This Coadjutor was Brother to the Duke of Rets Peer of France, Nephew to the Arch-Bishop of Paris by the Father's side; a personage of generous Thoughts, and of lively Spirits, full of Worth, and of a wonderful Wit; but ambitious of Glory, and of more Greatness. The Arch-Bishops of this City are by right Counsellors of Parliament, but not the Coadjutors: but this man, for his Habilities and Wisdom, was made Counsellor of Honour, by which Title he had admittance into Parliament, where winning favour by his pro|fest enmity to the Cardinal, he had a great stroke in the management of publick affairs. His first endeavours were, to grow great with the Dut|chess of Longueville, and with the Prince of Conty, excluding Prince Mar|silliack, who was the chiefest in their favour; which made Marsilliack so jealous, as he resolved to be no longer his friend, which occasioned af|terwards many inconveniencies: For the Coadjutor finding his designes vain in this, joyned more straightly with the Frondeurs, and with Duke Beaufort, who made himself their head, as also head of the Parisians, as well for his Condition, as for the hatred he also shewed to the Car|dinal.
The Parliament was this mean while so diligent, as nothing issued out but Decrees, Ordinances, and Remonstrances, whereby they thought to maintain the War. And though it had been often known that Princes disliked nothing so much, as to have their actions found fault with; yet the Parliament thinking, that albeit the Regent was not to be removed from her resolutions by verbal Remonstrances, yet they might justifie their pretensions, by publishing the ground-work of their Reasons: they made a Writing, and sent it to Guinegande the State-Secretary, wherein speaking freely against the Cardinal, they blamed him for having drunk in ambitious Maximes, and that as soon as he had got the Government of the affairs of the Kingdom, abusing so high a favour, he made himself master of the Kings person, under a new title of Superintendent of his Educa|tion; disposing absolutely of all places, Dignities and Towns, Govern|ments, Arms, and Finances, he onely receiving the thanks, ordering pu|nishments; and making not onely the fortunes of private men, but of the Publick, depend wholly upon him: that his administration of Govern|ment proved a strange piece of policy, clean contrary to the customs of France; a continuance of War, the peoples misery, a ruine of the Finan|ces, and which was more, the corruption of the whole Kingdom: That he made War his fixed Star, hated Peace, to the end that he might make his Councels more considerable, and have the better pretence to raise Mo|neys, and enrich himself: That he had endeavoured by all means to divide

the people and the Parliament, and so to make the people take up Arms against the Parliament, to the end that the Parliament being broken, he might be the absolute Master of the Kingdom.
With these and the like demonstrations, they concluded, that they had not taken up Arms, nor made any of these Decrees, save onely to defend themselves against that State-Minister, and for the publick preservation; in which case it was necessary to proclaim the Cardinal an Enemy to the King and Kingdom: That the preservation of Kingly Authority, and of the King, was the sole reason why they took up Arms; which was the one|ly reason for their particular safety; which was necessarily annext to that of the King: That therefore this was no act of Rebellion, but an effect of Duty; Wherefore they desired his Majesty to dismiss the Cardinal, and to leave him to the hands of Justice, that he might be an example to Po|sterity, to deter others from such vast pretences.
The semblance of this Writing had force enough to deceive those, who swoln with their own opinions, did not measure them by what was just, or feasible; hoping by the Cardinal's destruction to appropriate the pla|ces and dignities of the Crown to themselves, and to govern France after their own manner.
But these bold attempts were opposed by more moderate and wiser men, who were minded to curb these resolutions, and to square all things by the rule of Reason.
The scituation of Corbeile (by reason of the scarcity of Victuals) be|ing grown considerable, the recovery thereof was thus propounded: That a good body of such as were fit to bear Arms, and should be willing, should attempt this. Wherefore 4000 men were chosen, who were led on by Beaufort, Marsilliack, and Noirsmonstere; who march'd out of the Town; and being come to Ioycy, a Village in the midway to Corbeile, fell into such confusion, as wanting Bread, but meeting with much Wine in those abandoned houses, they were all Drunk, and fell asleep; some died for cold, some run away: so Beaufort was forc'd to return to Paris re in|fecta.
At the news of the Parisians being gone to recover Corbeile, Cond mu|stered the Troops about St. Clou, and marched thitherward; and had he come but two hours sooner, he had cut them all in pieces.
Afterwards the Marquiss of Vitry march'd out of Paris with 500 Horse to scowre the Country; and meeting in his return with a Body of the Kings Horse neer Bois de Vincennes, there hapned a skirmish, wherein Tancredi de Roan, a gallant Youth of 18 years of age, advancing, he was slain, whilst he had courageously thrust himself into the midst of the Ene|mies Troops: He was Son to that Henry of Roan who was so famous in the Wars of our times, by Margaret de Bettunes a worthy Lady, and of one of the most Illustrious Houses of Flanders.
Whilst the avenues were blockt up every where by the Kings men, the more to straighten Paris, divers Troops went from the parts about St. Denis to surprize Charenton, and to seize on that Bridge upon the Marne two Leagues from Paris; which was a Pass of much importance, for the Convoys of Victuals part that way which came from Bree a plentiful Pro|vince: but it was defended by Monsieur di Chalow, so as the Kings men failed of that designe then; whereat the Court being troubled, and par|ticularly Cond, who thought it redounded to his disreputation, it was resolved to drive the Enemy from thence. Orleans, who envied Cond's glory, was not willing that he should thereby purchase more honour:

Wherefore he resolved to march himself in the head of those Troops. The Council of War was held at St. Denis, the Souldiers were listed at Charon, a League from Paris, where being sheltered by the Castle of Vincennes, 3000 Horse were drawn out in Battle-array to fight those that should come from Paris. The Duke of Chastillion, Son to the late Marshal of France, advanc'd with 2000 veterane Foot, and fell with such resolution upon the Trenches and Barricadoes, as a more glorious success could not have hapned. The news whereof coming to Paris, they resolved to defend that place with all their might: All the Generals, Officers of War, a number of Souldiers, and many Inhabitants march'd out of the Suburbs of St. Antoine; where Beaufort, d'Elboeufe, with the rest of the Generals, and the Coadjutor, put themselves in Battle-array.
Orleans would not permit that Cond should go to the assault; where|fore Castillion fell courageously with his Foot upon the Suburbs, and Chau|lew retreated to the Church at the head of the Bridge, where fighting va|liantly he was slain, having twice refused quarter.
Chastillion coming towards the Church with his Sword in his hand, was unfortunately shot in the Reins of the Back, by a Musquet out of a Win|dow, whereof he died the next day in St. Vincennes Castle, to the great grief of the whole Court, and particularly of the Prince of Cond. Count Saligny died there also.
Chastillion was about 30 years old, valiant, of a handsome aspect, and of a pleasant demeanour. He left no Children behinde him, but left his Wife with Childe, who was delivered of a Son after his death, who is the onely remainder of that Famous Gaspero Coligny, who was Admiral of France in the time of Charles the 9th.
All the Souldiers of this station were slain or taken Prisoners, and a|monst others of condition, Monsieur de Poictiers Cap-master, and Mar|quiss Coygnack saved himself not without much ado. The Parliament did grievously resent this misfortune, and complained much of their Gene|rals for not fighting the Kings Army, which was very weak. The more Reputation Cond won, the more did he exasperate the Parisians hatred; for the whole business was attributed to him, though it were Chastillion that did act, and Orleans that commanded; and so bitterly did they speak against him, as almost forgetting their malice to the Cardinal, they inveighed onely against Cond. The Kings men would have fallen upon the Pari|sians as they came out of Port St. Antoine, if they had thought that they had been expected; but Cond thinking that in all reason they would have drawn out their Cannon upon that height, which was very fit to have play'd upon the King's Camp, was of a contrary opinion. The Kings men retreated to their quarters, leaving 200 Foot to guard the Bridge. The taking of this Pass upon the Marne proved very prejudicial for conducting Victuals; Wherefore Beaufort and Marsilliack went out two daies after upon break of day to recover it; but were forced to forbear going, to assist a Convoy which was brought by Noirsmonstere, and was come from Estampes to Linoys, being ready to be assaulted and taken by the Kings Troops. They had about 500 Horse with them: they staid that night in Vissie, a Village two Leagues from Paris, and went the next morning to Chyly, two Leagues further, where they met Noirsonstere; where hear|ing that Marshal Grammont being already come to Borgo della Rena, ad|vced between Villeneuf and Chyly; instead of going that way, they went lower along the River, and marched so fast, as the Kings men could not come to the Rear of the Convoy till they entred into Vitry, a place

surrounded with Vineyards full of Hedges, and joyning almost upon the Ri|ver Seine. Beaufort and Noirsmonstere halted at the coming out of the Vil|lage: and as the Kings men were gotten too within the Houses, Monsieur di Nierlieu Brother to Marquiss Vartimore, as he pursued the Enemy, was unfortunately slain by his own party, taking him to be an Enemy; yet Beaufort's Troops were charged, and the greatest part of the Convoy ta|ken before they could get into Vitry: And they would have fared worse, had not the Marshal de la Motte, who was come out with some Forces that very morning, and was joyned to Marsilliack, appeared in time, and so opportunely, as falling together with Marsilliack upon the Kings men, who were already gotten into Vitry, they drove them back to their main Body; so they entred all of them into Villejeuf, and fortified it. Marshal Grammont having staid a while to expect a recruit, thought it not fit to assault Villejeuf, which was already fortified, especially since the night drew on, and he so neer Paris, so far from his own quarters, as he might have been surprized, with prejudice to the Court; and therefore being contented with having taken the Convoy, he retreated to Medune, and so to St. Clou.
Beaufort's Name was so celebrated by the Parisians, as it was no sooner known that he was out of danger, but above 30000 people, what Men, what Women, ran to where the fight had been, shewing their particular joy to|wards him, who had fought hand to hand with the Count di Briole a bold and courageous Gentleman.
Though Longueville was obeyed in Normandy by almost all the Province, and that more than 20 Gentlemen had taken Commissions to be Colonels un|der him; yet being not able for want of Moneys to raise the men that he had promised; the Parisians began to conceive that he had failed the Parliament, which expected much from him; that he held secret intelligence with the Court; and that he sought excuses to evade the assistance which he had promised the Parisians. It was true, he had had some Treaty with the Marquiss St. Luke, but without concluding any thing.
The Parisians being thus troubled, as well for the irresolution of the Princes and Commanders, as for the backwardness of the other Provinces and Parliaments of the Kingdom, who though they had been much solli|cited, could never be brought to declare any thing against Regal Authori|ty, found how little stedfast those hopes are which are grounded upon o|ther means assistance, and began to desire that Peace which they had a|bused.
The Passes over the Rivers, and chief Avenues by Land, being this mean while blockt up, the Kings Camp grew daily greater, and the Besieged's courage failed. Divers succours came to the King; amongst which, that which was brought by the Count di St. Aignan was a very considerable one. He of himself brought 400 Gentlemen, his friends, and such as de|pended in the Province of Berry, where he was much beloved, and came with them and as many other Servants to St. Germains, much to his praise, and to the Kings satisfaction. They were quartered not far from the Court, that they might be ready upon any sudden occasion. Monsieur Boisack brought other Forces to Chastres and Linoy, seven Leagues from Paris, so as Paris was also blockt up on that side, and began to be less eager, and to see that they must have Peace, be it either with, or without the Cardinal. So the first heat of War began to cool, and Peace to be desi|red; whereunto the Court did no less incline.
The Parliament forbore sending their Deputies to St. Germains, les

they should be denied Audience the second time: and it became not the King's honour to send Proposals of Agreement to a disobedient City, and to Subjects, who in all reason ought to humble themselves.
At last it was thought fit by some that were well minded, to send Loy|aque, Herauld of France, from the Court to Paris, with two Trumpets, to intimate his Majesties Intentions and Orders to the Parliament, City, and to the Prince of Conty; that occasion might be given of a Treaty, as for|tunately was.
On the 1 of February, the Herauld was sent with Instructions in Wri|ting; which being a thing seldom heard of, it will not be amiss to relate them.
The Herauld being come to Paris, was brought to the Parliament, where he spoke as followeth:
My King and your Master hath sent me, by the advice of the Queen Re|gent, to you Presidents and Councellors, and to give you this Declaration, whereby his Majesty doth discharge you of all your Employments, in case you go not out of Paris within 8 days. Being notwithstanding willing that those shall enjoy their places who shall come unto his Majesty within the said time. And because his Majesty understands that this Declaration which was sent on the 23 day of the last moneth, hath not come to the knowledge of the most of you, by reason of the diligence that was made to hinder it: His Majesty (besides the eight days which ought to be numbred from the day of the Date, which time is already expired) grants you four days more, to begin on this day wherein I give you notice of it. And his Majesty being sensible of the miseries and sufferings of his poor people of Paris, and that he will leave nothing undone to free them thereof, be by the advice of the Queen his Mother, (to the end that none of you may have any pretence to continue longer in your disobedience) hath commanded me to signifie unto you, That he promiseth and granteth full security for the Persons, Places, and Goods of all those, without any exception, who shall go out of Paris with|in the aforesaid time: And this his Majesty doth assure you on the Word and Faith of a King. But if you shall abuse this his Majesty's so great Clemency and Goodness, and shall continue in disobedience to your Master and Sove|raign, I am commanded to tell you, that you must not afterwards hope for Pardon, since you will be the ruine of all the Parisians, and the occasion of all the evils that shall ensue.
When he had said this, he gave the King's Declaration, and the same In|struction.
From thence he came to the publick Hall of the City, whereinto being brought, he said: My King and your Master hath sent me to you the Provost of Merchants, the Sheriffs, Councellors, Quartermans, and People of Paris, to give you this Declaration, which I am commanded to read unto you. Which when he had done, he said: The chief reasons which moved his Majesty to send Testimonies of his goodness to the Parliament, to the Prince of Conty, and to the other Princes and their adherents, was, as they should finde by his Declaration, to give rest to his good City of Paris; to withdrw the Inhabi|tants from the evil ways whereinto they had suffered themselves to be seduced; and to free them from the misfortunes which it was impossible for them to escape, if they should still continue in their Rebellion: that they might ea|sily see his Majesty's tenderness towards them, by his endeavouring to give them proof thereof now, when God had pleased to favour the right of his

Cause, by the late happy successes. He then desired to be brought to the Prince of Conty, to whom he spoke thus:
My King and thy Master hath sent me to thee Armande di Bourbon, to tell thee by this Declaration, which here I give thee, That thou, together with the other Dukes, Peers, Princes, Lords, and their Adherents, are guilty of High Treason, for not having come unto him, as he commanded you, within three days: and because it may be, that this his Declaration came not to you nor your Confederates knowledge, His Majesty, by the advice of his Mother the Queen Regent, hath commanded me to tell thee, that he grants thee and thy Adhe|rents four days space more, to begin from this day, to come to his Royal Court. And to the end that neither thou, nor the rest may have any excuse to continue longer in disobedience, His Majesty by the advice of his Mother the Queen Regent, hath commanded me to tell thee, that he give thee full and free se|curity for thy Person, Places, Goods, and Government; as also to all the Princes, Dukes, Peers, and Lords thy Adherents, in case thou and they come to him within the prefixed time. Whereof if thou faiest, I am commanded to tell thee, and them, that you shall all incur the punishments therein contai|ned. All these Instructions were signed and sealed by the Secretary of State Guinegaude; and the King's Declaration was of the same tenour.
The Herauld appeared at the Gate of St. Honor, accompanied by the Engineer Petite, who was purposely come from Paris to the Court, and came before the Sentinels at Sun-rising, where he sounded a Call, deman|ding to speak with the Captain of the Guards, of whom he demanded en|trance, which was denied him; and the Captain sent news hereof to the Parliament, Prince of Conty, and to the Commonalty.
The Houses were met, and having tarried till three hours after Dinner, they resolved not to receive the Herauld nor the Kings Letters, supposing that they imported little of satisfaction. But they returned him answer, That they durst not receive him, nor listen unto him, out of respect and obe|dience, since it belonged not but to Soveraigns with Soveraigns, though the ancient stile of my King, and thy Master cannot be used to a Soveraign, but to a Subject. Adding, that they had chosen Deputies to make their submis|sions known to their Majesties, if they might have Pasports sent them. To this Petite answered, That it was contrary to all Respect and Obedience, to re|fuse admittance to those that were sent by the King; and that the Herauld had no other Orders but to execute his Commissions. Here he again deman|ded to be let in, and that his Majesties Letters might be received; which being again denied, he founded a second Call, and was again refused; Monsieur Fournier being come thither in the name of the City, and Mon|sieur di Maison on the behalf of the Prince of Conty, to tell him that the City nor the Prince could return no other answer than what the Parlia|ment had done.
The mean while night came on, and the Herauld sounded the third Call; and expounding his Commission aloud by word of Mouth, left his Letters upon the Barricado, and returned towards St. Germains.
When he was gone, the Packets were taken and carried to the Corps de guard; Whereupon two Letters were written, one to the Chancellor, a|nother to Monsieur Tilliere, wherein they were desired in the Parliaments name, to get a Pasport for those that were appointed, from the King to represent unto his Majesty, that their refusing to hear the Herauld was not an effect of disobedience, but of reverence due from faithful Subjects,

who professing themselves to be such, could not admit of an Herauld, which was usually sent from an Enemy to an Enemy, and not from a Pa|tron to his Vassals; wherefore the said Deputies would wait upon his Ma|jesty to receive his Commands.
The resolution was well received; for after some dispute in the Kings Council, the Queen granted Pasports to Monsieur Tallon, Monsieur Emil|liand, and to Bignon the King's Advocate, who going to St. Germains, had the means to introduce a fortunate Treaty.
Two reasons made the Queen willing to confer of Peace; the one, by this means to moderate the Parisians bitterness in general, by the sweetness of the Word Peace, to foment the effects of those that desired it, and to withdraw themselves from a greater danger, as was insinuated unto her Ma|jesty by the Cardinal, thinking it did not misbecome her Princely Piety, to pardon the Errours of Subjects.
The other, out of the continual jealousie she had of the Prince of Cond, by reason of the great sway he bore with the Army, and by the dislike which he daily won in the Court and council, where he was so firm to his own opinion, as few durst oppose him, though in some things they thought their own opinions better, because their Fortunes lay in France, where Cond was a Prince of the Blood.
But the Cardinal, who had no establishment in France, save what was grounded upon her Majesties great goodness, was looked upon by Cond, as an obstacle to all those pretences which might prejudice his Patron; Wherefore it became him to be in continual apprehension of some change of minde in him, in respect of his Brother, Sister, and Brother-in-law, who were all of the contrary party.
Treaties of Peace were still kept on foot by the Pope's and by the Vene|tian's Agents, and some hopes seemed to be revived therein. Cardinal Mazarine sent Monsieur Brancart to Brussels on the 17th of Ianuary 1649, to invite Count Pignoranda to an Interview, as was desired by the said Count some moneths before. Pignoranda accepted the motion, seemed willing; and till he could put himself in order, sent Don Iuan Friquet to advertise the Cardinal of his coming.
Friquet came to St. Germains, and began the business: The Cardinal stood still upon generals, not permitting Pignoranda to stir from Brussels; but wisht him, that if he did not confide in Friquet, he would write to him, and send some other Confident to him, who might freely acquaint him with the Kings intentions; and notwithstanding the objection that was made against Friquet for not having sufficient Plenipotentiary-power, he should be received by the Cardinal, and the King's minde should be sincerely communicated to him.
Whilst Affairs went thus, the siege of Paris continued, and the Generals, to keep themselves from being reduced to extremity, sought for all necessa|ry Provisions. To which purpose Prince Marsilliack went out with some Troops to back a Convoy of Victuals, which was brought by Marquiss Noirsmonstere from the Brie by the Valley of Grobois the 19th of February, which was assaulted by Count Grance with the Kings Forces which were under him at Lagny. But when Marsilliack was come to succour the Con|voy, the Kings men forbore attempting any thing against the Marquiss, who had warily placed himself, in an advantageous place, and made towards Marsilliack, who marched along the open fields, and charged him. And Grance's veterane Forces having the better of the unexperienced Parisians, Marsilliack was presently abandoned by six of the first Squadrons, had his

Horse slain under him, was Wounded, and taken Prisoner by the Kings For|ces; who whilst they strove whose prisoner he should be, Count Rosan came in with five Squadrons, and charged the Kings men so briskly, as Marsilliack, making use of this confusion, freed himself from these Foot; and though he were on foot, and wounded, took a Horse from a Souldier, and got away with Count Mtha.
Grance, being reinforced in this skirmish by some of his own Squadrons, fell so furiously upon the Enemy, as he routed them immediately. Roson was mortally Wounded and taken Prisoner, together with divers other Officers, and as many as were not slain. Whereupon Grance marched into la Brie, sackt the Castles of Lasegny, Sercon, and Villemenon, and assaulted the very Town of Brie, which was begirt with an ancient Wall, and defended by the Inhabitants; but he forced them to surrender the Town.
The said deputed persons were brought before the Queen as she sat in the midst of the Council, where having done their due reverence, Tallon told her how a Herauld had appeared at the Gate of St. Honor just as the Parliament was sate, to speak with the Assembly from her Majesty: Where|at all the Councellors being surprised, they knew not what to think of it, but that it was to try her Subjects fidelity, and to see whether they would treat with the King their Master, in another manner than Vassals do when they receive his Commands. That they therefore thought they had not disobeyed, knowing that Heraulds are not sent but to Enemies or equals; wherefore they pretending to continue the glorious Title of most humble Subjects, thought it the lesser evil to dismiss him, and to take the course which they had taken. Wherefore they presented themselves before her Majesty with sorrowful Souls, and humble Hearts, to intreat her to accept of her Parliaments excuse, who had not heard her Herauld, for fear of offen|ding her Royal Dignity, or prejudicing her Soveraignty, of the preserva|tion whereof they had a greater care than all the World besides; by which refusal, she might finde the obedience of devoted Subjects, and the innocen|cy of their Councils, which aimed at nothing, but the preservation of Re|gal Authority, against the power of the Enemies of France; concluding, that if she had sent him as to Soveraign personages, she might see their respects, and that they acknowledge their happiness consisted onely in their obedience. To assure her Majesty whereof, was the express cause of this their coming. But if she sent him as to criminal people, they were come to submit themselves to her Will, and to be punisht by her.
The Queen heard these words with her wonted goodness, and after|wards commanded the Chancellor to assure them, that she was satisfied with the Declaration which they had made: but that she could not be ful|ly content, unless their Words were accompanied by Effects; and they might then assure themselves of her good will toward them, and of her care for preservation of the Persons and the Fortune of all of them without exception.
The Duke of Orleans added, That he wondred exceedingly why the Parlia|ment did not readily render obedience to the Queen, being in all reason obli|ged to do it; and since they might promise themselves all fair dealing, both in general and particular, from their Majesties Clemency. Cond spoke to the same purpose, adding, That the Queen aimed at nothing but the good of the State, and the preservation of the Regal Authority, and the welfare of eve|ry particular person.
These men returning to Paris, made their report unto the Parliament; whereupon they no sooner began to treat, but Don Ieusippe Arnolsini was

brought in to disturb it; who was sent from Brussels by the Arch-Duke on the 24th of February to Paris incognito, with Letters of Credence, which he presented to the Prince of Cony, whilst he was in private con|ference in L'Hostelle d'Elbufe, with the Dukes of Beaufort and Bullin, the Marshal de la Motte, the Coadjutor, the Presidents Conieux, Navion, Viola, and Brousel the Counsellor. The on of these Letters was sealed, and sent to the Prince of Conty: The other was sent open to the Parliament. He was privately treated with by Saraine Secretary to the Prince of Con|ty, to finde out what he would e at: the Spaniards by him made specious profers to advance onely as the Princes and Heads of that party should please; and that they desired nothing but to free Paris, and to procure a general Peace. This was the Hood that caught the Prince of Conty; for he thought i a glorious thing if the Kingdom might be restored to Peace at the first unsheathing of Swords. He therefore dispatcht away the Mar|quiss of Noirsmonstere, Monsieur Laigne, Monsieur Roussiere, and Briqigny, who was stopt at Quinteyns. The sum of Arnolfini's business was, that the Arch-Duke would advance the Spanish Troops and those of Lorain, to free Paris; for which the Spaniards required a cautionary Town. La Motte propounded Corbie, but with small hopes of getting it out of his Brothers hands, who was Governour thereof, and was firm for the King. There were better hopes in the Treaties between the Dutchess of Monbason and the Marquiss of Oquincourt, who being in love with her, it was hoped that she might get Peronne from him; but neither did this hit: For Oquincourt's affection to the King, and his honour, prevailed over his love to Monbason; besides that this Proposal was refused by the Parliament, who thought it unbecoming them to assigne over a Town of France to the Enemies of France, whilst they were in treaty of a general Peace, which would prove a perpetual reproach to the Loyalty which they professed to bear unto their King. There was nothing therefore done in it more, than that Arnolfini was heard in the Parliament, where he appeared, and explained the Arch-Duke's Letter, and then gave in his Commission, the Contents whereof was, That he was sent by his Master the Arch-Duke to the Parliament, where he could not think but he should be welcome, since he brought the offer of Peace, which was by all Christendom so much desired, and so necessary for the quiet of the two Crowns. That it was true that Cardinal Mazarine would not make Peace two years ago, though he might have done it upon very advantageous terms for France: But that after the King went from Paris, the Cardinal propounded an Agreement with Spain upon very large terms, saying, that his chief motive therein was to chastise the Parliament-Rebels, and to reduce them to reason. But that the Catholick King did not think these exhibitions fair nor safe at this conjuncture of time, thinking that it would be a shame for him to make use of such means, so to oppress the Capital City of the Kingdom. That his Majesty thought it not safe to treat with one who was condemned by Parliament as an Enemy to the King and Kingdom, since the Parliament is to register and authenticate the Treaties of Peace. But that as his King would make no other advantage of this conjuncture than an honest and permanent Peace, he had sent him to the Members of Parliament, who he knew were concern'd in the real Inte|rest of the King and State, to offer them to be Arbitrators of the Peace, and that his Catholick Majesty would willingly submit to their judgment; wherein if they would not be Judges, he would permit the same Parliament to chuse Deputies out of their own Members, and to let them be in what place they pleased, yea even in Paris if they would; and that the King of

Spain would send his Deputies thither, to treat of, and to conclude a good and convenient Peace, sufficient to give lasting quiet to the two Crowns. In which Treaty the Duke of Lorain should be comprised, who refused to accommodate himself to the Cardinal, but kept joyned to the Spanish party. That he had declared he had well-nigh 20000 men upon the Fron|tiers; and that he would pass his word not to meddle with any of the Towns of the Kingdom, as he easily might do, considering how bad a con|dition they were in; there being but 200 Foot in Peronne, as many in St. Quintins, and fewer in Chatelet, and proportionally in other Towns. That he had offered all these Forces to serve the Parliament if they should have occasion for them; and that they might make use of them as they should please, and make them be conducted by French Officers, such as did depend upon the Parliament, or that they might take what other course they pleased to free themselves from all fear that the said Forces should do any thing otherwise than for the service of the Parliament, and accor|ding to their intentions. And in case they should have no occasion to make use of them, he would pass his word they should keep upon the Frontiers, and do nothing, whilst the Peace was negotiating. He con|cluded with desire of an Answer, which he might carry back to his Ma|ster.
These offers were debated in Parliament with diversity of opinion, ac|cording as men were diversly concerned; the greater number were minded rather to yield to the lawful fair pretences of their King, than to be obstinate in those pretensions, which, being fomented by Forreigners, must needs be ruinous. The most of the Generals were of this sense, who being sorry that they had entred into this Labyrinth, sought all means to reconcile themselves to the Court, and to reap that satisfaction by submission, which is easilier in the Clemency, than in the Justice of a Soveraign. They con|sidered that they were not of themselves to withstand the King: That the Parisians were weary of the Siege: That their Victuals grew daily less: That the people would one day value Bread more than all the Victories and advantages of the Parliament or Princes. That to throw themselves into the Arms of the Spaniards, who were naturally their Enemies, was to shun an April-shower, and expose themselves to a Winter-tempest; for that doubtedly they sought to weaken both parties equally, that they might put the Yoak upon them both. That if the French could so ill en|dure one sole Forreigner, who was so affectionate, and so advantageous to their King, it was to be imagined that so many others who were naturally Enemies to France would be more hateful to them. That if they had ta|ken up Arms to obtain satisfaction from the Court, they ought to endea|vour the getting of it in this conjuncture of time, than which they could not wish a better; whilst for fear they should close with the Spaniard, the Court would be glad to come to an agreement. These things being thus re|flected upon, the first President, the Presidents of Mesmes, and Viola for the Grand Chamber, the Counsellors of Chaumont, and others for other Chambers and Courts, were chosen to go at Deputies from the Parliament to the Queen, to thank her for having received their former Members so gratiously; to desire her that she would make good her words, and raise the Siege before Paris: as also to carry her a Copy of the Arch-Duke's Let|ter, and acquaint her with what Arnolfini had said, that their Majesties might see how sincerely the Parliament was minded not to fall from their due obedience; by which generous action they hoped to regain the Re|gent's favour, and make her yield to such an agreement as was desired by those that were wisest both in Parliament and Paris.
The Princes sent also Messengers with secret Instructions not to confer with any of the Kings Deputies, save joyntly with those of the Parliament of Paris, of Roan, and with those of Duke Longueville; and that touch|ing the manner of Conference, they should do as those of the Parliament did, and regulate themselves according to the conference at Ruel. That if those that were sent by Longueville, and by the Parliament of Roan, should not be come to where the meeting was to be, they should wait their coming.
That if the Court should insist upon any Instruction contrary to this In|struction, they should presently send word to the Prince of Conty, and do nothing till they should have received an answer.
That in case the Court-Deputies should pretend that such a condition were repugnant to the full and absolute power which the Deputies ought to have, and that they should refuse to do any thing without their present consent, they should demand time to let Conty know it, that there might be no interruption in the Conference.
That they should be careful to give daily intelligence of what should pass: That they should demand for the Parliament and for Paris all that was demanded at the Conference of Ruel. That they should pretend for the Parliament, and for all the Territory thereof, whatsoever was deman|ded by the Parliament at the Conference of Ruel: That they should also insist upon the execution of all the Decrees of Parliament for the ease of the people, and for a discharge of all the Taxes for two years for the Pa|rishes belonging to the Territory of Paris, and for 8 Leagues about the City, in respect of their being ruinated by the passage, and by the abode of the Kings Army: That because the people could not expect ease, nor the State safety during the War, they should insist upon proceeding of the Treaty of Peace; and that they should name some of the Parliament, and of the Prince's people, that it might be proceeded in effectually and unimpeded by any that were concern'd in the War, and before Spain could make advantage of the present discords of France; and to oblige the Arch-Duke, who had of|fered the Parliament to become Arbitrator of all differences, and to see all the promises performed, that nothing should be undertaken against the King|dom, as appeared by a Letter of the 10th of February; and that in case of denial, the Deputies should enter their Protestation against whatsoever mischief might thereby happen unto France or Christendom.
That the Article of Oblivion should be confirmed in terms answerable to the Treaty of Loudun in the year 1606, made with the late Prince of Con|d Father to the now Prince, unless they should have other Instructions touching this particular.
That if during this Negotiation the Generals of the Army should com|mit any novelty, the Conference should be interrupted: That it should be required that affairs should return to the same condition that they were in when the meeting was granted, till such time as the wrong done might be satisfied: That the said Deputies should observe this Instruction, not com|municating it to any; and that if there should be any dispute therein, they might produce the Article treated on to the Deputies of the Parlia|ment and Duke of Longueville, and to those of Roan, governing themselves according to the same Article, and write word what was done.
The Prince of Conty treated notwithstanding still secretly with the Counts Fuentes and Garcies, by the means of Noirsmonstere and of others; and insisted that Noirsmonstere should engage himself that the Spaniards should advance their Forces to the River Aisne in Champagnia, where

their passage was hindred by Marshal Plessis Pralin, when the Conference of Ruel was interrupted, and that of St. Germains began.
The Princes interposed many troubles, to afford time to the Negotiations of Flanders, and did still insist, that the Cardinal might be persecuted; not that they hated him so much as they seemed to do to the ignorant peo|ple, but for that this was the most plausible pretence of continuing War to the people, who were already weary of sufferings.
Monsieur Saracin was at the same time sent to Roan by the Prince of Conty, to acquaint Longueville with these Treaties, who negotiated still with the Arch-Duke by means of Monsieur Stantibar, to foment the Councellors of Roan, who were greater Frondeurs than those of Paris: But Saracin discovering that Longueville was not so partial to their Inte|rests as was believed, he wisht him to conclude the Treaties of Agreement with the Court, which were already begun by the Prince of Cond's Mo|ther, who piously endeavour'd to appease her incensed Children, and was the chief motive of making Cond friends with his Brother and Sister, who were jealous of Beaufort's power in Paris, whom the people did pas|sionately love, to the trouble of all the rest, especially by reason of his strait joyning with the Coadjutor, whose ready Wit all men feared.
The Presidents of Parliament being come to St. Germains, the first Pre|sident represented to her Majesty in the presence of the Duke of Orleans, the Prince of Cond, and of the Cardinal: That the Kings going from Pa|ris was prejudicial to his Authority, the face of affairs having altered coun|tenance; their Majesties affections being turned into hatred of their people, who were by hostile acts enforced to defend themselves.
That the faithfullest and most partial amongst them were surprized, and compelled to act contrary to their profession: That in the height of all these disorders, the Parliament had always strove to preserve their respect unto her Majesty: And though they were bound to receive a Letter from the Arch-Duke, and to listen to the Contents, yet they had returned no answer, nor taken any resolution thereupon: and that her Majesty appearing satisfied with the submission of the Kings Subjects, they hoped that she would be pleased to make her Forces keep 20 Leagues from Paris, and afford them con|veniency for Victuals for so vast a City, whereby she would inlarge the Hearts of the People, of whose fidelity the Parliament sent her new attestations.
He then pass'd to what had been said by him whom the Arch-Duke had sent, shewing the reasons that made the Parliament hear him; and desired her earnestly that she would allow them 1200 Measures of Corn daily, as long as that Treaty should hold.
The Queen answered, That it had been better for France, and more for the honour of the Parliament, not to have accepted the Letter; but since it had been done, they must seek to make amends by a good Peace: That she could say no more now, by reason of the Chancellor's indisposition, but that she would supply by Writing what was wanting in Words.
Then the first President and the President of Mesmes went to visit Or|leans and Cond, with whom they discoursed long about the means of a good Agreement. They treated also in the Queen Cabinet with the Car|dinal in presence of the Princes. They insisted upon the opening of the Passes; and after much contestation, the Princes promised them they should be satisfied as soon as the Parliament should have sent Deputies with power

to treat and to conclude: Which being speedily done without loss of time, they sent people chosen for that employment; and the business began on the first of March, not without some danger of sedition amongst the meaner sort of the people of Paris, who incited by the fomenters of the troubles, ran in great numbers to the publick Palace, crying out, that they were Sold and Betraid; whereat well-minded men were troubled, who looked for such in|conveniencies as usually happen when the Rabble-rout prevail: and they were forced to send some Troops daily out of Paris, for a Convoy to those little Victuals, which the neighbouring people, allured by great gain, ven|tured to bring thither; though those that went out met sometimes with the Kings Forces, and were but ill treated.
General Turenne kept this mean while in Alsatia with the French and High-Dutch Army; and though he by his long and faithful service had won great honour in the Wars, and esteem at Court; yet thinking that this was not answerable to his deserts, but pretending that many promises made unto him had not been performed, he likewise meant to make use of this occasion, and that being at the head of an Army, he would become Arbitra|tor of the differences: to boot with these instigations, he was allured by his Brother the Duke of Bullion one of the Generals of Paris; and upon hopes of that party, which was more reputed far off than at hand, he came also into the number of the Malecontents, so to revenge himself for the injuries which he conceived he had received, and to better the condi|tion of his Family, by making the Court gratifie his pretences, particu|larly of having Sedan restored to his Brother: and the like were the ends of all the others; none daring as yet to appear so ambitious, as to dream of being Head of any Province which was lawfully possessed by the King. Being therefore resolved to effect these his designes, he retarded his march towards Paris, notwithstanding that he was sent for several times by the King. The Cardinal discovering this, sent Monsieur Eruart to that Army with Moneys, and with Instructions to keep the Germans Loyal, whereby Turenne could not effect what he desired. So, finding that he was followed but by a few French, who were not able to defend him from the danger of being imprisoned by the Germans, who were not well plea|sed with him for the like affront done by him some years before the Gene|ral Rosse, he withdrew with some few of his Domesticks from the Army which he had commanded with much Glory and Honour, and his Army re|mained obedient to the King, commanded by General Rosse. Turenne kept in the neighbouring Towns, expecting some turn of Fortune: and though he could perswade none of the Army to follow his perilous For|tune, he advanced to relieve the Parisians, who were encamped at Vitry and Villeieve, and had thrown a Bridge over the Seine, somewhat higher, where it joyns with the Marne, thereby affording means for Victuals, which were brought, though but in small quantities, from Brie and thereabouts to the City; the Army being encamp'd abroad on the West-side.
Marshal Rantzaw's misfortune may be added to that which befel Turenne; he was Governour of Dunkirk, and being no friend to Cond, yet having caused jealousie in the Cardinal, he thought good to make him his friend; and came to St. Germains, where, on the 28th of February he was arrested and sent to the Castle of St. Vincent; and Grinoliere his Serjeant-Major, as also Priore Pristiere his Secretary, were imprisoned in Gravelin.
This mean while the Conferences between the Kings Agents and the Deputies of Parliament began, who though they abhor'd the Cardinal's presence, pretending that being declared guilty by the Parliament, it became

them not to Treat with one that was Condemned; yet it being the Queens will that he should be there, or that else she would condescend to nothing, he was admitted, though against the good will, not onely of the Deputies, but also of some of the Court, who intended to cast all the Odium upon him, and thereby to gain so much more the affection of the People, and to make it be believed that they were onely they who were the Authors of the Agreement: Whereunto both sides being well incli|ned, Peace was concluded on the 11th of March, upon these Condi|tions.
That all Hostility should cease, and that the Passes should be opened: That the Parliament should go to St. Germains, where the King being in his Seat of Iustice, the Declaration and Articles agreed upon should be verified: And that then the Parliament should return to Paris, to perform their Em|ployments: That in the year 1649, all the Chambers should not meet upon any whatsoever pretence, unless it were to receive some new Officers, and for the Merchants affairs; wherein upon such cases nothing should be treated of save ordinary things tending to the Civil Government of the City: That the Declarations of May, July, and October, in the year 1648, which were made in Parliament, together with those of the 6th of January 1649, and till that present time, should be void and null, save what concerned Criminal affairs between particular parties: That all the Letters under the Kings Seal, sent upon the last Commotions of Paris, as also the Declarations and Decrees made by the Privy Council in that point, from the 6th of January to that instant, should be abolished: That all the Forces raised in Paris and out of it, should be cashiered, when his Majesty should have caused his For|ces to retreat to the usual parts upon the Frontiers: That the Inhabitants should lay down their Arms, and not reassume them without the King's per|mission: That he who was sent by the Arch Duke should be sent back with|out any other Answer: That all Writings and Moveables should be restored to those from whomsoever they had been taken: That the Bastile and Arse|nal, together with the Artillery and Ammunition therein, should be put into his Majesties hands: That the Prince of Conty, the other Dukes, Peers, Prin|ces, Officers of the Crown, Lords, and Gentlemen, and all of whatsoever condition, should be restored to their Statu quo, as if nothing had happened; and that their past actions should never be questioned: That those who would not be concluded in this present Treaty, should receive no favour or assi|stance whatsoever from the City of Paris, nor from any others: That the King should return to Paris as soon as his occasions should permit him: That those who had raised any Moneys, Forces, sold any Moveables, Warlike Am|munition, or Victuals, either out of the Arsenal of Paris or elsewhere, should be freed from giving any account thereof: That the Election of Xantes, Coignack, St. John d'Angely, taken from the Court des Aydes, and attri|buted to the Court des Aydes at Guienne, should be restored to the Court des Aydes at Paris, where they were before the Edict: That in case the Par|liament, of Roan should accept of this present Treaty within the space of ten days, the King would take order for the abolishing of the new Six Moneths, and the re-uniting of all the Officers of the said Six Moneths, and of part of them, to the body of the said Parliament: That the Treaty of the Parliament of Provence should be put in execution, according to the Form, Tenour, and Letters sent by the King, for the revoking and abolish|ing the Six Moneths of the Parliament of Aix, and Chamber of Requests, in conformity to the Articles agreed upon between the Deputies of the Par|liament

of Paris. Concerning the discharge of the Taxes propounded by the Election of Paris, the King would be informed of the state or condition of the said Elections, as soon as the Forces were retreated, and would provide for the ease of the Grievances of the said Election as he should think fit: That when Deputies should be sent to treat of Peace with Spain, his Majesty would be pleased amongst them to send some of the Parliament, who should have the same Authority as the rest.
According to all Maximes of War, or Civil Government, the King ought not as then to have made an Agreement, since, in case the Siege had been maintained yet 15 days, the City was reduced to great extremity, and the seditious People mought have been punished according to their diso|bedience: yet a deeper and more secret Maxime prevailing, it was con|descended to, though with some prejudice to the Court, onely, as was be|lieved, out of the jealousie of the Prince his actions; and that Cond think|ing that by the Peace the Besieged's hatred would rest wholly upon him, and the praise upon the Cardinal, it is said that he endeavoured to get all advantages for the Parisians, though they were reduced to so straight terms, as they ought rather to beg pardon, than to demand Conditions. But were it out of this, or any other more secret reason, many bad effects ensued upon it; for the Parisians seemed to be but badly content with the first Articles, and much more, for that the Parliament had refused to take protection of that of Roan. Wherefore when the Deputies of the Chambers were seen to fit in presence of the Prince's and King's Officers, as if they had been Commissioners from a free Commonwealth, the peo|ple were so scandalized thereat, and grew so indiscreet, as the Decrees which were before reverenced as Oracles, became scorn'd and detested. And then the Usurpers of Regal Authority were aware, that whilst they would have climb'd too high, they fell from their own Tribunal; and in|stead of getting the Government of publick Affairs, they lost the lawful right of judging what was particular.
At the same time when the Parliament began to treat apart, the Prin|ces began to Negotiate their Agreements separately, every one according to their particular Interests, pretending to be totally dis-engag'd from the Parliament, whilst they saw that the Parliament, which was the primum mobile of the War, and with whom they had confederated, endeavoured Peace. The Frondeurs were very fierce for War till the Conference at Ruel, where the chiefest of them were wrought upon; Longueville, by his Brother the President of Maisonsi, Viola by the Prince of Cond, Cogneux and others, though they were in some sort engaged with the Arch-Duke. The Prince of Conty and Dutchess of Longueville broke with the Coadjutor, for that he being Beaufort's Confident, and having drawn all the Frondeurs and people to dance after his Pipe, he went about to blindfold them, and make them serve his designes, and his proper Inte|rests, and not that of their Families. Thus, during the time of Confe|rence of Peace, the Prince of Cond, who desired to reunite them to him|self, and not to let slip so seasonable a conjuncture, sent his Confident Monsieur di Mousay to complement them.
The Dutchess of Longueville confer'd long with Mousay upon the point of Reconciliation, and bid him assure the Prince, that she would carry her self to his satisfaction when Peace should be concluded.
After these Treaties, though Conty had made his peace with the Court without Beaufort or the Coadjutor; yet when they had discovered their

discontents, they forbore not to do all they could to make Conty stick to them.
He and the Dutchess his Sister were well inclined thereunto, being otherwise unwilling to lose the fruit of their Declaration, and that of the Duke of Longueville in favour of the Parisians; which consisted in mi|tigating the peoples hatred of Cond, thinking, that thereby she might become more necessary to the Court, and more considerable with her Brother, who till then had not too great an esteem for her.
Some told Cond, that the Court being in the posture it was in, the true way to get advantage on both sides, would be to let the Prince of Conty head the Frondeurs; yet he who then scorned the Frondeurs, and who hatred Beaufort particularly, by reason of the great esteem the Parisians had of him, resolved absolutely to severe Conty from their Interests, and by little and little to destroy that Faction; which being disperst, he might af|wards more easily pull down the Cardinal, or make him comply totally with him.
The occasion of the Arch-Bishoprick of Liege, which at this time was presented, confirm'd him in this opinion; believing, that if he could pro|cure that dignity for his Brother, he might establish his House the better. The Canons were divided, many whereof had recourse for protection to France, against the Elector of Culen, who would have his Brother cho|sen Coadjutor. That they might engage the King of France in their Interests, they offered to chuse the Prince of Conty, who fed his Brother with these hopes, to make him abandon Paris, and to bring him to Com|peigne, where the Court then was, and where he acquainted the Cardi|nal with his designe: he who received the testimony of his confidence, whilst the War of Paris lasted, could not but assist him; but considering afterwards, that it was not good to embroyl France in the affairs of Ger|many, and against the House of Bavaria, between whom there was good intelligence held, seemed to proceed so reservedly in the affairs necessary to effect this designe, that the mean while the Elector making his Agree|ment, all the Princes hopes vanished; which was thought to be one of the reasons of his complaints, and his beginning to distrust the Cardi|nal.
These designes proving vain, Conty and Longueville reconciled them|selves to the Coadjutor, and appeared outwardly to be good friends, though jealousies remained inwardly between them; for Conty could not depend upon any one.
The Duke of Bullion seemed somewhat distasted at these Negotiations between the Parliament and Court, and their hopes in Paris being revived by the drawing down of the Spaniards Flemish Army, he thought it strange that his concernments should be given over. He therefore moved the Prince of Conty and the Dutchess of Longueville not to make the Agreement; but to go with their Troops into Normandy, and being assi|sted by the Spaniards, to continue the War there, hoping hereby to effect his designes, and to make the Court grant his pretensions.
This Proposal being liked by the other Princes, they thought to fall upon it; but it was laid aside, as well for the difficulty which would be found in executing it, as for that Bullion made his peace otherwise, by the Prince of Cond's means, with whom he had still had good intelligence. But the Duke of Longueville, not being put by vertue of this Treaty into possession of his Towns, nor into his Government of Normandy, which was a new motive to him and Conty, to put on any resolution, rather than

to abandon the Dukes Interest; the Abbot de la Riviere, by consent with Cond, made a particular Agreement be propounded by Monsieur de Flamerin to the Prince of Conty, whereby the Duke was to be re-posses|sed of all his Towns, and Conty should have the Government of Dan|villiers for his security, if he would yield the name of Cardinal to la Riviere.
This Negotiation was managed and concluded by the Prince of Marsili|ack, with intention to let Longueville know that the Prince of Conty was cause of his re-establishment, and thereby to joyn them closer together; as also to keep la Riviere (who was then in great favour with the Duke of Orleans) stedfast to Conty's Interest, who concurring in all things with his Sister Longueville, intended so to establish themselves as they should not be defrauded of their pretensions when the King should be of age.
Thus was the agreement made between the King and Parliament; whereupon the Cardinal seeing the Courts condition bettered, declared that he would not now yield unto any of the Propositions formerly pre|tended unto by the Spaniards, since he saw himself in a condition of be|ing able to withstand them, unless some new Emergencies should disturb him.
The Pope's zeal, and the like of the Commonwealth of Venice to faci|litate Peace in all parts, made the Arch-bishop of Tarzo, who was Nun|tio, and Pietro Basadona the Venetian Embassador in Spain, to provide against the Evils which the affairs of Paris made them apprehend; where|fore they intreated his Catholick Majesty to command his Plenipotentia|ries, that notwithstanding the novelties that were risen, they should not defer nor obstruct the making of Peace. They obtained their desires, and the Catholick King ordered that the Treaties should be drawn to an end, and yielded to all things that were fair and honest.
The Nuntio Bagin and the Embassador Morosini informed the King of France immediately of this generous act, and gave notice to Count Pignoranda, that Count Brienne had signified to them, that if he should think fit to return to Munster, the Court of France would send a person of quality thither with Plenipotentiary-power: That if he would not go thither himself, he should send some other with sufficient power; and that at the same time others should be dispatched away from the Court of France: And that if he himself should please to come to any place upon the Frontier, the Cardinal's self would come thither, and so a con|clusion would sooner be made; it being still to be understood, that no|thing should be altered which was agreed upon at the meeting at Mun|ster.
Pignoranda answered, He marvelled how the Regent had so suddenly altered Maximes, varying from what Monsieur Vautort had both insinua|ted and exprest: That this so great a change occasioned a just Scandal, since France not making good what she (as he said) had promised but a few days before, the King of Spain should be tied to grant those Articles which he had always held unreasonable.
Upon the 24th of April the Nuntio and Morosini answered this dis|patch; and though Pignoranda would not hear of any Treaty, they na|med Vervins, Noyon, or Crespy to be the places of meeting. Adding, that all things might easily be accommodated if the Count would speak with the Cardinal; yet they declared in the close of the Letters, That the French intended to treat onely upon the points which were undecided; which the Spaniards did totally refuse, saying, That the Kings Agents being gone from Munster without having concluded any thing, the meeting

and Treaty was consequently dissolved, so as all was to be recommenced. That if France would agree to this, the King of Spain's Deputies should go to any place that should be appointed within a Moneth or six Weeks; for which time there should be Truce, which the Arch-Duke should rea|dily yield unto; and that if the Cardinal would speak with the Count, he would send him either alone, or accompanied by others, as he should be advertised.
The Nuntio and Morosini sought to promote the business, and sent Secretary Lorenzo Paulucci to Brussels, to sollicite what they were prepa|ring in Writing. Pignoranda was pleased hereat, as well in respect of them who sent the Secretary, as for the Commission he brought; and the Spaniards giving out that they had discovered during the short time of his abode there, that the French had no minde to make Peace, Paulucci re|turned without doing any thing.
Soon after his return to Paris, the Mediators writ to Pignoranda and to the Internuntio at Brussels three Letters, of the 29th of May, the 27th of Iune, and 10th of Iuly, containing, that the French persisted in the pro|posed Meeting, and in the desire of Peace, and propounded the building of a place of Enterview upon the confines of the two Dominions, where the Meeting might be had. And in the first Letter, which was written to the Internuntio, they mentioned, that the French were fully resolved not to alter any thing that was digested at Munster; intending to Treat onely upon such points as remained undecided. The Spaniard accepted of the Meeting propounded by the Cardinal, and of the building of the place for enterview; and Pignoranda gave notice, that as soon as this should be made, he would send Don Antonio Brun, who was the King of Spain's Embassador in Holland, and Plenipotentiary in the Treaty of Peace; and that he himself would advance the next week after towards the Fron|tiers, that he might be the readier to agree unto what the Cardinal should resolve upon: and the place for the building of the place for enterview was appointed to be between St. Quintins and Landrecie.
This readiness was commended by the Nuntio, and by Morosini; which they witnessed by Letters from Compaignie: but whilst Pignoranda expe|cted answer to what he had written, the Cardinal sent Letters by a Trum|peter on the 26th of Iuly, desiring him to send him word to what place he might send a Friend, to whom they might reciprocally communicate their mindes touching the principal points of the Treaty: adding, that he thought it would be convenient he should send a friend of his to him, to the end that it might be conceived by hearing both parties, whether businesses were in such a forwardness, as that a speedy conclusion might be hoped for; because if this were not done, he thought this Meeting would be useless to the publick, and troublesome to their own particular selves: and that no time might be lost, he thought it would be good to chuse a place upon the Frontier which he should like best for the Meeting; and that he should send him a Pass by Monsieur di Lyone, the Queens Se|cretary, whom he had destined to that purpose.
The Cardinal did this, for that he found that Pignorand sought to engage him in this Conference, not out of any desire he had to make Peace; but that he might make the World believe afterward, that the Cardinal had broken the Treaty of Peace for his own particular ends; and that he might thereby draw upon him the Odium of the people, by shewing him to be the occasion of all the War.
The Spaniards sent him a Pass for Lyone; and at the same time that

Pignoranda parted from Brussels, he sent an Express to the Hague, to ac|quaint the Embassador Brun with all this, who came with great speed to Cambrey on the 13th of August, whither Pignoranda was come four days before.
Lyone had audience as soon as he came to Cambrey, whom Pignoranda asked, What Propositions he had brought? Who answered, His Instructions were to know what the King of Spain's Pretensions were, touching the points undecided at Munster. Pignoranda found then that his designe was disco|vered, and said, They were not to talk any more of the Treaty of Munster, for that the Civil War of France had altered the face of Affairs, and that they were to begin the Treaty again. Lyone repli'd, That agreement was made between the King and the Parliament of Paris: That all was quieted.
After a long Dispute, Pignoranda demanded, That France would abandon the Interests of the King of Portugal, and likewise Catalonia: That he would repossess Duke Charles of Lorain, and restore the Spanish Towns that were taken, and that then they would discourse upon other points.
Lyon was hereat confused, and said, There was little signes that he desi|red Peace, since four Kingdoms were demanded before the Treaty should be|gin: That to abandon Portugal, and Catalonia, was to make the King of Spain Master of them, for it was certain they could not defend themselves without the aid of France: That no mention was to be made of Lorain; for that there was no Treaty between the King of Spain and that Duke, whereby that Country was to be restored to the Duke. He further added, That if he intended to end the Treaty, he must not dream of the weak con|dition which he fancied to himself that France was in, for that it was able to continue War yet twenty years longer, with the like Vigour as at first; and that the Popes Nuntio, and Cavaliere Contarini, who had been the Mediators at Munster, and were not now far off, might interpose them|selves with the like Authority, and might adjust that great Work, if they were desired to undertake it. Which Pignoranda would not give way un|to, saying, That the King his Master must first write unto him about it. Whereupon Lyon asking, If those great Personages should return, and should undertake the business, how he would receive them? Pignoranda replied, He would place them in a great Hall, and would honour them as Agents of great Princes. Whereby he discovered his designe.
Whilst Affairs went not according to Pignoranda's liking, he exaggerated mightily against the French, saying, Their onely end was to cheat men with the hopes of Peace, whilst they meant nothing less. He wrote again to the Mediators, declaring, That since the French would not moderate their Pre|tensions, nor come to any reason, they needed not discourse any more upon a meeting; but that if they had a desire to treat in an usual way of Treaty be|tween Christian Princes, the King of Spain would not make a moments delay, but would reassume the business; and he desired them to get him a Pass to re|turn to Spain.
In this interim Cavaliere Contarini came to the Low-Countries: He visited the Arch-Duke, spoke with Pignoranda, sought to stickle in the differences; and having founded the true sense of the Spanish Agents touch|ing the Peace, he found them seemingly very ready to treat; but that whilst, according to their customs, they seemed to do this, they did the contrary. He pass'd from thence to France, where he found the world well inclined, and the Queen very desirous of Peace. But the Spaniards standing stiff to their Resolution to annul all that had been done at Munster, and to begin the Treaty again; and the French being resolved not to speak

of any thing, but of what was left undecided, there could no middle way of accommodation be found; so as all treating vanisht into smoak.
Wherefore the Cardinal exprest himself with much confidence to Con|tarini, and acquainted him with the reasons why he would not go from any thing that had been discust, and been brought to maturity at Munster. One whereof was, That since the whole weight of the Government lay upon him, and that the King had trusted him with all the concernments of the Crown, he thought it not fit to give advantage to Forreigners, and to bereave those of the Nation thereof, whom it was better to fasten to|gether, though upon some disadvantage, than to disunite them with ad|vantage to the Enemy: and the rather, for that he knew he could not miss of a good and glorious Peace with Spain, when France should be all of a Piece. The other, for that the Spaniards at the same time when they treated with him of Peace at St. Germains, and when they complai|ned he was backward in yielding to some Articles, making the Parlia|ment and the People believe that by Arnolfini the Cardinal made large offers to make Peace upon any terms with Spain, to the end that they might bend their Forces against the Parisians: that it was far from truth that he did so, to revenge himself upon the Kings Subjects, whose Love and Union he did by all means endeavour; assuring himself, that at last they would know his right intentions, and his Rivals cunning; whilst all good French-men would contribute towards breaking the Plots of the Kingdoms Enemies, and make them yield to the just Proposals made by his Christian Majesty.
But if these Reasons made the French the more resolute to stick to their first Resolves, other causes perswaded the Spaniards not to budge from their second pretensions: For their Cause was much strengthned by the Peace with Holland, by the quiet condition of Naples, the success of the Enterprize of Cremona, and by the Novelties that had hapned in France. The Marquiss of Caracene laying hold of this so favourable con|juncture of time, sent Marquiss Serra, in the beginning of February, with 7000 fighting men against the French, who were quartered in the Cremonese. He at the very first stormed the greater Cassal upon the Poe, Boretto, and o|ther neighbouring Towns. Count Arese and Don Francisco Sersales fell upon Pomponesco with another Body of men, wherein Monsieur de la Vi|siere commanded with 300 French Foot, and forc'd them for want of suc|cour to yield the Town upon fair Conditions. Which Enterprize was followed by the acquisition of a little Fort, built by the Enemy, between Pomponesco and Viadana; the Defendants whereof yielded upon discre|tion to the Enemy.
Count Galleazzo Trotti General of the Horse, drove away some Foot from Gualtiery, a Palace between Bressel and Vastalla, and over-ran the Modenese with no small prejudice and terrour to the Country. And greater disorders would have hapned, had not the Duke wisely listened to an Agreement, which was introduced by his Brother-in-law the Duke of Parma, and afterwards concluded by the two Marquisses Calcagnino and Gosfredi, since all succour from France was vanished, which was the foundation whereupon the Duke declared himself.
The Conditions of this Peace were, That his Highness should dismiss all the French Souldiers and Officers, and send them the nearest way into Provence: That his Highness should be bound to observe the Agreement made the year 1634, for the relief of the Millanese, upon promise that the

Catholick King should do the same to the Duke upon all occasions: That a new Garrison should be put into Correggio, in like manner as was before: That the Rents which Don Mauritio di Correggio did possess in that Territo|ry, should be restored unto him, according to the Agreement of the year 1634: That the Duke of Merandola should continue under the Protection of the King of Spain, without any hindrance to be made by Modena: That the Sub|jects of each side, who had in this War served against their Master, should be restored to former favour: That the Prince Cardinal D'Este Brother to his Highness should renounce the Protection of France, upon assured promise to be abundantly recompenced for whatsoever he should loose thereby.
This Peace being made, the Spaniards fell to greater and more con|spicuous Enterprizes, before France could be in a condition to withstand them; and since there was no place which did more incommodate Flan|ders than Ypre, seated between the River of Lis and the Sea, back'd by Gravetin and Dunkirk; the Count of Fuenseldagne sat down before it with the Spanish Army on the 12th of April, fearing no good success: for he was to make and guard a Line of Circonvallation of five French leagues in compass, to keep off the Sallies of a great many Defendants, who were very well fortified without, and in a perfect condition of de|fence.
The little, but strong Town of St. Venant, neer Ayre, did with its Gar|rison much molest the adjacent parts; wherefore Fuensaldagne, when he had put all things in good order before Ypre, pass'd over the Lis with part of his Army, set upon it, and within six days brought it to Capitulation, which was no little help to the other Enterprize; and then return'd to the Camp before Ypre; and the Arch-Duke advanced to Commigne.
Count Beauveau, Lieutenant to Count Palvau, who was then absent, commanded in the Town with about 2000 Foot and 200 Horse, who de|fended themselves so valiantly, as it became the Arch-Duke to re-enforce his Army, and to go himself to the Camp with the Forces which he had with him, and to cause General Lamboy's men to come thither also, resol|ving to take it before the French could relieve it.
On the 6th of May, two days after his arrival, he made Don Gaspero Bo|nefaccio, the Marquiss of Sfondrato, and Signior Stopullara, assault all the Counterscarps, which were taken not without mortality on both sides; and forc'd the Defendants within eight days after to beat a Call, and to sur|render the Town upon honourable terms.
Ypre being thus taken, and St. Venant lost, the Spaniards thought they had done enough, and for the present attempted nothing else; for their Forces were much lessened, and the French were much increased.
The Spaniards thought to reap no less advantage in Catalonia, by the same troubles in Paris; for there wanted a Viceroy there, Mareshal Schom|burg, who commanded there, being returned to France. So mustering a good Army, commanded by Don Iovan di Garay, they thought to carry Salsona and Cordona, Towns in the midst of the Province, seated on the left side of the River Lobregate. These places were very convenient for holding Intelligence with divers of that Province, and whereby they might facilitate the taking of Flix and Mirauet, Towns which were forti|fied and Garrison'd by the French and Catalonians, seated between Lerida and Tortosa, beyond the River Ebra.
The Catalonians, who remained still at the Devotion of the King of France, hearing by their Agent Doctor Siviglia, that the King was gone

from Paris, and of the Troubles there, dispatcht away a Messenger, by whom they offered to abandon their own Country, and to come and assist his Majesty if it were needful. The Messenger was staid three Leagues from Paris by a party of the Prince's, had his Letters taken from him, which were read in the Parliament, to their no little shame; who saw thereby, that a forrain and far-distant Nation offered to do that, which the Kings natural Subjects refused.
Here my Author enters upon the Relation of our late Troubles of England, which were so damn'd and unparallel'd Rebellious, as I, who, I praise my God, never contributed any thing thereunto by action, do wish with all my Soul, that they were for ever buried in Oblivion, and am resolved never to write any thing that may recal them into memory: wherefore I must crave my Au|thor's pardon if I trace him not therein; save onely in what he says by way of short Character of our Blessed and Barbarously-murthered King Charles the first, in these following words:
An unparalell'd goodness was observed in him, and so free a Soul, as his Ruine was by many attributed more to this than to any thing else. He was in all the actions of Conscience infinitely pure. He feared God greatly, was given to Spirituality, and made himself known to under|stand, and to be capable of all Knowledge. He was milde in Comman|ding, free in Treating, generous in his Favours, in his punishments Mer|ciful; and to winde up much in short, which might be said of his Con|ditions, His Life was a Compendium of Moral Vertues, and the true Idaea whereunto every Prince (set his Religion aside) would be proud to conform himself.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The THIRD BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The continued Iealousies between the Court and Parliament of Paris are re|bated. The Siege and Succour of Cambray. The King goes from St. Ger|mains to Compeigne. The Duke of Vendome returns to France. Trea|ties of Marriage between the Duke Mercoeur and Madamoiselle Marcini Niece to the Cardinal; which caused much envy in many Princes and La|dies of the Court. The original of the distastes between the Prince of Cond and the Cardinal. The King returns to Paris. The proceedings of Duke Beaufort, and of the Frondeurs: Their Ends, Designes, and Interests. Troubles arise in Provence. The Insurrection and War of Bourdeaux. Divisions and Factions in the Court of France. Liege surprized. Castro in Italy taken. Those of Parma are routed in the Bo|lognese. The falling from favour of Marquiss Gaufredi, Favourite to the Duke of Parma. The Emperour marries the Princess of Mantua: And Duke Carlo marries the Arch-Dutchess of Inspruch. The Spaniards at|tempts against Ceva in Piedmont, together with what hapned in those parts.

TThe War of Paris being thus ended, Peace consequently ensued; contrary to the intention of the Frondeurs, who were declared Enemies to all quiet: and it was wrought by the means of the first President, and of other well-minded Citizens, who resolved to have Peace upon any terms, and not to expect greater necessity, nor vain hopes given by those who desired troubles: and though there was no mention made of the Cardinal in the Articles, yet all the Decrees of the King and of the Parliament being annull'd, he by consequence remained in Statu quo. This was a blow by the by, and covered by those who would not give matter of contestation to the Frondeurs, and it was wink'd at by the Princes: For though they appeared to be sincere in their actions in the beginning of the War, yet Interests altering afterwards, all except Duke Beaufort began to order their particular affairs apart by Trea|ty with the Queen; so as the people presently conceived they held pri|vate intelligence with the Queen; and that they designed to get Money of the City, and to regain favour at Court. The Duke d'Elboeufe was one of these, who got nothing in this War but scorn and hatred. But the Prince of Cond got much more hatred, who was held to be the Author of the Siege, and of all the misfortunes.
When Peace was made, Beaufort invited Duke Longueville to continue Friendship with him, and to joyn with him in making head against the Court; but Longueville being a wise Prince, laughed at him, and would not listen to his Proposals, nor would he by any means busie himself any more in Troubles. Beaufort tarried still for all this in Paris, being inamored of the peoples applause; and went not to St. Germains to reverence their Majesties, under pretence that he would not see the Cardinal, as did the other Generals, who visiting the King and Queen, complied with the Car|dinal.
In the Conference of Peace held at St. Germains, the Abbot de la Ri|viere renewed the Proposition of Marriage between Duke Mercoeur, and Mancini the Cardinal's Niece; the Duke of Orleans and Prince of Con|d would move it themselves to Mercoeur. And because by the Treaty of Paris, it was propounded that the Duke of Vandosme, instead of being Governour of Britany, should be made Lord High-Admiral, which place was taken from him by the late King; the Queen, who was not well plea|sed with that Family, desired Mercoeur to accept the Place, thinking thus to satisfie him, and to revenge her self of the rest. Orleans and Cond were of the same minde, being glad to see Vandosme and Beaufort hum|bled; and they did what they could to perswade Mercoeur to it: but he thinking it unfit to accept of what did of right belong unto his Father, refused it, unless it might be with the Duke his Father's good will.
The Queen was indued with the place of Admiralty, after the death of the Duke of Brets, and enjoy'd all the Emoluments thereof; and yet she was content to forego them, so as the Marriage between the Cardinal's Niece and Duke Mercoeur might take effect. She therefore excluded the Duke of Vandosme, and his Son Beaufort, out of the favour of the Prince of Cond; but Mercoeur being constant to his Father's Interests, who being reconciled unto the Queen, was restored to his Estate in France, and was with great submission brought to Court, it was not hard for him to over|come the Contrasts of Fortune. Vandosme (though he shewed the con|trary) did inwardly rejoyce to see his second Son Beaufort in such favour with the Parisians; for he thereby grew more considerable at Court, where the Cardinal's Friends continuing to shew the necessity of keeping this Fa|mily in obedience to the King, they considered that the Marriage of Mer|coeur, and his Father's satisfaction, hapning at the same time, they should both have won the good Will of those Princes, and have fastned the Car|dinal better. Vandosme and Mercoeur were well pleased with these Pro|posals, whilst by alliance with the chief Minister of State, they might raise up their House, which was in a low condition. The Cardinal on the contrary knowing what bad effects come usually of Marriages made for Interest, and not for Affection, seemed to be far from exposing himself to more Persecution and Envie, which do usually accompany rising Fortunes; but being finally overcome by the reiterated Reasons alledged by his Friends, and being much more convinced by the necessity of getting a considerable support in the Kingdom, and that he might win Beaufort from the troublesome thoughts that were insinuated into him by the Frondeurs, which might cause more disorders, he suffered the Treaty to proceed.
But the Duke of Bullion and Count Chavigni infused Jealousies of this into the Prince's minde, moved thereunto principally out of self-interest; for Bullion thought that by raising a contrary party in Court, he might make himself necessary, and manage his return to the possession of Sedan the better. And Chavigny being displeased to see himself totally excluded

from Government, hoped, that if the Prince should reassume the govern|ment of Affairs, he might come to his former condition. He therefore durst not at first meddle in dividing the Royal Family, nor oppose the Prince to the Cardinal: But Cond being very sensible of his own Inte|rests, he told him afterwards, That nothing could be denied to his deserts; and that he might easily obtain the Admiralty, if he would desire it: That he had reason to pretend thereunto, since he was possess'd of the estate of his Brother-in-Law the Duke of Bresse, and ought therefore to inherit that, as well as his other Possessions; and that he might reap great advantage by obli|ging many in the distributing of Places at Sea, and by the Commands of the Fleet. Wherefore the Prince was easily perswaded, being like those Plants which being shined upon by the Sun, grow strong and lively, and when the Sun sets, fade and languish; for sometime approving, and sometime dis|approving the designe, he seemed not to assent thereunto: And yet he made it be known under hand by Monsieur Mazarolles, a follower of his, That he could be content the Admiralty were conferr'd upon him. Nor was it onely the Duke of Bullion, and Count Chavigny, who sought to in|terrupt this Marriage; but President Peraut, Superintendant of the Prince his house, and who had been his ancient Servant, failed not to inform him of what he thought fit.
The Prince, who had the honour of Arms and the desire of Glory added to the greatness of his Birth, approving of such Councels, grew full of jealousies and suspitions, which lessened the friendship and confidence which he seemed formerly to have in the Cardinal, and occasion'd the disagree|ments which ensued: for seeing that Paris had been by his means reduced to Reason, and knowing how the people were minded towards the Cardi|nal, he designed to assume unto himself all Regal Power, and to make him|self sole Arbitrator of all things. He therefore carried himself Imperiously at Court, making small account even of the Queen; and thought whol|ly to abolish the Frondeurs, to the end that their Heads being quell'd and dispers'd, they should not be able to oppose him: but as the strength of a weak Twig joyn'd to many others, gives not way to a great piece of Wood; all the Prince's Cunning, and his Partakers Wits, seemed to aim at nothing but at keeping mens minds and interests divided: And the Fron|deurs studying also how to keep Cond divided from the Court, did all they could to keep Beaufort, who was then little less than Idolatrized in Paris, from fastning to the Cardinal; insinuating unto him, that to keep him|self in the esteem which he was in, he must appear an irreconcilable Enemy not onely to the Queen and Cardinal, but even to his Father and Brother, as he beyond all expectation did.
Cond was also troubled to hear that the Cardinal treated touching the having of the Government of Picardy from the Duke d'Elboeufe, who was Governour thereof; which notwithstanding did not ensue, for that the Price was not agreed upon, and for that it was not considerable without the particular Government of the City and Citadel of Amiens, which were held by the Duke Chaunes; as also of Peronne, which was in the posses|sion of the Marquiss d'Ochencourt, of whom the Court had then some jea|lousies for having received the Dutchess of Chevereux into that Fort, when she returned from Flanders during the War, without the Kings permission.
By reason of two Accidents which casually ensued, Ochencourt grew so afraid, as made him get into favour with the Cardinal, and become his par|tial friend. And thus it was: As some of the King's Guards went to the Frontiers of Flanders to joyn with some other Troops of the King's;

though they had no order to touch upon Peronne, yet being desirous to go thither, the Marchioness his Wife was jealous, shut the Gates upon them, refused them entrance, and sent word to her Husband, who comman|ded the Army upon the Frontiers as Lieutenant-General; and a Gentle|man of the Cardinals coming thither at the same time, whom he suspected was come to make him Prisoner, he forsook his Command, and went to Pe|ronne. Which case the Cardinal commiserating, and Oquincourt not da|ring to come neer him, the Cardinal chose a place to Oquincourt's liking, to speak with him; and clearing him of his jealousie, Oquincourt was so obliged to the Cardinal, as he contracted great confidence with him, and was ever afterwards his intimate friend.
The Court kept thus for a while at St. Germains, intimating their in|tention of coming thither, whilst all things were in a peaceful condition. But War hapning afterwards in Flanders, by the Spaniards falling in upon St. Venant and Ypres, it went to Compeigne; and though this was a neces|sary remove, the seditious people forbore not to whisper against the Car|dinal, who the more they murmured against him, the more did he endea|vour to keep up the Kings splendor and dignity; which caused the tur|bulent Commonalty of Paris to publish defamatory Libels against the Kings Agents, to make all men think that the Court intended not their quiet; which made the Duke of Orleans go to Paris about the beginning of Iune, to certifie that City of their Majesties real intentions; which he did, to the great satisfaction of all that were well minded. And hereupon the Provost of Merchants, the Sheriffs, Councellors, Colonels, and the rest who make up the Common Council, meeting together, resolved to issue out Inquisitions against the Authors of the said Libels, and against those that printed or published them. They also thanked his Highness for his good affection, and beseeched him to use his power in bringing the King to Pa|ris, which would be the true means of dissipating all the fluctuations of that wavering people: to which purpose they deputed some to be sent to his Majesty, to represent this their so general desire. The care of the universal Government was not for all this given over; but the War with Spain being reassum'd, the King was in a condition of raising an Army of 25000 good veterane Souldiers; which it being questioned whither they should go, some propounded the falling upon Doway in Flanders, others upon Avennes in Hainault, and others propounded other Enterprizes. But the Cardinal being assured that there were not above 600 Foot in Cambray, was of opinion that they should fall upon that place, which was then in the Spaniards possession; which was not any part of the Low-Countries, but was in the late War with Flanders taken by the French, and was given by the King to Marshal Baligny, who possess'd it as Soveraign thereof for some years, till Count Fuentes recovered it. By which exam|ple, it was said that the Cardinal hoped to be endowed with it, when it should be taken; or at least to be made Governour of the City and Cita|del. Wherefore it was thought he betook himself thereunto out of self-Interest. The Prince of Cond was invited to this so considerable busi|ness; but he, being then at his Government of Burgundy, refused the em|ployment, blamed the resolution, interposed many difficulties; which were all thought excuses to cloak his aversion to assist the Cardinal in his for|tune: And at his return to Paris, he spoke against the Marriage between Mercoeur and Mancini, had often conference with the Dukes of Nemours and Beaufort, was visited by the Presidents and chief Councellors of the Parliament, and began to swallow that Maxime, That much mischief must

be done to receiue much good. He blamed the Court for rewarding inju|ries, and neglecting good turns, as in the case of Vandosme's Family; and began to slacken his adherence to the Court, and his confiding in the Car|dinal, which till then he had cultivated. He blamed him for aspiring to the absolute Government, and gave him signes that he could not approve of his company in Council, having found him an hindrance to his secret ends: wherefore to render him hateful to the people, he strove to make him be believed the Author of all the violences; that he endeavoured to raise jealousies between the Queen and him; that in stead of defending him with the Frondeurs. The Merits of this Prince, who had deserved so well of the Court, mixt with other representations whether true or false, caused such jealousies, even in those who were most affectionate to the King's service, as use to usher in highest hatreds. So as the Cardinal, that he might sweeten him, studied to keep this first agitation from breaking fur|ther forth: and though the Prince did not undertake the business of Cam|bray, yet he alter'd not his former design; but in lieu of the Prince, employ'd Prince Harcourt therein, and sent all the Kings Forces, which were come from several parts, to that affair; which as they crost the River Some, were found to be more than were believed; all of them experienced men, and well in order. And whilst they encamped sometimes in one place, some|times in another, to conceal their true designe from the Spaniards, Count Palvan, with 4000 Souldiers gathered together in the Maritime parts of Flanders, began to scowre the Campagnia, as well to secure the Towns which were held by the French, as to draw some of the Ene|mies Forces thither, and so to weaken their Army: towards which the Arch-Duke marched from Brussels to joyn the whole Army toge|ther; which was for the most part come then from Doway, Valenciennes, and Lisle.
Whilst the Spaniards were a while in this uncertainty, the French about the end of Iune sate down before Cambray, with much wonder to both parties; as well in regard of the greatness of the City, which had in it both a Castle and a Citadel, as for the difficulty of the Enterprize. But the Spaniards appeared to have been so careless of the Town, by reason of their undervaluing the French Forces after the troubles of Paris, as all men thought that so important a City absolutely lost: especially the Go|vernour Count Garce, a Spaniard, being then absent, who at the first news thereof came thither in a Country-fellows disguise. The French began to make the Line; which because it was to be of a great circuit, could not be digged with such diligence as was requisite.
Cambray is one of the greatest Cities, and of most importance, which the Spaniards have in those parts, distant onely three Leagues from the Fron|tiers of Picardy. It lies on the right hand of the River Schelde, five Leagues below the rise thereof; which therefore is not there very broad. The way of Convoys to the French Camp was very convenient, but some|what long, they being to come from St. Quintins, and Peronne, to Chaste|lette, a Fort not far from thence; from whence they were brought to the Camp.
When the Spaniards heard of the Siege, and knew the danger the Town was in, by reason of the small number of Defendants therein, they forth|with sent 150 Officers thither, who being discovered by the French, were for the most part taken Prisoners; and the whole Spanish Army in a body marched towards Buchein, a strong Castle upon the Schelde, three leagues

below Cambray, to provide for the safety thereof, which consisted in speed; for had they tarried till the French had compleated the Line, the succour would have been very difficult. The Governour, who knew the Enemies Works, which were as yet open on two or three sides, writ to Count Fuen|seldagne, That the City was in danger to be lost, unless it were speedily re|lieved: and mentioned the way to do it, which was, to march straight for|ward with the body of the Army towards the Fortifications, feigning to fall upon one Quarter, and to send 2000 Foot to another Quarter which was not yet intrenched; so as the one or the other of them might easily enter where they were least looked for. This Letter was intercepted by the French; and being decifer'd, was sent to Count Harcourt, that he might so order his Affairs, as to disappoint the Enemies.
The Spaniards assaulted the Quarters: The French thought assuredly either to take, or to cut in pieces the 2000 men that came to relieve the Town; but notwithstanding they got in, no man knew how, nor no man withstanding them. Some would have it, that it was by the negligence of an Officer, who quitted a Barricado to run to hear a noise that was made in another part; but be it what you will, it hapned so unexpectedly, as all were amazed at it, yea, even the Spaniards themselves. The French im|puted it to the Germans, who as strangers might perchance have been fa|vourable to the Enemy. But the common Opinion was, That it hapned by a very great Mist that fell then, and by the negligence of an Officer that guarded the Barricado. Harcourt hereupon rais'd the Camp, to the great discontent of the Court; for it was thought his Forces were such, as he might have taken it, although the relief was entered. He retreated to Cambresi; whereat the Arch-Duke being very much joy'd, as having saved a place of such importance, he sent the Marquiss Sfondrato with 6000 men toward the Washes of Flanders, to observe Palvan's proceedings; pro|pounding nothing to himself during that Campagnia, but how to keep the French from making more attempts. Thus the Armies kept for some days neer one another, wanting many necessaries.
The King and Court kept still at Compeigne, and were the more displeased with this accident, for that they saw the Frondeurs and other, Male-con|tents of Paris rejoyced thereat, as if they had thereby received a great Victory; being so blinded with hatred, as the French were seen to rejoyce at their own ruine, left good success might have increased the Cardinal's Reputation. Beaufort and the Coadjutor, and others who envied his for|tune, gave out, That he was the cause why the King did not return to Pa|ris; rendring him thereby hateful to the Inhabitants, who got much by the Courts being at Paris: and so highly were they incensed against those that were of the Royal Party, as in scorn the Frondeurs called them Mazaini|ans.
Two things did much trouble the Court and the Cardinal, to whom, as chief Director, all both good and bad success were attributed; so as he re|solved to go himself to the Camp, upon pretence to treat of general Peace with the Spanish Plenipotentiary Pignoranda, who was to that purpose to be at Valenciennes, as was agreed upon by the Pope's Nuntio and the Vene|tian Embassador. On the 22 of Iuly he went to Chasteau-Cambrey, where the King's Army lay, and was accompanied by the Dukes Vandosm and Mercoeur, the Mareshal Villeroy, and Pessis Prasin, together with dier others of the Court: He was received in the Camp with all applause due to his Eminency.
Where he had divers consultations with the prime men whom he admit|ted

to the Treaty; and inviting them frequently, encouraged them to shew their Worth and Valour. Then causing the Army to be mustered, he presented them with considerable Donatives, particularly the Dutch Commanders; declaring, That he never had the least suspition that Cam|bray was relieved through any miscarriage of theirs; and that the King was of the same opinion, from whom he brought Letters to General Ohem, wherein his Majesty expressed his opinion of their innocency: and by these and other civilities endeavoured to sweeten them, who for the impu|tation falsly laid upon them, threatned to forsake the Service, as being free|men, and Forreigners; and did win upon their affections, for all the French could do to their prejudice. And there being nothing that makes Soul|diers willinger to hazard their Lives, than to shew them a means how to make amends for their sufferings, he moved that they should march into the Island of St. Armand; (a rich and plentiful Country, seated between the Rivers Scheld and Scarpe) Which being agreed upon, the French mar|ched into that fruitful Island, and entred into the midst of it without any opposition, (for their coming was unexpected) and pillaged whatsoever they pleased, to the as great confusion of the Inhabitants, as grief of the Spaniards, who were generally blamed by all Flanders for their inadver|tency therein. The Arch-Duke went thither, to see whether the Enemy were to be fought with or no, and driven from thence; and took up his Quarters there, where the Scarpe falls into the Scheld, to keep the French from advancing further. And since his Army could not fight the French, being fewer in number, he by the advantage of scituation defended the Passes, and sent for Souldiers from Flanders, and from all the neighbouring Provinces, to increase his Army. The French quartered in this opulent Country for above two Moneths, running up and down without doing any thing; till finding it needful to possess themselves of some place behinde them, whereby they might facilitate the bringing of necessaries to the Camp, and keep their Cavalry without any trouble in the Enemy's Coun|try; Count Harcourt rose on the 7th of August from the Abby of Denaim, where he was encamped after the Spaniards had retreated to Valenciennes, and went to Arleux, between Doway and Bocheim, which is a small tract of Ground Islanded by the River Scarpe, and by the Rivolets of Sluce and Sally, five Leagues from Arras, where he staid some days, as well to hinder the Spaniards from bringing Provisions to their Camp from Doway, Cam|bray, Bocheim, and other places, as to get Victuals for his Army. And not long after parting from thence, he encamped within sight of Valenciennes, and went himself in person with 1500 Horse, and 2000 Commanded Foot, to assault the Town of Cond, scituated in a place where it is not over|looked any where; having a no contemptible Castle, which is watered by the Rivers Escaut and Aisne. Count Broglio had the charge of assaulting the Town given him; which he did with incredible speed, and lodged sud|dainly upon the Counterscarp of the Town, and forced the Enemy quickly to surrender it; Colonel Grondes marching out of it on the 24th of Au|gust, with 500 Foot, and 50 Horse, which were Convoy'd by Monsieur Beauvais to Valenciennes. Upon this advice the Arch-Duke advanc'd to Morteigne; but hearing that that place was lost, went neer Tourney, sum|moning together all the scattered Souldiery, and the Country-Militia, to keep the French from making further progress, who marched even within sight of Brussels, though not without the inconveniency of want of Vi|ctuals, which were to be brought from afar off, the Convoy whereof being encountered neer Quesnoy by 1000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, commanded

by Colonel Bruch; they after a lusty Skirmish pass'd happily on, the Spa|niards being somewhat indamaged, and pursued even to the Ditch of Quis|noy, losing 80 men; and the French losing not above ten, and Monsieur de Sassey who was taken Prisoner.
The Cardinal returned to Compeigne, before the Army went into that Island, and found the Prince of Cond come thither; who prest that the King might return to Paris; wherein he was seconded by the Duke of Or|leans.
The Court removed from Compeigne to Paris, with such general applause and satisfaction, as it might be rather said to be a glorious Triumph, than an usual arrival. Then the Articles of Marriage were treated of between Man|cini and Duke Mercoeur, wherein the reversion of the Admiralty was promised him, after his Father the Duke of Vendosme's death: but when all this was upon concluding, the Prince of Cond's jealousies mar'd all. The Match between the Duke of Candale Eldest Son to the Duke of Espernon, and the Cardinal's other Niece the Countess Martinozzi, was also treated of, and agreed by all parties interested; but not effected, for reasons which you shall hereafter hear.
The more the Kings Authority did increase in Paris, the more did that of the Frondeurs decrease; who notwithstanding ceased not to be Ene|mies to the Cardinal: and all men observed Beaufort's proceedings, who for his Reputation, and to maintain himself Head of the people, would appear to be faithful to his party, by going to visit their Majesties at the Court, without visiting the Cardinal, glorying to be the onely man in the Kingdom who made head against him. But though he was admitted by the King, the Queen, to shew that she could not tolerate the little e|steem that was put upon her in the prime Minister of State, seemed not well pleased with his Visits; whereat he, in a distasteful manner, flung out of the Room, saying aloud in a scornful manner, That he would return thither no more, since he was so badly received. And though the Cardinal applied himself to moderate the unquiet Spirit of this Prince, who by the peoples adherence might cause new Convulsions, to which purpose he made great proffers to his Parents the Duke and Dutchess of Vendosme; yet all proved vain: for, as it was said, the Prince of Cond did underhand endeavour to keep them at odds, that the Court being weakned by a contrary Fa|ction, he might thereby the more increase his Authority, and govern in the Council as he lifted. And Beaufort by this means got an opinion a|mongst the people of being undaunted.
But whilst by often frequenting the House of Monbason as he pass'd to and fro from the Court, during his abode in L'Hostelle de Vendosme, he exposed himself to the will of the Kings Guards, being told of what ha|zard he ran, he changed his Lodging, and lodged in the Street of Prvelles neer St. Eustace, and nearer to la Hostelle de Monbasan; whereby he shewed his distrust of the Court the more. Now because since the Decree of the 2d of March, the Parliament was not called for publick affairs, whereat the Court was well pleased, the Frondeurs being back'd by the Malecon|tents, promised to make both that and all the supreme Chambers meet, at the usual Audience of St. Martins; and though it was agreed upon by Ar|ticles, that the Chambers should not meet without express leave from the King, yet they said these were unsufferable errours; and complained much that the Cardinal had replaced Monsieur d'Emery in his former place of Su|perintendant of the Finances: but they were not aware that this was done meerly by Conde's means, who having won much favour at Court,

after the War of Paris, saw it necessary to have the Superintendant of the Finances his Friend; so as contrary to the opinion of all men, and contra|ry to the Cardinal's pleasure, he would have him restored to his Place, de|claring, That none was so fit for it as Emery; which made Cond's action the more suspected, and more vigilantly observed. But Emery continued not long in the place; for being seized on by Sickness, he died soon after, and the Mareshal Milleray succeeded him: and though Cond was he who was to be blamed for the replacing of Emery, yet he turn'd the fault so cunningly upon the Cardinal, as all men attributed it to the Prime State-Officer; which made the Court and Court-Officers to be hated by the people, who hoped that being fomented by him, they might facilitate what they had agreed upon. But whilst things went thus at Court, the Emergencies which arose in other Provinces were no less remarkable; which will occasion us to look a little backwards.
Amongst several ways found out to raise Moneys, the Court had re|solved to introduce Semistry, which is an addition of as many Officers as were before, to the end that they might not exercise their places as before for the whole year, but by turns, from six months to six months; whereby not onely much Moneys might be raised by the sale of Places, but the exor|bitant authority of Counsellours was thereby moderated. Orders being issued forth for the putting the Semistry in practise in Provence, as it was in Normandy, the Count  Alets, Governour of Provence, undertook the work; and without acquainting the Court what Novelties it might occa|sion, caused the Kings Commands to be published, and gave order for the sale of the new Places; wherein some of his Domesticks interessing them|selves, negotiating their own advantage with the Purchasers, considerable Commotions arose; whereof one was, That one called Lughet, that he might make way for others, was one of the first that bought one of the said Semistry; which did so anger the Counsellours, as he was not onely looked upon as a new Companion or Fellow-brother, but as an Enemy to his Country, and e're long was unhumanely treated: for as he was one night at Supper with his Friends, certain people came in Masked, and slew him, whereat the Governour was so scandalized, as he caused several that were thought complices, to be imprisoned, that the Malefactor might be found out! which not being done, (for those that were guilty were esca|ped) he banished those from the City whom he suspected most, and parti|cularly those who had most opposed the new Edict in the Parliament; who withdrew to their Country-houses; many of them going to Carpentras, a City in the County of Avignon; who though they were asunder, held such Corrspondency with their Friends who remained in Aix, the Metropolis of Provence, and with other Friends in the Country, insomuch as a considerable number being assembled together, the Count grew jealous, who being unpro|vided of Souldiers, and wanting part of his Regiment who were imbarked in the leet which went to Naples, thought himself not able to withstand the contrary Party, if they should attempt any thing. So as he treated of Accommodation, which was concluded by suspending the new Semistry, and with leave for those that were banished to return home; whereat those Counsellours were so puffed up, as they made a numerous Faction against the Governour, which intrench'd upon his Authority, punish'd his Adhe|rents, and did in open manner withstand the usual form of chusing Consuls; whereat the Court being displeased, the Queen was often acquainted there|with, and wish'd to consider what inconveniencies might ensue, unless spee|dy remedy were taken. But the King's Council having then their hands

full of the Troubles of Paris, and growing apprehensive of the Action of many Lords, they put him in hopes, saying, That when the Affairs of Paris should be settled, they would send him sufficient Forces to punish the Pec|cant; and wish'd him wisely to dissemble.
But the Count being impatient, instead of concealing this Advertise|ment, did participate it to some others, whom he thought his Friends; the knowledge whereof coming to the contrary Faction, distrusts increased, and means used to cancel the fault, was by running into a greater contuma|cy: So as the Parliament of Aix following the Example of that of Paris, grew licentious; and as the Parisians had detracted from the Cardinal's Administration, representing to the King the necessity of pleasing his people, by taking all Employment from him, and driving him out of his Kingdom; so did the Provincials pretend to the removal of their Governour; to which purpose they sent unto the Court, threatning, That in case of denial or de|lay, they would no longer obey him.
He on the contrary pretended to sustain himself by the power of his Friends, and of the Nobility; and seeking rather to revenge than to secure himself, drove all that he suspected out of Aix. And because Monsieur de la Tour, who was Friend to one Beaureville, the Advocate-General of the Parliament, did stir up Sedition more than the rest, he caused him to be imprisoned, threatning to make him an Example. But the people, as a Torrent which swells by the concourse of several Rivulets, took this for Vi|olence, and for a private Revenge; and upon pretence that upon the 18th of Ianuary a Souldier of the Guard had wounded a Servant of a Member of Parliament, took up Arms, and fill'd the whole City with Sedition, in|somuch as had it not been for the Arch-bishop of Arles, and the President Seguiran, who by their Credit and Authority moderated the Uproar, some|what of fatal might have hapned: yet the people were not pacified, though for the present they laid down Arms; for their jealousies increasing, as no|velties multiplied, two days after, on St. Sebastians day, which is usually celebrated in a little Church without the Gate, by the procession of many people, a Country-fellow cry'd out, That the King's Party would shut the Gates of the City as soon as the Procession was gone out. Whereupon grew so great a confusion, as that the Governour's Palace being begirt and besieged by a numerous rout of armed men, they reduced him to such straights, as to escape so eminent a danger, he was forced to treat, and to yield that he and all his men would go out of the City, as he did; whereby the Parlia|ment was freed from the fear of the Souldiers, and of the Governour. Whereupon a Decree was suddenly made for abolishing the Semestry, for joyning with the Parliament of Paris, for the recalling of Consuls, for resti|tution of the places taken from the Baron de Brass and from Monsieur Siguiram; and finally, for the observing those Orders onely, which should be from that time given by the Count di Garces, the King's Lieutenant in that Province: To whom they were content to submit, that they might make it appear they had done all this not to forgo their obedience to the King, but onely that they might not be subject to the violence and private passions of their Governour; with all which they acquainted the Court, and made excuses sutable to their Delinquencie.
The Count d'Allets, being much troubled at this Affont, betook himself to provide all things necessary to chastise those who had so far forgone their Duties. He got together about 5000 Foot, and 150 Horse, besides 600 Voluntiers of Provence and Languedock. He took Chasteau Regnande, Borba, la Roque, Maxsarques, St. Pole, and other Towns which had decla|red

for the Parliament, and were of no great consideration, not being in any posture of defence; and he encamped before the very City of Aix, which is seated upon the River Are, greatly peopled; but begirt only with a bare Wall, and Towers after the ancient manner: from whence 200 men sallying out, they were all taken and cut in pieces, and they would have proceeded farther, had not a Gentleman come at the very time, who brought Pardon and Peace subscribed by the King. Where|upon the next day Arms were laid down on all sides, and the Kings Soul|diers were sent some into Piedmont, some into Catalonia.
But though Peace was made in Provence, War was kindled in Guienne be|tween the Duke of Espernon the Governour-General, and the Parliament and City of Bourdeaux; whereof to understand the occasion, we must make here a short digression.
By the example of the Commotions of Paris, a Faction was formed by certain Councellors of Parliament in Bourdeaux; who by conversing with the Wife of Councellor Mirat, and with some other Women who met together in her house, began, like the Frondeurs of Paris, to pry into businesses not competent to their Callings, which was to meddle onely in Civil and Criminal affairs, and not to busie themselves with State-affairs, which belongs onely to the King's Privy Council. Mirate was a crafty man, of quick and unquiet thoughts, and reputed very wise; he was held to be the chief of all the rest; amongst whom was President Pichon a Bro|ther of his, Monsieur Feyarde, Monsieur d'Alem, and divers other turbu|lent and ambitious Spirits. These were assisted by Advocate Constanse, and by Monsieur di Fontenelle. At the first risings against the Duke of Esper|non, this Faction was fomented by Monsieur de la Vie, who was Advocate-General; a proud pretender, who intending to justle out the first Presi|dent Bernet, that he might have his place, whereby he might wrestle with Espernon's Authority, whom he loved not, made use of the troubles of Pa|ris, which made men lay aside all respect, and made it lawful to infuse jea|lousies into the aforesaid Councellors, and others of unquiet Spirits, such as were Messieurs Blanck, Mouesin, Remont, Espagnet, and chiefly the Pre|sident Dasis. Their designe being to enhaunce their pretended Authority under the Name of Parliament, that they might govern the City; they began to declaim against the Duke of Espernon, terming him Proud, A|varitious, Violent, and of contrary ends to those which belonged to a wise Statesman: they laid to his charge that he sent Corn out of the Coun|try, under pretence of uniting the Frontiers, but indeed to make Mer|chandise of it: That he opress'd the people, and threatned them. They declared, that what they did was for the ease of the Country: they insinu|ated into the people, that Espernon intended to lay two Crowns upon every Tun of Wine, from which the King had exempted them: That he sought to disarm them, so to make them more pliable to his Will: That to that purpose he had begun to draw the Canon out by night from the Castle of Ha, and to bring them into the Castle Trombette, from whence he might batter the City. By these conceits they won upon the people, who listening after whispers, the Duke was invited to the Assembly, to provide by his presence for things necessary, and to send the Kings Forces (which lay about the City) ten Leagues off. But the Duke, who knew the designes were different from what they appeared to be, that he might not be enforced to any thing contrary to the Kings Authority, or being unwilling to be unhandsomely dealt with, thought not good to come thither, but retired to his house at Cadigliack. The soberest of the Par|liament

got the rest to abstain from all Sedition, and sent two Councellors, Salamon and du Vall, to him; who whilst they prevailed with the Duke to send the Troops ten Leagues from Bourdeaux, whereby all things were quieted, the impatient and indiscreet people took the Palace of Ha; whereat the Duke being highly scandalized, he presently demanded the restitution thereof from the Citizens and Parliament: but they denying to do it, fell from their intention of depositing it into the hands of the Magi|strates of the City, by reason of a Letter which they received at the same time from the Parliament of Paris, which was full of fair Promises; and by the Duke's denial to desist from fortifying Liborne, which he did, by reason of a rising of the people in the Town. Thus their displeasures grew greater, and President Dasis sent for some of the most seditions into the publick Hall, who abused some of the good Inhabitants, and drove them out of the City; among which, Secretary Clavo and Monsieur di Duboy; and then they declared themselves more openly, and took up Arms under pretence of defending the Country; and a Council of War was chosen, wherein the first President was obliged to assist, together with some Counsellours.
The first thing this Council of War did, was to send word to the Coun|try-people thereabouts, willing them to take up Arms; which they did, and presently took the Castle of Varyes near Libourn; which was im|mediately after Besieged, and retaken, together with the destruction of the place, and of all those in it, by the Camp-master Marshal Marine's men. Moreover, two Frigats, three small Vessels, and 12 Brigantines were armed by them; they took four Brigades of Foot into pay, and several Troops of Horse; and to supply expences, they made use of the publick Moneys, imposed Taxes, and did whatsoever was necessary for maintaining the War. The Duke armed also, but sought to appease the Bourdelois ra|ther by fair means than by soul; and though the two of his Letters which he wrote to the Parliament, and two which he wrote to the Commonalty of Bourdeaux, were but unhandsomely answered; yet he seeming not to take notice of it, offered that if they would forbear fortifying Libourn, his Forces should not approach Bourdeaux; and that he would get the King to take away their Grievances, and to give all just satisfaction. But all was refused, and the Trumpet which brought news that the Peace of Paris was concluded, was threatned to be hanged.
And immediately Monsieur de la Vie was sent to Court, to make it be believed that the Bourdelois were the Kings most faithful and obedient servants, but Enemies to their Governour, who had treated them ill, and been too haughty in his Government. They then made the Marquess of Chamberet, an old and hardy Souldier, Commander of their Troops; they took the Castle of Lormont, and put Forces thereinto. Two of Crequy's Horse-Troops were cut in pieces by the Peasants; and the Country-peo|ple of those parts were so resolute in rebellion, as some of them being besieged by Monsieur di Marin in the Church of Labbones, they refused to yield, and chose rather to perish by fire.
Then the Parliament of Bourdeaux writ to the Parliament of Tholouse, inviting it to joyn with them, and to keep the Forces of Languedock from falling down into Guienne: And the Vicount Virlada, in the name of the first President, and of other the King's good Servants, went to Tholouse by the approbation of the Duke of Candale, who was son to the Duke of Espernon, who was for Peace, and propounded to that Assembly, That it would be an honourable and commendable action for the Parliament of

Languedock to be Arbitrator of the difference of the Bourdelois. Which advice being embraced by those of Tholouse, they forthwith named Mes|sieurs di Carminada, di Fresars, di Carlineas, together with the Advocate-General Marmiesse, to interpose in the business, and to negotiate an Agree|ment: Which Espernon approving of, he sent Monsieur de la Barche to pass all due Complements, and entered cordially into the Treaty of Agreement; to assist whom, came the Count d'Argensonne with Orders from the Court to use all means to mollifie the exasperated Spirits of both the sides, to re|duce the Parliament to its Duty, and to make the Duke of Espernon con|tented with what the present conjuncture of time would allow: but in effect, not to do any thing to the Dukes prejudice, nor without his consent; for the Court was well enough pleased with the courage which he had shewn in the Kings service.
In the beginning of April, Argensonne went with the Count his eldest Son from Cadilliack to Espernon-house, which made the Burdelois suspect him, as the Duke would have done, had he gone first to Burdeaux. Argen|son was received with much demonstration of confidence by the Duke, and told him, That the whole business consisted in three points; in relie|ving the Castle of Trombette, in reducing the Parliament and People to their obedience, and the third (which he thought would make much for obtaining the second) in building the Citadel of Libourne: Which were the three things from whence all the disorders of Guienne did proceed. From thence Argenson went to Bourdeaux, where, after having been recei|ved with much respect, he propounded to them the victualling of the Castle of Trombette; wherein many difficulties were met with, which by his dextrousness were at last overcome; and the Parliament consented thereunto, though it were much opposed by the seditious sort, and particu|larly by du Salt the Advocate-General, who notwithstanding his great age, and the place which he held, appeared always one of those who did most oppose the King's service. And here it is observable, that whereas in the Parliament of Paris the younger sort were most contumacious, in this of Bourdeaux the elder were most cross, and did by their Rhetorick work up|on the younger; who by joyning with them, occasioned that disorder which had almost made the whole Assembly rebellious; for there were but few that kept within the bounds of Duty: and though Bernet the first President was the King's good Subject, yet was he of so weak parts, as he was not able to oppose the seditious, fearing continually to be assassinated.
When the Frondeurs saw they could not impede the Parliaments resolu|tion of victualling the Castle of Trombette, they seduced the people to hin|der the effecting of it: which occasioned some delay; wherefore Argenson, who feared the Castle might be in some straights, writ to the Governour Monsieur di Haultemonte, to know what condition the Castle was in; and being answered that it could hold out yet for twenty days, he immediately sent his Son to inform the Duke thereof, who was preparing to relieve it by force, though he had but two Brigadoes of Foot, and about 1000 Horse, with some Provencial Gentlemen, and without any one Piece of Artillery. Thus was he already gone from Cadilliack, and come to Castres. The Count met the Duke upon his March, and gave him an account of the Ca|stle, and that the Parliament had given way to the victualling of it; where|upon the Count promised to stay one whole day, to see whether they would do it or no: And the Count return'd that night to Bourdeaux, and caused 200 Sacks of Meal be brought to be put into the Castle. As soon as he was come, some commotion arose amongst the people, which by

Monsieur Pichon was appeased. The Count went to finde out his Fa|ther, and acquainted him with what Espernon had promised; he went to the Parliament to sollicite what they had promised; he told them of the Dukes march, and spoke with so much reason, as they promised again what they had done formerly; but met with the same difficulties in the execu|tion of it. The March caused great complaints, the Frondeurs were wilde, a number of people ran to the Arch-bishop's Palace, crying out, That they were betrayed, That whilst Argenson was negotiating in Parliament, Esper|non ransackt the Country.
Young Argenson was in great danger, being begirt by the people who ex|claim'd; but by giving them good words, he appeas'd them: and though some Musquet-shot had been made at his Chamber-window, over the Arch-bishop's Gate; he made no words of it, to keep from exasperating them: the Duke advanced the mean while to Gradigan, to relieve the Castle by force; but being advertised by Argenson, that the Parliament had promised to con|vey Corn into the Castle the next day, he said he would tarry one day lon|ger at Gradigan; and then he found he had been too hasty in his March; for he was within two Leagues of the City, and his neighbourhood had discomposed all things: and it being found in the Council of War that be had not Forces enough to effect what he had designed, it was resolved, to salve the reputation of the Kings Forces, that old Argenson, who was come to Gradigan to the Duke, should return to Bourdeaux, and promise the Parliament that the Forces should be led up higher into the Country, if they would renew their promise that the Corn should be carried in, as it was by Argenson's mediation; for the Corn was delivered to Hault|mont, the Duke retreated to Cadillack, and the Forces marched towards Agen. Argenson staid in Bourdeaux to negotiate other affairs, and his Son went to acquaint the Duke therewith; so as whilst things were in a fair way of agreement, the Duke of Candale, who had been always with his Father, and who did by no means like these Wars, went to Court; and Affairs would have been adjusted, had it not been for a new Emergen|cy.
A little unfinished Fort which Espernon caused to be erected at Libourn, was the occasion of these Commotions: For when the Duke retreated to Agen, he caused two pieces of Artillery to be put into that small Fort, or Redoubt, some Powder and Morter-pieces. When this was known at Bourdeaux, the City fell into a great disorder, the Parliament and people exclaim'd that this was a new trick of Espernon's, who had not kept his pro|mise, and the Kings party ran hazard of their Lives. Count Argenson was then at Cadillack, whither the Parliament writ unto him, acquainting him how the Duke had broken his promise, by not leaving things in the condition they ought to be. Of this the chief President writ particular|ly to him, and intreated him to come to the City and to appease the peop|ple: Whereupon the Count, who was not purposed to return, did not|withstanding prepare to return, and to take his Son with him, to Bour|deaux.
At his entrance the people shewed him their discontents, and broke out into a thousand Contumelies and Imprecations against Espernon, say|ing, They had been abused in their giving way to the Victualling of the Castle of Trombette, which otherwise could not have held out above three days; and that Agreements had been directly broken. Whence Argenson perceived the commotion of that City to grow greater than ever. The Arch-Bishop, who was of the Family of Bethume, endeavoured as much

as he could to appease them; but the peoples hatred to the Duke was such, and their desires of revenge so great, as nothing could pacifie them. The Frondeurs could not endure that Argenson should live in the Arch-Bi|shops Palace, but thought to keep him and his Son as Hostages till the works about Libourn should be slighted; but not being able to make them Priso|ners publickly, they made them be told by some of their Friends, That they were not safe in the Arch-Bishops Palace, and that the wisest among them could not secure them against the rage of the people: That therefore they thought their best course would be to retire to the Castle or Palace of Ha, where they might be safer. Argenson quickly found their designe, and answered, That though he apprehended nothing where he was, yet he was ready to obey the Parliament, and to go whither they listed. So he and his Son were carried to the Castle of Ha, whereof the Counsellour Espagnote, who was one of the chiefest of the Seditious, was Governour: as soon as they were entred, the Guards were doubled; and the next day, orders were given, that they should not be suffered to go out. The people were grown so tumultuous, as their Rulers could no longer govern them; for some 6000 of them came to the Castle-gate, crying out, That Argenson was a Traytor, a false man: That he together with Espernon intended to ruine them; and that they must kill them. The Parliament being acquain|ted with this Uproar, sent the chief President together with divers other Counsellours, to the Castle of Ha, to prevent inconveniencies; but as they pass'd along the streets, they were railed upon, and had had stones thrown at them, had not some that were of power amongst them, kept them from further outrage. But the prime President was so frighted, as when he came into the Castle, he could not speak. They soon told the Count, That all was lost, unless he took order that the Fortifications about Libourn might be demolished: But Argenson told them, He was not Commander of the Province, nor Governour of Libourn. So their Request was frustrated.
The first President said, That an Order might appease the disorder; and that time would advise what was best to be done next. The Order was re|solved upon, but the difficulty lay in who should carry it. Some of the boldest Counsellours said, That they themselves would go with it; but they were told, They might be detained. Wherefore they all concluded, that Ar|genson should tarry in the Castle, but that he should send his Son; who be|cause he could not safely pass through that crowd of people, Marquiss Chamberet, General of the Troops, came himself to the Castle-gate to guard him to a Bark which was prepared for him. And when this was re|solved, the Father was no longer suffered to speak in private with his Son; so as all he could whisper unto him as he embraced him at his going away, was to wish him not to return to Bourdeaux, though by his Letters he was de|sired to do so. When he was come to Libourn, the Governour refused to obey Argenson's order; wherefore it being to come from the Duke of Espernon, the Count went in haste to Agen, to dispose the Duke thereunto; but he first advertised his Father and the first President of all he did.
The disorder grew this mean while so great in Bourdeaux, and the cla|mour of the people was such, as not expecting answer, they resolved to go themselves to demolish those Fortifications. Argenson was all this while shut up in the Castle of Ha; but he did so well represent to the Deputies of Parliament, who went dayly to visit him, what injury the City did her self, by imprisoning one whom the King had sent to pacifie the Province, as at last fearing that the Court might deal in the like manner with their Deputies who were at Court, they were advised to give him his liberty.

He promised them to go forth with to Espernon, hoping undoubtedly to obtain his request, for the resolution whereof he desired onely three days; they promised him not to innovate any thing in that mean while. Upon these terms he came forth of the City, under the conduct of the afore|said Chamberet.
This mean while the Count his Son was gone to the Duke, whom he had prepared to free his Father, and to give order for the demolition of the Fortifications about Libourn; which just as he was ready to do, Argenson came himself, and what was already resolved of was done; so as Argenson was partly minded to return to Bourdeaux to acquaint the Burdelois with this good news. But news came the next morning, that about 7000 of those factious people were gone out to besiege Libourn; which made the Duke alter his resolution, and to dream of nothing but upon opposing the fury of the people. The Duke embarked his Souldiers at Reole, and went himself along with them; many Gentlemen flock'd presently to him, and without more ado, those Forces, which did not in all amout to 2000 men, quartered within two leagues of Libourn, intending to fall upon the Camp of the Burdelois the next day.
Libourn is about a mile in compass, of a square form, invironed with Walls, and antient Towers without any Platforms, seated upon an Angle made by the rivers Durdone and Isel, which meet at one side of the Town to|wards Fronsack; the Campaguia is plain and plough'd up: The Burdelois had not yet time to intrench themselves, nor was there any order in their Camp. The General Chamberet was old, not much verst in leading any Foot, and much less in what belonged to a General: His people were undis|ciplined. On the contrary, the King's men, though they were far short in number, yet were all expert Souldiers; conducted by Warlike Officers, whereof the Count de Marin was the first Camp-Mareshal; all the rest who accompanied Espernon, were such as had for the most part been in the War. The posture of the besieging Camp being discovered by petty par|ties of Horse, small Skirmishes hapned, which grew greater afterwards on the Dukes side. Count Serres, with Crequy's Gavalry, and Count Marin with the Foot of the Guienne Brigadoes, fell furiously on the Enemies, Quarters, who did so ill defend themselves, as they were immediately rou|ted. All sought how to save themselves; and so great was the astonish|ment, as many of them perish'd in the Water, as they strove to save them|selves by Swimming. The Kings men made what havock they pleased, whilst they could follow the Fugitives: Marquiss Chamberet was be a|lone, who with some other of his friends, behaved himself as a man of Honour; but he was slain, as was likewise Monsieur d' Andre, Serjeant-Ma|jor of the Army: Some of the Councellors of Parliament were taken Prisoners: The number of the dead was about 2000; all the Baggage, Cannon, and two Frigats were lost. Monsieur Martinet, Governour of the Town, sallied forth at the same time with most of the Garrison, and killed many of the Enemy. The Bourdelois had above 7000 men, and all the Bells of the neighbouring Villages rung out to call in men to their assistance, who came from all parts. Espernon was very proud of this action; he entred Libourn, and lay therein, quartering his men in the neighbouring Villages. Count Argenson tarried in the upper Country, to expect the issue of this action; which when he knew, he went to the Duke to ad|vise of what was to be done; but he found him so exasperated against the Bourdelois, as it was impossible to bring him to any moderate resolution: He dream'd of nothing but of chastising the Bourdelois, and thought the

Court would have sent him Forces to that purpose; he pass'd over the River, and advanced to Castres, and accompanied by the same Gentry that had served him at Libourn, hasted towards Bourdeaux. The mean while the Arch-Bishop, with the Deputies of the Commons, who had kept to the King's service, entred into Treaty; that the Duke might besure to be welcome to the Citizens, if he would come into the City. The Parliament would have no part herein, but declared they would never have to do with their Enemy Espernon: yet it was thought that if once the people were satis|fied, means would be found to appease the Parliament, the hope whereof made him comply with the City's offer.
The Duke advanced with his Army to Graves, two Leagues from Bour|deaux; the Arch-Bishop and Deputies came to meet him, and acquainted him with the reasons which made the Citizens and People go out against Libourn; and desired him to do what was sitting, and not to be the occa|sion of such ruines as civil Discord brings with it. The Duke replied, That Subjects could have no reason to disobey their Soveraign's Decrees: That they should treat according to their duty, dismiss their Souldiers, demolish Fortifications, disarm their Vessels, and be content to live quietly as before. The Deputies answered, That the City would obey, and that they desired him to enter the City; Which the Duke said he would, if they would dis|arm their Men, and beat down their Barricadoes. The Treaty being con|cluded, it was carried into the Town by Viscount Virlada, and the Duke was told that the next day he should finde the Gates open for him and all his retinue, the Souldiers excepted, the Barricadoes down, the Militia dis|banded, their General dismiss, their Vessels unarmed: all which was done; but the Dukes Harbengers found the Gate St. Iulian shut upon them, and Barricado'd; but the Duke entred by that of Diaux, accompanied by his Domesticks, by some Officers, and by about 400 Gentlemen: And present|ly Monsieur d' Espagnet, who was of power amongst the people, was sent to appease those that were up, and to demolish the Barricadoes. The Duke was visited by all the Corporations of the City, but not by the Parliament; because the Treaty was (as they alledged) onely with the City, and not with them; who were the more incensed, for that the Duke did not conceal his anger against them. The first President with some of the Wiser sort went to visit him, who with the like respect went to return their Visit. He went afterwards to the publick Palace, where he spoke handsomely of the late disorders, and promised the City to intercede with the King for their indemnity; adding, that he would not tarry long there, but that he would send his Forces higher up into the Country, to the end that the City might be free of the inconveniency of their neighbour|hood.
Affairs seemed to be thus quieted, and in truth they were all so astonish|ed with the Blow received at Libourn, as had they governed themselves well; there was great hopes they might have been reduced to reason; but then the Duke must have tarried longer in Bourdeaux: for his too speedy return to Agen, afforded not time to the Parliament to grow more milde. Espernon dream'd of nothing but revenge, whereof he cannot be excused; for from thence proceeded a great part of the disorders wherewith Guienne hath been so long afflicted. It is true that the Parliament was always wan|ting in their duty, and did therefore deserve punishment; but modera|tion must have been used therein, which might have appeased those turbu|lent Spirits. The Duke went from Bourdeaux with firm intention to pu|nish the Parliament, he went to Gadilliack, from whence he acquainted

the Court with what had past: He desired the King to pardon the People, but not the Parliament: Young Argenson carried this Dispatch to the Court, which was then at Amiens: At the first the Council stuck upon forbidding the Parliament, which did much prejudice the business; for they must either have put on a speedy resolution, so not to afford them leisure to make new Plots, or after long delay, have forborn execution. If the interdiction had presently followed, whilst the people were well disposed to Peace, the Parliament would have been necessitated to obey: But time altered the face of affairs; and when they were resolved to do it, they could not. The Court went from Amiens to Compeigne, which was another occasion of delay. Argenson told them, that if the inter|diction should be speedily made, it might be easily effected; but if de|ferr'd, the business would take another parley: But whether it were that they were negligent, or that the Court had other business at that time, six Weeks pass'd without taking any expedient: so as that wound not being healed, but contracting continually ill humours, by the turbulent sugge|stion of the Parliament, the Bourdelois fell into new and more rash con|tempts. The first President was excluded the Council, and the Councel|lor Salomon was driven out of the City. The People were forbidden to receive Pardon from the King, and the Giurati to desire it; imprinting in the People, that what was presented to them as a remedy, was a pestife|rous Poyson; and that to accept of Pardon, was to confess a fault. The Expeditions were sent to the Duke, and the way of putting them in exe|cution refer'd to him: but he, who was wholly set upon Revenge, fell upon the most violent remedies. Monsieur de Comminge, Lieutenant of the Queens Guards, was sent with two Vssiere alla catena d' oro. Ushers with Gold Chains to Bourdeaux, with the Inhibition; and Espernon himself went thither, who at first was well received. But when, they found that Comminge was come to thunder out the Inhibition, whereat the Parlia|ment was much troubled, by reason of the bad consequence which the mark of such a fault brings with it, they would have shut the Door upon him as he entred into the Hall, but some of his Guards made a noise, and kept them from doing it; which incensed those that were present: the most seditious cried, To Arms, to Arms; some Barricado'd the avenues of the Streets which led to the Palace with Garts loaded with Dirt; others would have shut up the Gate Salimieres, which is neer the Palace, and by which succour might be brought from the Castle Trombette; but the Dukes men being aware thereof, stood in the midst of the Gate, and kept up the Portcullices which the Seditious would have let down; which afforded conveniency for 150 men to enter, who were sent by the Governour of the Castle to oppose the peoples fury. The mean while, the Duke, who with Count Argenson, Monsieur de Comminge, and a great many Gentle|men, was in the Palace-Hall, was told that the Tumult increased; which made him retire, left he might be environ'd by the Croud. He returned to his house Pay-paulin, where he staid the rest of that day: He thought to have come the next day to the Palace; but President Pontac advertised him that the Seditious intended to set Puy-paulin on fire, and counselled him to retire, left he might expose his person to the fury of an inraged people. This advice was embraced, and instead of going to the Parlia|ment, he went from Bourdeaux with the Nobless which accompanied him, and with his Guards and Domesticks. He was no sooner gone out of the Gate, but the people got upon the Wall, shot at him, threw Stones, and curst him: He marched speedily towards Cadilliack, and went from

thence to Agen, to expect Orders from Court. The peoples fury being somewhat appeased after this venting of their rage, Monsieur de Comminge endeavouring still to reconcile the Duke unto the Parliament, went to Porter, four leagues from Bourdeaux, to confer with the Deputies of Par|liament; but to no purpose. Many of the chief Inhabitants went from the City; the Guirato Barriere, as he was going was slain, but by whom no man knew. Constance, Pontack, Boutrin, and Duglas, who were all Frondeurs, were made Giurati.
When the news of this Insurrection came to Court, together with all that had hapned besides, all means were used to allay the Rancour; and divers good Orders being made, President Gouges, the Counsellours Mirat, Monion, and La vi, who were all four Deputies of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and had been detained at Senlis by order from the King, were set free; and Mirat was sent back with advantageous Proposals to the Parliament, whilst they should keep their obedience. For it was said, That Garonette, who held secret Intelligence with Duke Beaufort and the Coadjutor, well-wishers to the Bourdelois, offered to make Marquiss Save|beus General. This Savebeus was a Gentleman of Perigord, who being advanced in Espernon's Court, had by his favour married the Daughter and Heir of Pierre Rusier de Limosin, a very rich man, who had declared for the Duke of Orleans against the late King, at Momorancy his first stirring. He was afterwards Lieutenant-general to the Duke of Parma in Italy; and not being content with his Fortune, he fish'd in troubled Waters. The Cardinal was after told, That since all Remedies that had been hither|to applied to this Malady had failed, and that all had proceeded from the Duke of Espernon's presence in Guienne, who was there generally ha|ted, the cause must be removed, to remove the effect. But it was not thought convenient to remove Espernon then, because that another being to be sent thither, it might be that the Prince of Cond might desire to be the man; so as the Burdelois affection towards Cond might prove more prejudicial to the King's Authority, than their hate to Espernon: as also, that it was more easie (Espernon being powerful in Friends and Territories in Guienne) to reduce the Burdelois to their obedience by his means, than to seem to fear a rash and indiscreet people, by sending a new Governour: and that therefore, by Maximes of good Government, it was better to hazard the whole, than to loose a part willingly with hazard of the rest. The King had a thought to go thither himself in person, or at least to send the Duke of Orleans to Bourdeaux, where all things tended towards War; and Gallies being armed by the Burdelois, began to scoure those Waters in ho|stile manner, having taken Monsieur de Meart, the Duke of Espernon's Su|perintendant, Prisoners, and Counsellour Blank, in their Country-houses, who were brought with much ignominy to Bourdeaux; wherefore Espernon, who was come to Bourg to have a care of that place, commanded Mon|sieur de Piles to advance with some Companies of the Guienne Brigado to Portes; and garrisoned all the neighbouring places with Souldiers which came to him from Agen, Mont-Alban, and elsewhere, and acquainted the Court with all these proceedings. And because Haultmont, Governour of the Castle of Trombette, had seized on some Beeves as they were driven underneath the Walls, for that the City had denied him some Victuals which he had desired; this served for a pretence to the Burdelois to break with the said Governour; the Citizens making divers shot against the said Castle, and making all the Souldiers that were in the City Prisoners. Wherefore Haultmont made all his Artillery play; but the Castle being

seated low, the Bullets graz'd onely against the tops of the houses, causing neither prejudice nor fear. Therefore Savebeus was of opinion that it should be besieged: To provide against the which, Monsieur de Mentrese advanced with some of the King's Vessels into the Goromne, and four Ships were forthwith armed by the City; with which, together with some other Vessels of War, Monsieur Thibaut fell down the stream to encounter the Royalists. Meautrix his Vessel as it advanced to give battle stuck a|gainst ground; so as going into a little Bark, he flew the Pilot, and set fire on the Ship. The Burdelois this mean while drew forth some Cannon to play upon the Castle; wherein the Parliament was not wanting to give assi|stance, and imposed a great sum of Money upon all the richest Citizens. Advocate Roche did, together with some others, compose one Counsel of War consisting of six, and another of four, for the Maritime affairs; they took divers Troops into pay under Monsieur d' Espagnet, who was the En|ginier, and began to besiege the Castle, wherein there were but 200 men in Garrison: They set upon it on three sides; and to keep it from being relieved, the Marquiss of Savebeus and Marquiss Lusignan advanced with many Squadrons to the Burrow of Pondesack, fortified and put Garrisons into all the Churches and little Towns about Bourdeaux; and fortified the Island St. George, which is a tract of ground lying between the branches of Garonine. Moreover, all that were absent were summoned under great penalties to return unto the City: which many of them did; and the houses of such as did not return, were plundred, and all their Goods were sold by the Candle. Espernon endeavoured to relieve the Castle by Water, and appeared with his Forces on the opposite shore; but was forc'd to give over the Enterprize. Wherefore the Defendants having manfully defen|ded themselves from the latter end of August, till the midst of October; their Victuals failing them, the Water being corrupted, all their Defences and Tower beaten down, and the Garrison being reduced to bare to men, despairing of Relief, they were forced to capitulate, and went out on the 18th of October: the Enemy entred, sackt the Castle; the Duke of Esper|non's Movables, which were worth 50000 l. Sterling, were brought into the Market-place, and sold for 8000 l. the Cannon which was in the Ca|stle, were brought in great triumph to the publick Hall of the City. Coun|sellour Fayard with Ivie and Vine-leaves upon his head, like a Batchanatian, bestrid one of the greatest Pieces, and with Flaggons of Wine in his hands powred out Wine to the licentious Rabble that followed him; invi|ting them all to cry out, Vive le Burdelois, Vive le Parlement: Upon which was fastened a Writing in applause of the Enterprize, and exhorting them to accept of the Title of Majesty. This was composed to little purpose, and to the scandal of all good men, by one Gage a Priest, a Chieftain of the Seditious, and who by base flattery sought for a reward.
During this Siege, the Deputies of Bourdeaux protested to the Queen, That the Parliament intended mischief to none but to their bitter Enemy Espernon; and that in all things else they were the King's faithful and obe|dient Subjects.
The Court, which desired to wipe off the rust of Scorn and Hatred (which could not be done but by using sometimes simulation, sometimes rigour) at the same time that they sent Orders to certain of the Souldiery of Guienne to advance, sent Mareshal Plessis Pralin to reassume the Treaty of Peace, and to give all reasonable satisfaction to the people and Parlia|ment.
When the Marshal came to Guienne, he forbore going either to Cadil|lack,

or Bourdeaux; so to keep from giving suspition to either party: but went to Lormont, and began to negotiate as a third person between the Parliament and Duke; he was complemented by the Deputies of the Parliament and of the City: at first he endeavoured to impede the conti|nuation of the Siege; and when the surrender was made, to hinder the demolishing of the Castle Trombette: he was answered by Sault, who was the Advocate-General, That they would have no Peace but War, till the King were of years, unless Espernon were removed from that Government, in whom they neither would nor could confide. And a certain Artificer, who was more brazen-fac'd than the rest, upbraided him, saying, he was another Argenson, as much as to say, one that would deceive them: For Argenson had in his negotiating cunningly maintained the honour and In|terest of the King.
Vie returned to Paris, to acquaint the Court with what had past, ha|ving instead of serving the King, done the clean contrary; for he under|hand counselled the Inhabitants to dismantle the Castle, and to continue their former resolutions, to the end that the Court having Forrein Wars upon their Backs, and civil garboyls at home, might not be able to adhere so tenaciously as it seemed to do to her Rights in that Province: For that favourable conjunctures of times were not to be let slip by Subjects who were desirous of Liberty; tracing the Court in her accustomed ways, which was to seem always to desire that which she did utterly abhor; and to observe any thing but what was promis'd, when it might be prejudicial, and when the occasion which drew on the promise is vanish'd.
The same Vie treated with the Prince of Cond, and wisht him to un|dertake the protection of the Frondeurs of Bourdeaux, who would be ready to sacrifice their Lives and Livelihoods in his service. The Prince seemed to be pleased with this Invitation, and told him he was very well addicted to those he spoke of: But at the same time he answered those who entrea|ted him in the name of the Duke of Candale, not to declare against his Family; that if he and his Father Espernon would joyn with him, he would bring the Bourdelois wholly over to Espernon, and would secure him in that Government. Candale refused the Proposal, and would not forgo his obedience to his King: Which being known in Bourdeaux, by a Letter written to Espernon by Monsieur de Theuenin his Agent in Paris; the Wisest amongst them found that the Prince did but mock them: But the Bourdelois were so over-born with Passion, as their own danger could not make them be aware; and therefore, not minding the Proposal, though it tended to their satisfaction, with pride misbecoming Subjects, they mar|ched with 4000 Foot, and 800 Horse into the field; and on St. Martins day they took Pondesack, and plundered the Church, whereinto the Coun|try-people had brought their Moveables; they violated Women, and fired Houses. The Castle was defended, two daies, but was then surrendered. Their designe was to do the like to Cadilliack, which they sate down be|fore; but the place being well defended by eight Companies of Guienne Brigade, and by five other Companies which came from Rion a neighbour|ing Town, they quitted the attempt.
They then turned towards Pregnack, and from thence play'd with their Artillery upon Langon, which they took by assault, and plundered: 200 of Marine's Foot, who guarded the Castle, which was weak, and after ha|ving defended it four daies, for want of Powder parlied, just when Monsieur Marine was come to Bazaz, two Leagues off, with Forces to relieve it. The surrender of the City Marcare followed the loss of Langon; and the

Parliamentarians over-running the Country even to Gironde, the Marquis Savebeus staid there to refresh his men, whereby he afforded Espernon (who was advanced to St. Basil) time to put Monsieur di Biron with a sufficient Garrison into Reole; which spoiled the Bourdelois designe, who hearing that at the time Count Dognon was entred the River with eight Fri|gats, a good number of Gallies, several Feluccaes, some Fire-barks, and other provisions, and with a great many men, so as the Kings Forces were in|creased; they left Garrisons in the Towns they had taken, and returned hastily to Bourdeaux.
Whereupon the Duke of Espernon, having suddenly retaken St. Ma|caire, Langon, and Pondesack, with 6000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, fell upon Bastide, but did no good therein; for, it being seated on the other side of the River, just over against the City, and guarded by Marquiss Theobon by a great Garrison which was ever and anon reinforced by many Souldiers brought from the Fleet; he met with so stout defence, as he was forced to give over the attempt with the loss of some Foot, and of Monsieur Scormans Captain of Marine's Brigade.
Count d'Ognon having taken up his station at Lormont, was there assaul|ted by Savebeuse with 300 Citizens, led on by Girat a Captain of the City, not without danger of losing the men he had landed, and the Cannon, had not the Bourdelois (who were confused at Girat's being wounded) lost time in giving the assault, affording the Count conveniency to re-em|barque his men. The Bourdelois fell upon his Vessels, but with small good to the Parliamentarians, who having sent ten Fire-ships twice against the Kings men, their Vessels took fire before they came to the Kings ships. By these chances, which were contrary to the expectation of the Bourdelois, the Kings men being recruited by several re-enforcements; and on the contrary, the Bourdelois much discouraged, the Bourdelois began to be more calm, and instead of Revenge, to wish an Agreement. Wherefore the Mediators reassumed the Treaty, and by Monsieur d' Alluimat's com|ing to Bourdeaux, who was sent from Court with Articles agreed upon be|tween the parties concerned, and Marshal de Plessis, the Agreement was concluded. The substance whereof was, That the Castle Trombette should be demolished till the King should be of years: That the City should be eased of the Imposition laid upon it of two Crowns upon every Tun of Wine that went out, and of a certain proportion of Taxes: That the Troops should be sent farther off, and the Consuls of every City and Province might send their Appeals to the Parliament without their Governours knowledge. No speech was had of what had past between the Parliament and Espernon. The Count condescended to all that the Bourdelois demanded, so as under pre|tence of Grievances, new commotions might not arise; nor that the people should be exasperated by rigour, against which the Kings Council would use no violent remedies.
But though these Fluctuations were in part thus calmed amongst the people, yet were not the Frondeurs quieted, nor their Ambition, who in the publick Storms thirsted after private advancements. Monsieur de la Morte de las was sent by the Marquisses of Lusignan and Savebeuse to the Court of Spain, to implore aid from the Court of Spain; who were received gratiously by the Favourite Don Lewis de Hara; who to soment, these dis|orders, resolved to dispatch away the Baron Batteville, then Governour of Guipuscoa: He embarqued at St. Sebastian, and being come to Bour|deaux five days after the Peace was concluded, he notwithstanding ap|peared in the Assembly, and had publick and private Conferences with

some of the Parliament, which would never consent to agree with Esper|non, nor that the exil'd Counsellors should be readmitted to their former conditions: nay, whilst Monsieur Villamonte propounded means to agree all parties fairly, they threatned to throw him into the River; and one of his men was assassinated by some indiscreet Citizens, which increased the rashness of the rest; his Coach being cut in pieces, and he had been made Prisoner as he returned to Agen, where he spoke with Espernon, had he not (being advertised by a Friend of his) gone by the way of Libourn. The Parliament raised a great sum of Money to pay the debt which they had contracted during the War; which being repugnant to the Kings Authority, the aforesaid Vie, and Advocate Constante, as they came from Bourdeaux to the Court, the Marquiss Chasteauneuse reproached them for it. But they not withstanding got favourable answers, as shall be said here|after, and which had been abundantly advantagious for them, had not the Frondeurs, who were impatient of their good fortune, prefer'd a rash War, before Peace granted them with such indulgency.
Before we enter upon the relation of the Troubles which hapned in the year 1649, we will relate the Divisions and Factions of the Court, which arising from a weak and almost unknown beginning, grew to such a height as pass'd all due conveniency.
The first Faction was that of the Queen-Mother's, or rather of Cardinal Mazarine's; for the Court minded nothing but how to uphold this State|Minister of an uncorrupted Loyalty, totally bent to maintain the Kings Authority against the too great power of the Princes of the Bloud, and of others, which is suspitious in an absolute Empire, such as is that of France. The end of these was to keep the Duke of Espernon in the Government of Guienne, intending to keep those Subjects in obedience, and to stave off all Novelties which might arise from another Governour, whom they might affect, and who might depend upon them. It was thought to be a lesser evil to fall into a troublesome War, than to abandon the King's Authority to the Will of a proud and contumatious people, and for their pleasure to turn away that faithful Officer. To foment the Provencialists underhand, and to insist in not having the Count of Alets any longer for their Gover|nour, as being too neer a kin to Cond, to the end that by bereaving him of that leaning-stock, his power might be the less: To keep the Duke of Orleans still in good correspondency with the Regent, and jealous of Con|de's greatness, by the means of the Abbot della Riviere, who was promised to be made Cardinal: To seek out all means to moderate the Duke of Beau|fort's anger by the Dutchess of Monbason's means, winning her over by promise of Honour and Advantage; to the end that by recovering him into his duty, they might do the like to the Parisians, by whom he was seconded: To cross the Parliaments pernitious designes: To ballance Cond his vast thoughts: To cool their heat who were set upon Interest and Ambition; and finally, to maintain Regal Authority, and to win time till the King came of years, whereby all their pretences who were desirous to better their For|tunes were rendred plausible.
The second Faction was that of the Duke of Orleans, which was chiefly guided by the Abbot della Riviere, in whom he did totally confide, though he were hated by the Dutchess Margueret his Wife, and by Madamoselle. Their ends were to unite themselves to the Queen, hoping to marry Ma|damoselle to the King, as they were held in hope by the Court; as well as was the Dutchess, who intended that the King should marry her eldest Daughter. And the Dukes Family being Rival to that of Cond, they

endeavour'd to lessen the Credit and Crandezza thereof. This contrariety proceeded in part from the jealousies which use to be between great Ladies, as were those of the Family of Orleans, and those of Cond's and Longue|ville's Family. And to these Factions did several Princesses and Ladies of great Quality, and many highly qualified Lords adhere.
The third Faction was that of the Prince of Cond, Prince of Conty, and of the Duke and Dutchess of Longueville; whose ends were so to for|tifie themselves with Governments of Provinces, and strong Towns, du|ring the Kings yet two years remaining Minority, as that when the King should be become of years, they might be able of themselves to resist and withstand any opposition which might be made against them. It is known that the Grandezza of the Princes of the Bloud hath always been suspected by the absolute and independent Dominion of a Monarch; as had been observed in the times of the precedent Kings by the imprisonment of almost all the Princes of Cond, and lately under the Administration of Cardinal Richlieu; who, during the time of his supream Authority, became Arbitra|tor of the Lives and deaths of the most conspicuous men of the Kingdom. To this was added their being able to keep Cardinal Mazarine from esta|blishing himself in his Employment by Marriage and Governments; and though he should be still in the Administration, to keep him low and weak, as well because that no other French Subject of haughty thoughts might succeed him, as that wanting a considerable Leaning-stock, he might be the more exposed to depend totally on them.
The fourth Faction was that of the Frondeurs, whereof the Duke of Beaufort, and the Coadjutor, were the chief Heads: and it was fomented by the Dutchess of Chevereux, and the Dutchess of Monbason; by divers Presidents and Councellors of Parliament, and by almost all the people of Paris. Their designe was to lessen the Cardinals Authority, to increase their own, and to make their Faction powerful. The Coadjutor was in high hopes hereof, being thereunto perswaded by the example of his Pro|genitors, who had had the administration in the Regency of other Queens who had been Forreiners; which not being to be done whilst the Cardi|nal was at the Helm, they sought out pretences how to colour their calum|nies wherewith they aspers'd him, and flattered the people with hopes of bettering their condition: the Parliament and people proceeding by these means, infused distrust into the Parisians, comforted those of Bourdeaux, and seeking how to disorder affairs, resolved to put all things into confu|sion; so as the King being bound to dismiss the Cardinal, they might effect their intents.
Not to omit touching upon what the Forces of these four Factions were: That of the Cardinal was fortified by the Kings Authority, by the obe|dience of all the Provinces of the Kingdom, except those that were go|verned by Princes of the adverse party; by all the Veterane Troops, by all the strong holds, by the Officers of the Crown, by all the Courtiers and Nobless of the Crown, who reverence nothing but the name of King.
The Duke of Orleans party aimed at nothing but at the Grandezza of the Abbot de la Riviere, who being named by the King to be a Cardinal at the first election of Cardinals, did nothing but caress the Court and Cardinal, to keep them from altering their mindes. And though the Court intended him not that honour, left the Duke of Orleans might have a Fa|vourite of equal dignity with the Queens Favourite, yet it proceeded dextrously, to gain the advantage of Time. The Abbot not diving into

the depth of the business, press'd the Queen continually to use all conve|nient means at Rome for his preferment; but he was not aware that the Instrument he made use of was that which wounded him; for the more the Court of France did desire this honour for la Riviere, the Pope did the more retard this promotion, to avoid giving this satisfaction to Cardi|nal Mazarine, with whose Interest he thought it did comply, that the Abbot might be decored with that dignity, without which his concern|ments would be ruined: For the Pope was not very well disposed towards the Cardinal, for reasons that shall be said in their proper place. Yet the Pope had not refuse'd to nominate him, and the Abbot received visits in L'Hostelle d'Orleans, where he lived, from the Pope's Nuntio, with great applause and approbation, as if he had already been made Cardinal. And though many said that this was done by Mazarine's cunning, and not with the Queens intention; yet as men are easily lull'd asleep with Songs which please them, the Abbot wanted the Courts wariness; for being free from all suspition, he was so well perswaded of himself, as he believed that if there were any thing in hand at Court prejudicial to him, it would be found out by the Cavalier de la Bene, and by others his friends which he kept at Rome as Agents to the Duke his Patron, to sollicite this his Promotion.
This nomination of Cardinalship succeeded in the year 1648, and it was effected by the Queen, being withstood much by the Court. When the King was returned to Paris, Cond's Family having prevailed with Conty to become an Ecclesiastick, they pretended to the name given to la Riviere for Conty; were it either that he did really desire that dignity, or that by abandoning that pretension he might get some greater advantage.
Upon the hearing of this, the Abbot employed the Duke of Orleans to the getting of what was promis'd him, and made him withdraw to Limours; threatning, that if they failed him, he would go into Languedock. The Queen was much troubled hereat, and was forced to perswade the Princes to yield to the said pretension; shewing them, that Conty being a Prince of the Blood, it made but little for his reputation to be made a Cardinal at the King's nomination, as was usual to the Subjects of France: but that it ought to be done for his extraordinary Merit, and for his Birth. So as Cond being willing to satisfie the Queen, and yet not to lose his right to the Cardinalship, it was agreed upon between them, that her Majesty should write to the Pope, and desire Conty's promotion as Extraordinary; which if the Pope should deny, then Conty should be nominated for Cardinal instead of la Riviere; and that the Queen should declare, that when a Prince of the Blood should pretend to such a dignity, all others were to give way. The difference being thus adjusted, the Duke of Orleans returned to Paris, where not long after the Abbot was made a State-Minister, and was upon all occasions caressed by the Cardinal, and by Cond.
The third Faction, which was Cond's, was onely to establish himself upon sound foundations, seeking onely some pretensions to effect it: He was Governour-General of Berry, and of the City and great Tower of Bourges the Metropolis of that Province. He had therein many Fee|farms and Vassals, besides the strong Castle of Montrond, which was well provided, and well Garrison'd by him. He was likewise Governour-Ge|neral of Burgundy, and of the Castle of Dijon the Metropolis thereof, scituated upon the River Ousche, wherein he had also many Fee-farms and Vassals; besides the Town of Belgarde, (with the Title of the Dukedom) sufficiently Garrison'd, upon the River Sone. He was Governour of Ver|dune,

and of St. Ione de l' Aune, places of importance for scituation, but meanly Garrison'd; and he treated by leave from the Queen, to make himself Governour of the important Town and Castle of Ausone, as you go from Dijon to Dole. He also had the Government of Steney, and Cler|mont, strong and considerable places. He was Governour-General of Compeigne, and had newly obtained from the Queen the Government of Danvilliere a noble Town in Luxemburg, lately before won by the French, wherein Monsieur di Rochefaucault, Brother to Prince Marsilliack (who was Governour of Poictou) was Governour. His Sisters Husband the Duke of Longueville was Governour-General of Normandy, and parti|cularly of the City and Castle of Caen, and of the City and Castle of Diepe, a considerable Sea-Haven; and he had therein also many Fee|Farms and Vassals. The Marquiss of Beveron, who was a great friend of his, was Governour of the old Town of Roan; and his Couzin Count Mattignon Governour of Granville, and of Cherburg, both Sea-Havens; and these were the two Lieutenant-Generals of the same Province: he prest continually for the Government of Pout d'Arck upon the Seine, two Leagues from Roan: Marshal de Brese, Cond's Father-in-law, was Gover|nour-General of Anjou, and of the Castles and City of Angiers, the Me|tropolis thereof; and of Saumeur. The Count d' Alets, Cond's Kinsman, was Governour of Provence; who kept in Arms in that Province against his Enemies; and being by the Inhabitants made Master of Toulon, he kept his Regiment of Foot in Garrison there, after Monsieur di Garniere's death, and behaved himself as Governour.
This was the strength of the third Faction, to the which many great Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom did adhere, who were friends to these Princes; and who did publickly aver, that they did it merely to mo|derate the Cardinal's greatness, upon whom they laid all foules. And to make himself yet stronger, Cond, though he had not first consented to the Marriage of Duke Mercoeur with Madamoselle Mancint, yet by means of such as were friends to them both, he made the Duke of Vendosme be told, that he was a Prince of such Birth and Morit, as he might justly pretend to be Admiral, without consenting that his Son should marry the Cardinal's Niece; and that if he would gainsay it; and joyn with his Interests, he would carry affairs so, as that he should be Admiral; and that he being one who loved the Honour of the Princes of France, he was unwilling that the house of Vendosme should match so far beneath it self. He spoke here|of without any manner of respect, though it were a question whether he did it out of ill will to the Cardinal, or to prejudice the Duke of Vendosme, with whom it was known he was not upon good terms. It was also thought that he endeavoured to slave off Candale from considing in Mazarine: but the Court being already too much engaged with his Father the Duke of Espernon, who was kept by the Cardinal in the Government of Guienne, for the reasons aforesaid, he could not effect his desire. So as considering that the Countess of Martinozza's Marriage could not be ef|fected without restoring Espernon to Bourdeaux, he publickly opposed it, fomenting the Parliament, the Inhabitants and chief men of the City, to insist upon his removal. In the Kings Council he did publickly defend the Bour|delois, condemning Espernons violent proceedings; with Words likelier to foment Discord than to make Peace. And to hinder that the Go|vernment of Provence might not fall upon some one too pleasing to the Court, he defended his Kinsman the Count of Aletz against the Parlia|ment and City of Aix, not onely by express Letters, and by particular

Promises, but in State-Consultations, and with threats against the Depu|ties of that Province, who complained continually against their Gover|nour.
Finally, the more to hinder Mercoeur's Marriage, and to bereave Ven|dosme of the hope of being Admiral, he made Marshal Breze demand the Admiralty, as Father to the Duke of Breze, who had been slain in the Kings service; supposing that Vendosme would not condescend to that Alli|ance without the said Charge: and he moreover wrought it so, that his Father-in-law, the said Marshal, sold the Government of Anjou to the Duke of Rohan, Chabot, who was his great friend.
As for the fourth Faction of the Frondeurs, they seemed to minde no|thing but the Cardinal's Ruine, either by making him be banish'd the King|dom, or by making him be seditiously slain by the people; by which they thought to advance their private fortunes.
Duke Beaufort was resolved to keep in favour with the people, with whom he did publickly contend against the Court. And the Frondeurs endeavoured to draw more Citizens and others over to their party, know|ing themselves to be of themselves too weak to contend against the other Factions. The Coadjutor, who thought himself fit for any employment, how great soever, and longed to get into employment, and to get the dig|nity of Cardinal, did so wisely carry his affairs, as, though he was a great Confident of Duke Beaufort's, and the chief counsellor of his party; yet he sought privately how to fall in sometimes with the Cardinal, sometimes with the Prince of Cond; that so if he might be able to pull down one of them by means of the other, he might easily afterward effect his end, which was to destroy them both, and to become sole Arbitrator of all things himself. The Cardinal, who cunningly penetrated into the depth hereof, defended himself dextrously from these the Coadjutor's seigned semblances; who growing sorry for it, sought for protection to Cond, that they might both joyn in extirpating the Cardinal; which if it should succeed, it would not be hard for him to overthrow Cond, who was to this purpose extraordinarily reverenced by the chief Frondeurs; especially after his return to Paris from Compeigne: and truly he might be said then to have Fortune by the Forelock. For had he embraced this opportunity, he would have become very powerful, by adding the Authority of the Frondeurs and that of the Parliament of Paris to that Renown which he had already gotten. But were it either that he feared he might make way for others to compass their ends, or that being of a noble and generous minde be hated cozenage and double dealing, he would not go so far a|bout, but governed himself according as occasions did arise, to attain to what conduced most to his ends.
Some maligne Star seemed to have influence every where; for after Tu|mults had been raised in many parts of Europe, they came to France, and afterwards to the City of Liege. The Troubles which arose there were occasioned by the Citizens denying to pay the 60000 Crowns which fell to their share in the Peace which was concluded the year before, by their not admitting of the Coadjutor, being sent by the Elector of Culen, under whose jurisdiction Liege was; and for that it was discovered those Citi|zens had a designe to chuse the Prince of Conty for their Coadjutor.
Wherefore the Elector finding it now a fitting time to reduce that City to its devoire, whilst it was divided; he sent General Spor thither with 6000 men, who entring those Territories in Hostile manner, the Ligeois and those those that confin'd upon them took up Arms, obliging the

Elector's men to War; which began by their falling upon Fleron, a Vil|lage about a League from Liege, which was presently stormed and burnt. Iuppole, another great neighbouring Village, made stout resistance; for being fortified, and defended by many Citizens who marched out with Monsieur Hannet, they manfully withstood two Assaults; but not being able to withstand the third, it was also taken and fired, with the death of Hannet, and of as many as were in it. Then the Electorals encamped in the Monastery of the Carthusians, not far from the City. They burnt Amerceny; planted their Cannon before Corvillion, a little Town which commanded it; took the Cloisters of St. Giles, and placing their men in Battle-aray, began to batter the Walls, though the Besieged, being a War|like people, did with great and frequent Salleys endeavour to keep the Enemy aloof. Here was Colonel Arar slain, who was of great experience, and much beloved by the Souldiers: many other of the best Inhabitants were slain here likewise. The Electorals were still sollicitous in advan|cing the Siege, fearing left the Hollanders might come in to the relief. They set upon the Abby of St. Lorence, which was fortified by the Ligeois, and guarded by 300 men; but were repulsed with much loss both then, as also a second time; but being wearied out by many reiterated Assaults, and by the death of many of them, and not being relieved by the City, the Abby was taken by Storm the same day, all the Souldiers were slain, the Abbot and all the Monks were taken prisoners, as held to have holden intelligence with the Besieged. The Citizens being hereby as much terri|fied and dejected, as they at first appeared stout and courageous; and be|ing much more cast down by the disagreement of many amongst them|selves, who held private intelligence with the Enemy; they demanded a suspension of Arms for six days, which was granted them but for 24 hours, a sufficient time to treat of and conclude such a business: In which time one of the Burgomasters, and some others who sided with the Ele|ctor, opened the Bridge-gate privately, and let in the Baron of Linden Go|vernour of Huy, with 4000 armed Men, who were placed in several parts of the City, not meeting with any opposition, save a little in St. Mark's place, where the most seditious amongst the people made a Head: But being quickly overcome, and their Captain slain, they soon run some one way, some another; so as the Electorals made sure the City, took Bur|gomaster Hennet Prisoner, who was Brother to him that was slain whilst he defended the aforesaid Village, made the Regiments of Spor and Golte|quer enter the City, by which they became absolute Masters thereof. And thus did this Insurrection end, with the Imprisonment of Burgomaster Bartlet, to the great glory and advantage of the Elector. The aforesaid Prisoners were condemned to die, as chief Authors of the Tumult; but Bartlet ransom'd his life at a great sum of Money. Hennet and two other of his Companions had their Heads struck off; and the City was sin'd, to keep from being Sack'd. The Elector came thither afterwards; and to keep them from the like Rebellion, he took all the Chains from the Streets, and gave order for the building of two Citadels: And thus did this War end.
At the same time that these things hapned in these parts, new Broils were heard of in Italy; for Pope Innocent being resolved to force the Duke of Parma to pay the Creditors of Monti Farnest, which he was not able to do, by reason of the great expence the Duke his Father had been at in the late Wars; in Ianuary this year some Commissaries of the Apostolick Chamber were sent to Borghetto, a Town in the State of Castro,

and carried with them four Companies of Souldiers, to put the Sentence in execution which was made against the said Duke in behalf of the Dut|chess of Nerula; who being withstood by the people of Parma, and made to return without doing any thing, such distastes grew thereupon, as did by degrees increase, and were much increased by the assassinate which was committed on the Bishop of Castro as he went to his own resi|dence, though it hapned against the Duke's will; for hereupon open War broke forth: Duke Ranuccio did what he could to stave it off; and the Pope declaring that his designe was onely to gather in the approaching Crop, to satisfie the Montesti therewith, the Duke professed much respect and reverence to his Holiness; listning to all Proposals of Agreement, be|ing as desirous thereof, as the way was easie, if the Declarations which came from Rome had been (as those of Parma said) as sincere in effect, as they were in appearance: for since it was civil Interest that was trea|ted on, they thought the Pope might not make it criminal; and that in|stead of spending his Men and his Money against a Prince who was obse|quious to the Holy Church, he might with more glory have employ'd them against the Enemies of Christ and of the Catholick Faith. The Duke offered to disburse as much money as the pretended Harvest would come to; and did at the same time desire his Holiness, that touching the lapsed Fruits, if it should be found that he were liable to the payment thereof, they should be added to the whole sum; which he promis'd to pay, toge|ther with Interest, within the space of twelve years. To these Proposals the Pope answered sometimes in one manner, sometimes in another: and though he gave out that he had given order to the great Duke's Embassa|dor to pretend onely to such payments as were due whilst the State of Castro was in possession of the Family of the Fernesses; It was at last re|solved, that the Duke should be bound to make payment for the whole time, though the Apostolick Chamber had possessed the State during the late War. Whilst these Treaties were on foot, and that the Pope declared he inten|ded not to take Castro, not to suffer any Hostility to be done in the State, his Forces were no sooner entred thereinto, but they did the quite contra|ry; they fate down before Castro, commanded by the Counts David Vid|man, and Girollimo Gabriele. The Duke being loth to lose it, and fin|ding that the Great Duke's Negotiation, nor that of Cardinal Albernots, and of the Marquiss Caracene in the name of his Catholick Majesty did no good, raised some Forces in the Territories of Parma and Piacenza, and resolved to go to the relief thereof: the same Gaufredi and Count Francisco Baiardo led on his Forces; who advancing by the way of Vastalla, and Mirandola, toward the River Lens in the Bullonese, with no little terrour to those Inhabitants; they were met by the Church-Army commanded by Marquiss Matthei, accompanied by the Marquiss Villa, and the Marquiss Tassoni; and coming together on the 13th of August, neer the Town St. Pietro in Cassal, those of Parma were routed after five hours fight, and Gaufredi was forced with little honour to return to the Territory of Parma with the remainder of his worsted Army: whereat the Duke was highly offended, especially for that he had heard that Gaufredi had abused the Duke's Name upon many occasions; and that amongst other things, he had put the Bishop of Castro to death; he made him be imprison'd in the Castle of Piacenza, where Process being made against him, and he being convinced of inexcusable Faults, he was in publick view beheaded.
Gaufredi was Son to a Physitian of a little Town in Provence called Ciutal; and being by his Wit gotten to be Secretary to Duke Edward, he

got to have the whole power in the Court; and in this his greatness, giving distaste to the Dutchess and chief Lords of the State, he drew upon him that envy which usually attends so violent a Fortune as was his; and in|stead of altering his haughtiness with the death of his Master, he still grew prouder under the Duke his Son, whom he did totally govern, in despite of his Mother, and of the great ones of the Court: and confiding in this his prosperity, he fancied to be a General, though he had never been a Souldier; and to go with these well-appointed Forces to frighten Rome, as the Duke of Bourbon had done. But at his first encounter with the Church-forces, he ruined that Enterprize and his Fortune; being dazled with the splendor of that Ambition, which always, when unaccompanied with the lustre of Birth, proves dark and cloudy.
Sauson Arsinelli Governour of Castro, who till then had defended the Town valiantly, despairing of Relief by reason of this unfortunate encoun|ter, parlied on the first of September, and surrendered the Town upon as honourable and advantageous terms, as in like cases are given to men of Honour: He delivered up the Town and State into the Popes hands, whose Garrison entred thereinto; and his Holiness became Master thereof without any more ado.
And though by this Surrender all Hostility should have ceased, yet the differences between the parties pretending was not so quickly husht: For the Pope being resolved that the Duke should not onely pay and dis|charge the Fernesan Debts, but that he should be further proceeded against, for having made opposition by way of Arms; they did still continue. At last, all the Spanish Agents, together with the Great Duke, being be|come Mediators, and being desirous to oblige the said Duke, left he might desperately throw himself into the hands of the French, the Agreement was made by their means; the State of Castro remaining in the Pope's pow|er till the said Principal should be satisfied by the Duke; which was not without some prejudice to the esteem which France was then in in Italy, since the Princes thereof were forced to have recourse to Spain, whose reputation the greater it grew, the more did that of the French lessen, who were not less prejudiced by Duke Charles of Mantua his joyning in straigh|ter alliance with the House of Austria, whilst thereby he left depending upon France, as he had till then done, and in all reason ought still to do. But not foreseeing such an inconveniency, were it either out of unadvisedness, or that he thought to keep the Duke in awe by the Town of Cassal, or that there were not therein then any Marraigeable Princesses; for Madamoselle d'Orleans had no minde thereunto, as being unwilling to marry into Italy, where she might not enjoy that Liberty and Freedom which is allowed in France; the Duke might do what he pleased. Wherefore he married with Donna Isabella Clara of Austria, Arch-Dutchess of Inspruch, in Iune this pre|sent year; which made a straight tie afterwards between these two Houses. For the Emperour Ferdinando being a Widower, and being to marry the third time, he pitched upon the Sister of the said Duke of Mntua, whom he married the next year, 1650. Both which Brides as they pass'd to their Husbands, went through the State of Venice, where they were en|tertained throughout all that Dukedom with such Splendor and Magnifi|cence, as the Commonwealth is accustomed to do upon like occasions.
A Match was formerly treated of between the Emperour and Madamo|selle d'Orleans, who had a great desire to be either Empress or Queen; not thinking that her Princely Endowments ought to match beneath her birth. Monsieur di Mondevergne was sent upon this occasion to Caesar's Court,

whose Negotiation failing, Monsieur di Saugeon was sent thither in the year 1649, under pretence of visiting her Brother Francis Duke of Lorain, who was then at the Emperours Court, where he tarried some moneths, and had many Conferences with Count Trautmendorp, making chiefly use of the Lantgrave of Hessen, and of the Jesuites, with whom he used all means to effect it, first with Caesar, and afterwards with the King of Hun|gary; but the Spaniards mar'd all, with whose Interests the Marriage did not comply.
Whilst affairs went thus here, the Spanish Fleet, which being comman|ded by General Pimento, failed from Naples toward Catalonia, on the end of August came before Oneglia upon the Coast of the Ligustick Sea, between Monaco and Finale, belonging to the Duke of Savoy; where lan|ding some Souldiers, they drew neer the Town, and forc'd the astonished Inhabitants, who wanted Garrisons and Fortifications, to receive in a Spa|nish Garrison. Upon news whereof, the Spaniards, who were already in the field upon the confines of Alessandrino, parted suddenly from Montegros|so, intending to make some attempt upon Alba, a City in Montferrate. But some Souldiers being put thereinto by Monsieur St. On, and by Count Verua; they returned towards Ceva, and assaulted the Castle; which be|ing valiantly defended by Count Alexander Bogerello Governour of the Town, and by Count Mauritio Santi who commanded the Fort, they were withstood, and at last forced for want of Victuals to retreat by night; and on the 15th of the said moneth were fallen upon in the Rear by some French Troops, who shew some of them.
The loss of Oneglia troubled the Savoyards, by reason of the disturbance which it caused unto all the neighbouring parts. Wherefore Marquiss St. Damiano Governour of Villa Franca, and Marquiss Omberto Governour of Mondoni, knowing that there were but 400 Souldiers in it, came before it with certain Forces which they had drawn out of their own Garrisons, and out of the neighbouring parts, and recovered the Town. The Go|vernour retreated to the Castle, where wanting necessary Provisions, he was forced to surrender by the diligence of these Gentlemen: the Spa|niards designes were thus interrupted; who got much advantage in Cata|lonia by reason of the troubles in France.
The necessity grew still greater in Catalonia, by reason of a general Famine that was there; and civil Discords were augmented in France; wherefore the Spaniards had hopes to make full acquisition of that Province. To which purpose, having given forth order for new Levies in the State of Milain, Kingdom of Naples, Germany, and Flanders, they also rigged out a Fleet at Sea. As soon as they had mustered an Army of 7000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, commanded by General Iohn di Garay, Lieutenant-Ge|neral Tuttaville, and by the Duke d'Albuquerke General of the Horse, with 17 pieces of Cannon, and requisite. Ammunition; they marched about the end of September to Ionneda neer las Borgias; from thence to Splaga in Calno; it not being known whether they meant to march towards Cerve|ra, or to fall down into the Valley of Tarragona; which made Count Mar|sin, who was General of the French in Catalonia, equally to fortifie all the Frontiers, to keep them from being attempted by the Enemy; who after having tarried two days at Splaga, fell upon and took Monblank, and took 80 Foot of Fabrick's Brigade Prisoners; which made the French advance suddenly to Sarcall, with 1500 Foot drawn cut of the Garrisons of Cerve|ra, Arbecca, and Ballaguer, and with all the French and Catalonian Horse, advancing afterwards to Pira, half an hours march from the Spanish

Camp; with intention either to hinder, or to protract their passing into the Vale of Aragon, by the Hill of Cabra, as they seemed willing to do; and here there pass'd many Skirmishes between the Horse, which were ad|vanced. But the French not being in a condition to keep at Pira, they re|treated to Rochefort: Whereupon the Spaniards falling down without any hindrance into the Vally of Taragona, they on the third of October as|saulted Constantine, and in three days took it, though it were stoutly defen|ded by the Garrison; and at the same time they fell also upon Salo, which is seated upon the Sea-side, and took it by assault, wherein almost all the Defendants were slain, and the rest were taken Prisoners, together with the Governour Monsieur Benjamin, who was Wounded in six places. From thence the Spanish Army marched toward Les Panades, seeming to have a designe upon Barcellona; which Marsin suspecting, he sent 800 Horse thitherward, commanded by Monsieur di Nestiere, together, with the Foot-Brigadoes of Champagnia, Auvergne, and Montpallion, and 200 Switzers, giving order that they should be in readiness, and that when they should see the Spaniards were ready to fall upon that City, they should go in to recruit it. Garay advanced without any opposition; and his Army being strong, and well provided of all things, he set upon and took Serges, four Leagues from Barcellona: and he might easily have effected his intent upon Barcellona, had it not been for the vigilancy of Don Iu|sippe Marguerite Governour of that place, and of Monsieur di Mark Bi|shop of Caserans, who discovered the intelligence which the Spaniards held in that City, for which above 200 persons were put out of it. And all other things were diligently provided for, particularly the Fortifica|tions of Mongovich, and Guards of the Maritime parts, where there was most suspition, whilst the Spanish Navy was upon those Coasts, upon pretence of carrying the Queen from Genoua to Finale. Servera, Camarassa, Braedes, Falset, and other Townes of the Vally of Arum were likewise fortified: and moreover, in 15 days space above 4000 Country-people were armed; who were all Friends to France, and bitter Enemies to the Spani|ards.
General Marsin sent the Marquis of Fara afterward with four Regi|ments of Horse to quarter at Villa Franca two Leagues distant from Sirges, that he might there observe the proceedings of the Enemy, with orders notwithstanding to retreat if they should make towards him; which the Duke of Albuquerk did with most of the Catholick Horse: whereupon the said Marquis got to Horse betimes, and without confusion retreated to Martorel, after having been charged by the Spaniards; in which Bicker|ing all the French Commanders did signalize themselves, and in particu|lar Viscount Larbusle, who together with divers other Officers and Soul|diers were Wounded. Duke Albuquerke did also behave himself valiant|ly, having his Horse killed under him; and Don Gaspero de la Cueva and three other Captains were slain neer him.
Don Iuseppe Marguerite had in this interim conveyed divers Writings into the Enemies Camp, containing promise of Pasport and Moneys to all that would withdraw from the Spanish service; so as after the last encoun|ter the Enemies ran so fast away, (for their sufferings were great) as their Army was much diminished.
Marsin quartered afterwards near St. Andrea; and thinking that the Spaniards might go into the Panades, to get new intelligence again in Bar|celona; and not finding himself strong enough to fight them, nor to force them to remove, he resolved to effect it by a powerful diversion in the

Kingdom of Valenza. Wherefore he sent Don Iusippe d' Ardene into those parts with 3000 fighting men, who entring without any opposition, over|ran a great part of the Country; which General Garay understanding, he suddenly embarqued 3000 men for Vineros; and leaving his Baggage and Artillery at Taragona, he drew the Garrisons out of Montblank and Sirges, and marched himself towards Villabodin, and from thence into the parts of Lerida, being pursued by the French, who did somewhat prejudice his Rear by reason of his slow march; and peradventure he might have fared worse, had not D'Ardena been far off with his Forces, who brought nothing with him into Catalonia by his over-running the Kingdom of Valenza, but that contagious Disease, which did afterward ruine almost that whole Principality.
This years Campagnia being thus ended in Catalonia, whilst all were in their Winter-quarters, and whilst the French studied no less to surprize Taragona, than did the Spaniards Barcelona; Iusippe Arbose a Notary of Taragona, advertised Marsin that there were not above 400 Souldiers in Garrison in that City; that he the said Arbose had above 80 Catalonians who were his Friends there, who when the French should possess themselves of a Gate, they would take up Arms against the Garrison.
He therefore went from Barcellona, seeming as if he went to view his Quarters neer Villa Franca, five miles distant from Taragona, and carried with him 800 Foot, and some Horse; and marching by night, came before the Town on St. Ierom's Hermitage side, upon a Hill within Musquet-shot of the City, by which advantage he sheltered his Foot and Horse. He advanced 500 Horse to a high place which was sheltered by the same Hill, to hearten those that were to possess the Gate; towards which the said Arbose, one Catalonian, and five French marched in Country-habits, with ten Mules loaded with Meal, as Provisions which were usually carried into the Town; which the Sentinel who was upon the Wall perceiving, he gave the accustomed Signe, whereby they were permitted to the first and second Portcullices; but as they were to enter the third, and that se|ven Souldiers that were of the Guard would have opened the Great Gate, the Sentinel observing that some of those supposed Country-people did not answer well in the Catalonian Tongue, cried out that they were French; yet he would advance and possess himself of the Wicket: but the Guard coming in when they heard the moise, they were forced to retreat, and slew the Sentinel with a Pistol-shot: Those who were privately advanced to assist these men, hearing the Pistol go off, which was the Signe given for them to advance, they did so; but were slain or stop'd by the Spaniards, and had their Mules taken. And Marsin, hearing the sinister chance, re|treated to Barcellona on the 15th of Ianuary, throughout which whole City it was noised that the Enterprize had taken; as certainly it would have done, had they taken Catalonians instead of the French.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.1650. The FOVRTH BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The Prince of Cond declares himself dissatisfied with Cardinal Mazarine, joyns with the Frondeurs; then repents, and makes his Peace again. The discontented party endeavour to raise seditions in Paris. A Musquet is discharged at Councellor Jolly. An Assassinate against Cond is sus|pected, whereof the Frondeurs are accused: The Prince resents it, and en|deavours to have the persons guilty punished, accusing the Duke of Beau|fort and Coadjutor as the Principals: They endeavour to excuse themselves, and remove his jealousies, but in vain; whereupon they joyn with the ad|verse party. The Marriage between the Duke of Richlieu and the Mar|chioness of Pons is concluded, at which the Court is much dissatisfied. The Dutchesses of Cheveuse and Anguillon being highly offended with the Prince of Cond as the principal Agent therein, plot his Ruine. New Commotions arise in Paris, and the Princes of Cond, Conty, and Duke of Longueville are Imprisoned. The Abbot de la Riviere loses the Duke of Orleans his favour. Divers Noblemen declare for the Princes. Count Marsin is Imprisoned in Catalonia. There follow many changes of Gover|nours, and the Chancellor falls into the disfavour of the Court. The King goes into Normandy, and from thence to Burgundy. Some Towns in Berry, by the Count D'Aignon his means, put themselves under the Kings obedience. Belgarde is taken by the Royalists. The Dutchess of Longueville retires into Flanders, Thence to Stenay, and, together with Marshal Turenne, concludes a League with the Spaniards. The Princess of Cond is received at Bourdeaux; and that Parliament declares for the Princes. The King makes preparation for his going to Guienne, and the War against Bourdeaux is renewed. The Duke of Orleans demands to have the Imprisoned Princes brought to the Bastile: He is pacified, and there happens divers accidents in Paris. The War in Catalonia continues, and the Spaniards make great preparations for fomenting the Civil War in France.

AMidst these so many various Interests and pretences of the differing parties, there hapned a new and unexpected Accident, which had like to have turned topsie-turvy, not the Court onely, but also the whole Kingdom of France; in regard the Prince of Cond pretending that the Cardinal at the Conference touching the Peace at Paris, had promised the Government of Pont de L' Arche unto his Brother-in-law the

Duke of Longueville, and he denying it, was so highly incensed and dis|quieted, that he declared, He was resolved to come no more at Court whilst the Cardinal was Minister of State, or in the Kingdom: Which occasioned so great a confusion, as the like hath hardly been at any time. Great was the concourse of the Cavalry, Gentry, and persons of all sorts, to Cond's house; who according to his wonted custom speaking publickly and pas|sionately against the Cardinal, protested, He would never more have friend|ship with him: which Expressions, together with his other Carriage, gain|ed him the favour of the common people, who were possessed with sinister opinions, and greedily desirous of new things; and also purchased for him the good Wishes of the Parliamentarians, to whom divisions in the Royal Family were welcome; so as he found himself presently in a con|dition of being able to make good his pretensions, and to disorder and over|throw the whole frame of the Government.
The Frondeurs were the onely persons who made no application to him, although the Quarrel were against their greatest Enemy; because having be|fore desired to gain him unto their party, he had (as you have heard) re|fused them. The Prince being a little surprized at it, had recourse unto his Sister Longueville, to the end she by her credit with the Faction, might pre|vail with them to make application to him. This she readily undertook, and wrought so, as the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and all the prin|cipal Heads of the Party, came to visit and make offer of their service to him, they being very sensible of the advantage might thereby accrue unto them, in being able, when joyned with him, to overthrow the Cardinal; which of themselves they were not able to perform, and therefore entred into a Confederacy with him, having in appearance onely the same inten|tions, but in truth desiring to make use of his authority in compassing their own particular designes, which were to banish the Cardinal, and re|store the Marquiss of Chasteau Neuf unto the Ministry.
Cond found nothing of difficulty in making a total Union with them, hoping he might by theirs and his own Forces render himself sole Master at Court, and disposer of all Affairs in France; onely this jealousie remain'd, that he might change the Cardinal for Chasteau Neuf his Enemy, which was a thing he no way liked; and therefore he caused Beaufort to be sounded by the Dutchess his Sister, that he might understand whether Beau|fort intended to come with him against the Cardinal without reserve, and to perswade him that after the Cardinal's expulsion, he would continue to espouse his Interests against all his Enemies. The Dutchess endeavoured to perform this, but in vain; because he declared frankly he intended to engage no farther in their Union, but onely for the Cardinals expulsion; and the Coadjutor expressed himself also to the same purpose. The Prince begun then to be sensible of the Frondeurs drift, which was to make use of his Authority for removing of Mazarine; and then instead of leaving him the power, to deprive him also totally thereof; and by the re-esta|blishing of Chasteau Neuf, to draw the sole direction of all matters to them|selves. The Cardinal was grieved the Prince should for so slight a matter become his Enemy; and professed, that rather than he should be the occa|sion of Troubles in the Kingdom, he would renounce all his Fortunes there, and quit his Charge: He refused the Visits and Applications of many per|sons who made tender of themselves; and finally, he declared publickly, That although the Queen should be willing to uphold him against the Prince, and desire his stay in France, yet he would disobey her in that par|ticular, as being more desirous of the Kingdoms quiet, than his own ad|vancement.
In this confusion, there wanted not some persons of Quality who inter|posed for an Accommodation, grounding themselves upon their know|ledge of the Prince's temper; who the more furious and violent he was at first, was by so much the more easily pacified with submissions and re|spectful carriage towards him; and they were the rather perswaded of it, because they knew his generous mind would not endure the extravagant and undecent pretensions of that party. The Duke of Orleans, and Ab|bot de la Reviere (who desired not the Cardinal's destruction, fearing they should thereby increase the Prince of Cond's power, and make the Fron|deurs and Parliament more bold and insolent) contributed their endeavours hereunto, so as the first heats being pass'd over, the Treaties for an Accom|modation were resumed; and as the Prince's minde grew calmer, the Car|dinals Friends gained more and more upon him in their Treaties for an Ac|commodation of the differences between them.
They represented to him, That if Mazarine went away, 'twas necessary to finde some other person in his room; the Queen, the Duke of Orleans, and even the Prince himself, being unable to undergo that perpetual vigi|lance, labour and care, which was necessary for the discharge of that Em|ployment; and in that case there were no persons could be thought on, but the Marquiss of Chasteau Neuf, or Count of Chavigny, both antient and well-experienced Ministers of State. Whereof the later, though acceptable to Cond, would never be admitted by the Queen, who was to allow the person chosen, he having been a creature of the Cardinal Richlieu, and one who had joyned with him in the persecution of her: and Chasteau Neuf liked by the Queen, would never be endured by Cond, as an antient Ene|my to his Family, and one who in the Parliament of Tolouse had been a principal person, and acted as Keeper of the Seal, at the death of Duke Mont|morancy his Mothers Brother. To these considerations, wherewith the Prince was even convinced, was added this, That he foresaw, in case these two should be excluded, a third person was probably to be made choice of, who would be much more harsh and violent: This was the Coadjutor. And unto all this was further urged, That the Duke de Roan gave the Prince hopes Pont de l' Arche should be granted to Longueville: That the dignity of Constable and a good sum of ready Money should be granted to himself. And in fine, they let him see, that if by joyning with the Frondeurs he should banish the Cardinal, the Duke of Beaufort, as Head of that party, would have all the applause and favour of the people; and his authority in Paris, by such a Rival, would be much eclipsed and weakened; and that 'twere therefore better to agree with the Cardinal, from whom a better sa|tisfaction was to be expected, than from any other.
These Reasons were very well approved of by the Prince, who was no friend to Beaufort, or any other that might stand in competition with him, for that Reputation which the nature of his actions had acquired unto him: whereupon advising with his greatest confidents, he considered that the Frondeurs were willing to joyn with him, not out of any desire they had to second his designes, but that they might by his means compass their own; and therefore took a resolution to agree with the Cardinal; which he thought he might then do without loss of Reputation, considering he was in this contest got to be Head of that party, as well as of all others that de|pended on him. This was executed with much speed, and upon very ad|vantageous conditions; the Government of Pont de l' Arche being thereup|on granted to Longueville, and the Cardinal assuring him, he would proceed no farther in the Treaty of Marriage between the Duke of Mercoeur and his Niece.
Such was the end of this difference; the Cardinal kept his Station, the Frondeurs were deluded, the Parliament confounded, and all other the discontented parties were much unsatisfied, especially to see so great a change in less than eight days, without the least notice given of it to any one of those many persons of Quality, who had upon this occasion decla|red for him; whereupon the general hatred, which was in a manner laid a|side, was kindled against Cond much more violently than before, and espe|cially in those, who having thought the difference between him and the Car|dinal would continue, had been too forward in the declaring of themselves; and being now discovered and abused, railed against Cond, taxing him to be a person, who minding onely his own ambitious designes, had no value for his friends, nor consideration of the services which they had done him. But above all, Beaufort and the Coadjutor were most implacably his Ene|mies, they having fancy'd to themselves great matters by his assistance, and the rather, because the Prince said publickly, That he would rather suffer four Mazarines to be Ministers of State, than one Chasteau Neuf; profes|sing, That he had been in much trouble those few days he had been with them, their inclinations being so diametrically opposite to his.
The Frondeurs, and all others being thus disappointed of their hopes of banishing the Cardinal, that which followed was, first, the small respect which Cond seemed to bear towards the Queen, and the first Minister of State; believing the shews of reliance upon him from them, were true, not counterfeit. Secondly, the great dissimulation which the Cardinal used towards him. And thirdly, (which was most of all) the Curses which were generally made against Cond, for keeping in a Minister of State who was generally hated by all persons; and many thereupon presaged the time was drawing on, which might be seasonable to Imprison him, as here|tofore his Father had been, in the Bastile, upon the like conjuncture of af|fairs, by the Marquiss d' Ancre; and there was none but thought the Cardi|nal capable of those Maximes, by which great persons are taught to take such courses, as that a Subject who hath been able once to dispose of all things at his pleasure, should not be continued in such Authority and Power. This came to be the general discourse, so as in all places there was nothing so much spoken of, as of the Princes being clapt up; though there were divers persons who said it was not to be thought the Cardinal (du|ring the Kings Minority) would dare to attempt such a thing against a Prince of his quality, because nothing of that kinde could be effected without the knowledge and consent of the Duke of Orleans, who was President of the Council: and Cond had the Abbot de la Riviere for his Confident; who proud of such an Honour from so great a Prince, assured him that his Royal Highness resolved nothing, and much less of affairs of such importance, without consulting first with him; and therefore he assu|red him he would not fail upon any such occasion to give him notice.
The Cardinal in the mean time was particularly informed of all the Prince's actions, and studied nothing more than some convenient opportunity to in|terrupt his bold designes; and the great difficulties which appeared in the performance of it, rendered him much more fixed in the resolution he had taken to perform it. He considered on the one side the desperateness of the attempt, and the extremity of ruine which would fall upon him if the Prince (who was extreamly jealous of every thing) should come to have the least suspition that he had any thought against him: And on the other side, how ignominious his management of the State would be, if the Authority of the King his Master should, during that time, be impaired

and lessened by the Prince. And in this perplexity he resolved that dis|simulation was the true Sugar he was to use, wherewith to sweeten all his Actions. In order hereunto, he caused presently all his said Nieces to be removed from Court, and shut up in a Monastery of Nuns in the Faux|bourgh of St. Germains, and declared publickly, that his intentious never had been to marry his Nieces in France, for those ends which he was char|ged withal; and therefore he was very glad to give over the thought thereof, his onely drift being to unite the Royal Family against those who endeavoured to raise Dissentions amongst them. This gave a stop to those Discourses which his Enemies had formerly made against him in Paris upon that occasion; But his true end therein, was to put them in a place of safety; so as in ease he should be forced upon any occasion to retire, these Ladies might not be exposed unto the insolencies of an unruly peo|ple, as foreseeing all those artifices which the malice of his Enemies made use of to procure his Ruine.
These passages very much troubled the Leading Men of the Frondeurs, and all the other Malecontents, who saw their party decaying daily by the Residence of the Court (which eclipsed all other Authority) in Paris, and by the agreement between the Prince and Cardinal; and therefore they resolved, by some extraordinary and suddain attempt, to put things unto a hazard before the peoples mindes were wholly quieted; and there|upon to take such resolutions as time and the condition of Affairs should suggest to them.
The Parliament had not in this mean time met since the first of April because all things being quieted by the Peace lately concluded, there had been no occasion for their meeting. The Great Chamber had ended seve|ral differences between the Partisans and their under-Farmers, who refu|sed to pay their Rents, although it were the order both of the King and Parliament that they should do it. In pursuance hereof, the Partisans had caused several of the under-Farmers to be Imprisoned in the Town-house, where they had been restrained for several days. And upon this occasion, the Partisans, to procure payment of their Money, met several times, and in great numbers, in the Town-house; which caused some discourse a|mongst the people, who were very much enclined to Tumults and Sedition. The Chambre de Vacance (upon the motion of the Procurator-General his Substitute) prohibited all kind of Meetings, upon any occasion what|soever, without order from the Magistrate. The Partisans thought them|selves injured by this Order, and presently chose several Deputies, persons of quality, (as Councellors, and Advocates, and Temporal Citizens, a|mongst which were the President Charton, the Councellor Iolly, the Ad|vocate Portait, Monsieur de Constunes a Burgess of Paris, and others) who had Commission to endeavour the ending of this matter without noise or tumult, and to sollicite the payment of the Rents as they grow due, according to the Instructions given them; but the Great Chamber forth|with prohibited this Deputation, and ratified the Decree made by the Chambre de Vacance against all Meetings either in the Town-house or else|where: On the other side, the Chambre de Requestes being moved by the new chosen Deputies, met and confirmed their Commission, declaring that the same could not be made void by any other Authority but that of the Parliament; and the same day some of the Lords meant to give an account thereof to the first President, who having sent for the Provost des Merchands, the Escheuns and Cosuls of the City; there appeared also the Deputies of the Chambre, accompanied with above 00 Partisans,

civil persons, who with much earnestness desired to receive the effect of the King's Declaration, and the Decrees of Parliament made in their fa|vour, and that the Deputies they had chosen might be confirmed. The first President satisfied them with the promise to move it the next day in the Great Chamber; but the President de Coigneux, who endeavoured to make them sensible that this affair was to be treated with more mode|ration, gave great offence, and many cried they would, notwithstand|ing the Decree to the contrary, have a meeting the next Munday in the Town-house; which tending unto an open Sedition, the Archers were commanded to seize upon the principal Authors of the Commotion, a|mongst which they laid hold on de Constunes as a leading man; whereof the Duke of Beaufort complained unto the Duke of Orleans: and on the Mun|day there was a Meeting of many of the Partisans, they being invited there|unto by Printed Billets which were set up at the corners of the Streets all over Paris; 'twas there resolved that a Petition should be presented to the Parliament, for punishment of those by whom de Constunes had been imprisoned, and that in the mean time the Partisans should be taken into the Parliaments protection. The Great Chamber ordered the Petition should be shewed unto the Procurator General, and endeavoured by all means to appease the troubles; but those who designed troubles, that they might compass their intent of bringing things into confusion, upon the 11th of December, as Counsellor Iolly pass'd through the Barnardins Street, there came up to the Coach a single Horseman, who shot a Pistol into it that missed him, but raced the Skin off from his Arm; whereupon he turned his Horse, and fled away without being known. This acci|dent made a great noise in Paris, and all his friends made complaints of it to the Lords of the Great Chamber; but the President Charton, who dwelt hard by, and whom Iolly intended then to visit, upon the first noise of the fact went to the Louvre, and demanded Justice, complaining that the intent was not to assassinate Iolly, but him, and required Justice: and there began the sitting of the Great Chamber, and that of the Tornella ceased. The first President assembled all the Parliament, and direction was by them given to the Procurator-General to make enquiry touching the fact, and that all persons who could give any information concerning it should come in: the Lords de Champront and Domalt two of the Counsellors were de|puted to visit Iolly, and to receive all informations should be brought. Chron was taken into protection, and the Counsellor Brussel voted that the City Gates should be shut up, and Guards put there; but it was carried in the Negative.
During this Assembly of the Lords, the Marquiss de Bellaye, who was a Kinsman to the Duke of Beaufort, and of the Dutchess of Cheveus, en|deavoured to stir up the people, that he might, during the troubles, ad|vance his own factious designes; and being in the great Hall, began to call upon the Burgesses to shut up their Shops, take Arms, and provide for their own safeties, telling them, It was now fit to speak plainly, quit any far|ther dissimulation, and provide for their own safeties. He told them, the Regiment of Guards was drawing together with orders to assassinate Beau|fort, and several other Counsellors of the Parliament: That they had be|gun with de Constunes for having spoken for the publick good. From thence he went unto the Market-place with eight others in his company, where they all used the same discourse; and from thence went to Nostre Dame unto the Coadjutor to give him an account of the Action. He see|med in publick to reprehend them for this action; but the report is, that

in private he encouraged them to proceed, being himself willing to come abroad if he could thereby have brought the people to a Rising; being heard to say in the Court of his own house, What Cruelty is this? what farther security can we now have? But he went not abroad, by reason of the uncertainty of the matter, being loath to declare himself publickly in so scandalous an Affair. From thence Bollay went to Broussel's house, who told him, That he was too furious: And from thence he went unto the Street de Marmoselles, without being able to raise the people any where; many telling him, That if he had any particular Quarrel of his own, he should revenge it himself, without seeking to engage the City in it.
This Marquiss being of a Noble Family, was much troubled with the smalness of his Fortune; and having gained some Reputation in the late Rising at Paris, desired nothing more than some new Troubles, which he hoped might be an advantage to him.
The Queen being advertised of all these Passages, called presently a Council, to advise whether she should go to hear Mass at the Church of Nostre Dame, as she was used to do on Saturdays: But being advertised, whilst the matter was in debate, that all was quiet, she went thither as for|merly, accompanied by the Prince of Cond, and all the Grandees about the Court. At her return she found there the Provost des Marchands, and the Eschevins, who came to assure her of the Towns-mens Loyalty. But the Frondeurs having failed in this their mornings attempt, resolved for their own security to raise another Tumult the same evening: And to that pur|pose assembled in a Piazza that borders upon Pont neus, as being a great thorough Inne, and the shortest way from the Palais-Royal to the Prince of Cond's house in the Rue St. Germains. The Inhabitants thereabouts being troubled to see a Meeting at so unseasonable an hour, sent to know what was the intent of this Meeting, and by whose order it was done? But answer was returned, That it concerned not them to know; and they were not to give them an account of it. Some more curious, not satisfied herewith, pressed to know who they were: And in this contest a Musket was discharged; which made the Dwellers thereabouts take Arms, and caused the Cavaliers to retire themselves over Pont neuf; whereupon all things were quiet.
The news hereof being brought to the Count Servient, he forthwith gave account of it unto the Queen and Cardinal, and also to the Prince, who being then at Court, and upon the first knowledge of it was returning home, had he not been stayed by her Majesty and the Cardinal, who repre|sented to him that those persons could have no other designe in meeting there, but against him, and therefore desired him that he would by no means hazard his person. The Prince was at last perswaded by them, and went to lodge for that night at his Stewards house; but to be satisfied tou|ching the matter, sent home his Coach, accompanied with some of his Ser|vants and retinue: When they came neer Pont Neus, two Horsemen came up with the Coach, but not finding him there, went to that of the Count Duras which followed, and discharged several shot into it, one of which kil|led a Lackey that was in it. This made the Prince (who had designed the destruction of the Frondeurs Faction, that the Heads thereof might not be made use of by the Court to frame a party in opposition to him) readily lay hold on this occasion for the doing of it, by taking this Assassinate to have been intended against him. The Cardinal (who looked on this conjuncture as favourable to the designe he had of making an immortal ha|tred between the Prince and the Frondeurs) laid hold on the occasion, which he managed very dextrously, by making the Prince sensible that all

this was a Plot of the Duke of Beaufort, and the Coadjutor, to take away his life, because by his agreement with the Court he had given a stop to their designes: mean while there having been great talk touching the matter attempted by Bollaye, the Duke of Beaufort brought him unto the Marshal Grammont's House, where the Prince supped, to justifie himself from having had any ill intentions against his person. The Prince answer|ed, he knew not whom to suspect, but could not see Bollaye, since he had endeavoured to make a rising among the people, whereby he had in|curr'd his Majesties displeasure. Beaufort answered, that he was well as|sured Bollaye had not the least ill thought towards his Highness; for which he would be a pledge for him, and if he should appear in the least guilty, would be the first man to punish him. The Prince thanked him; and the Marshal having desired him to stay Supper, he dismiss'd Bol|laye, and sate down with them.
The Signior de Bovillon la Mark Captain of the Guard of Switzers, and Bollaye's Father-in-law, besought the Queen to pardon the action by him done the Saturday before; but her Majesty told him, it was a matter of high consequence, and that therefore she must not stop the course of Justice. The Duke of Orleans returned to Paris the same day, having been sent for by the Queen, to consult touching some fit means to quiet the disturbances begun, and to assist the Parliament in punishing such as upon examination should appear guilty. As soon as the Duke came to Court, there was a private Council held; and the next morning a Letter was sent to the Parliament, giving them orders to make enquiry and pro|ceed against those who had endeavoured to raise Storms in Paris, and to assassinate Iolly; concluding with words full of confidence of their zeal and affection unto his Majesties service, and the publick Peace and quiet of the Kingdom.
Next day the Parliament met, and thither came the Duke of Orleans, accompanied with the Prince, the Dukes of Vendosme, Elboeuse, Mercoeur, Bovillon, and several others, where his Majesties Letter being presented by Monsieur Saintes, was ordered to be read, and registered. The Duke of Orleans thereupon made a handsom discourse touching the present jun|cture of affairs; but the Prince was silent, though 'twas reported he in|tended to enter his complaint in Parliament. The City-Colonels and Cap|tains were all summoned to the Town-house, and commanded not to take Arms, or chain the Streets, without express order from the City-Coun|cil, upon a report which was spread, that the discontented party intended a second rising. The Parliament ordered the restraint of Bollay, of the Advocate Germain, of the Provost de L'Argent, and of Anean a Wine|Merchant; and then the Prince made his own complaint, and demanded Justice for the assassinate designed against him. Her Majesty the same day sent for several of the principal Citizens, and assured them, that the King her Son was very much satisfied with the proof he had now of their Loyalty and Affection towards his service, notwithstanding the great en|deavours used by some factious spirits to raise Commotions. And it was really a great satisfaction to the Court, who thought that Paris would upon the least provocation have risen against them, to finde, that on the contrary the Parisians were very Loyal and affectionate unto his Majesty; and that if the contrary had at any time appeared, 'twas brought about by the false practices of some few seditious persons, who were Enemies to the publick Peace.
The Parliament adjourned then for six days, that those who were to

make enquiries might have time to do it; during which Monsieur de Iolly (upon what occasion it was not known) presented a Petition to the Great Chamber, setting forth that the Assassinate attempted against him being a private action, was no matter of State, nor had any connexion with their crime, who endeavoured to raise Sedition in Paris; and there|fore prayed that his Cause might not be judged in Parliament, but left to be determined in the ordinary Court appointed for the tryal of those Cases; and that he might have leave to proceed there against those who were guilty, and their Complices; adding, that he had now gotten some light touching the matter, and hoped, in case he were left at liberty to proceed freely therein, to make a full discovery thereof. Upon this Peti|tion it was ordered that he should give in his Charge in Parliament, and that the Great Chamber should have the hearing of it.
Upon the 20th of December, all the Chambers being met, there appea|red the Duke of Orleans attended by the Princes of Cond and Conty, the Dukes of Beaufort, Retz, Bresac, and Luynes, the Coadjutor, and o|ther Councellors of Honour, above 20 in number.
This Meeting, and two others, which were held upon the 22th and 24th of the same Moneth, were spent in contests touching the persons who were to be Judges; exceptions being taken against all those who were parties, either as persons against whom the Assassinate was intended, or as favourers of the designe of doing it; amongst which, the Duke of Beau|fort and the Coadjutor were pointed at, so as after several disputes touch|ing that matter, the Assembly broke up without agreeing any thing, and was adjourned till the Wednesday after the Holy-days.
But the Prince was so positively resolved to pursue the resolution he had taken to destroy the Faction of the Frondeurs, that 'twas an easie matter for the Court to gain him with the shew of being troubled at the attempt against him, and render him a mortal Enemy unto the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and the whole Faction of the Frondeurs; who being rendered desperate by this persecution against them for their Lives and Honours, joyned with the Cardinal, as hereafter shall be shewed; and Cond by that means became a prey unto the Court, to be disposed of by them according to their Wills and pleasure.
Great were the Rumours and Discourses then at Paris, because the Court having this opportunity (though they embraced it not) to destroy the Frondeurs, the Queen her self commanded all the Cavaliers, Officers, and others of the Kings Guards, to accompany and serve the Prince as he went to the Parliament or elsewhere; which was done as well to gain Cond by this respect, as also to increase the jealousies between him and the Frondeurs, by such demonstrations of distrust towards them. On the other side, many Gentlemen and Citizens of Quality agreed together to accompany the Duke of Beaufort; by which means Cond, who was of an impatient nature, was much more enraged against him; so as it was a strange thing, that considering the prejudice each party had against the o|ther, the great diversity of Rumours and Reports that were amongst them, and the number of armed Men, some disaster did not happen amongst them: but in this the good nature of the French is to be praised, who after their first Passion is over, love peace and quietness.
It was certainly a great affront unto Beaufort and the Coadjutor, to be suspected as guilty of this Assassinate, there being nothing which doth so neerly touch men of Honour, as those Crimes that reflect upon their reputation; and therefore the more the Prince seemed to give credit unto

that opinion, so much the greater was their hatred to him. But such was the authority he arrogated to himself, and so great a contempt had he for all the Court, that without considering the injury he did unto his Maje|sties Authority, he fell upon another action, which drew upon him the general censure of all persons, and was the ruine of his Fortune. The Duke of Bichlieu, one of the richest persons of the Kingdom, Nephew and Heir unto the Cardinal of that name, was Suitor to the Princess Che|vereux, a young Lady rarely qualified, both for her Birth, and gifts of Nature, and onely Heir unto the Family. The Dutchess of Aiguillon Aunt to Richlieu treated this Marriage, with the consent of the Duke and Dutchess who were the Father and Mother to the young Lady. But she expressing a dislike towards him, the matter was kept in suspence, to the great trouble and affliction of Richlieu: Who making his complaints thereof one day unto the Marchioness of Pons, a Widow, Daughter to the Baron de Virier, under whose care the Dutchess d' Aiguillon his Aunt had put him, he being as yet a Youth not above 18 years of age; the Marchioness advised and comforted the Duke in this affair: but being troubled for his Passion, she chanced to fall into discourse thereof one day with the Dutchess of Longueville her great Confident, who being desirous to advance her friend, suggested to her, that 'twere much the best way for her to marry him her self; that she should not let slip so favourable an oc|casion of becoming Dutchess of Richlieu, and one of the most rich and greatest Ladies of the Kingdom. The Marchioness being thus perswaded to embarque in this affair, wanted not Beauty and other attractives to win upon the tenderness and unexperience of the young Duke, who knowing himself to be under his Aunts care and tuition, so as he had not the free disposition of his own person, had thereupon recourse to the said Dut|chess of Longueville, beseeching her to be an Instrument for the effecting of this Marriage: which the Dutchess, who had a great kindness for the Marchioness of Pons, willingly undertook, and desired the Princes her Brothers to engage themselves in the upholding of it. The Prince of Cond suddainly embraced this motion, and resolved to effect it without acquainting the Court with it; because he knew that if the treaty were discovered, it would be hindered by the Dutchess his Aunt: and although he was sensible he should thereby disoblige the Families of Chevereux and Aiguillon, yet he resolved to proceed in it upon these considerations: First, To oblige thereby and make a friendship with the Dukes of Richlieu. Secondly, To be revenged of the Dutchess of Aiguillon, with whom he had some differences touching the Duke of Breze his inheritance. And Thirdly, To gain thereby an admittance into Havre de Grace, the Duke being Governour of that place of importance; but with this clause inserted by the late King into his Letters Patents, that the Dutchess his Aunt should have the absolute command there till he attained the age of five and twen|ty years.
All things therefore touching this matter being agreed, they went pri|vately unto the Castle of Tria in Normandy, which belongs to the Duke of Longueville, and is distant from Paris about 16 Leagues upon the way to Havre, where in the Prince of Cond's presence the Marriage was cele|brated on the 26th of December; and the next day the Duke and his Spouse went to Havre, where he was received into the Citadel by Monsieur de St. Maur, who was Lieutenant-Governour there to the Dutchess of Aiguillon, and her Kinsman; but knew nothing of this matter: so as the Duke and his new Bride were Masters there, the Souldiers submitting to his Commands out of the respect they bore him.
The Princes of Cond and Conty, from Tria gave an account of the Marriage unto the Queen; and the Dutchess of Longueville writ to ex|cuse her self unto the Cardinal, concluding her Letter with this, That she could not believe he would second the Dutchess of Aiguillon's Caprichio's against a business which was acted by the advice and consent of her whole Family. The Cardinal told Priolo who brought the Letter, that having not been called to Council; he could not meddle with the matter, nor hinder the course of Justice; but was in truth much troubled in his minde at these extravagant proceedings, as well perceiving they tended onely to the setting up of an Authority which he assumed unto himself of giving Laws unto all others; and though he thought it did not much import him whether the Duke Richlieu did marry that or any other Lady, it seemed notwithstanding a very shameful thing, and tending to the great dishonour of his Ministry, that a Prince of the Blood should dare pub|lickly to justifie an action of that nature; and therefore resolved to finde out some expedient for redress thereof. But forasmuch as it is necessary for those who have the conduct of great affairs, to seem ignorant of many things that they see clearly, he took no notice thereof, spoke of it as a Jeast, and so concealed his resentments of the matter, as none at all took any notice of them. He discoursed with Priolo for some time of things indifferent, and dismiss'd him without the least suspition of that which at first (being a discreet person) he had apprehended.
This news being divulged, gave particular occasion for all the Court to take notice of the Princes confidence, and intention to assume all matters to himself; because thereby he not onely undertook to dispose of the Marriage of the greatest Subjects of the Kingdom with so much inequality in respect of their conditions, but also for the jealousie they had of some designe of his upon Havre de Grace, either for himself or his Brother the Duke of Langueville, or at least that Richlieu, being Governour by his Wife, would be won over to his party, together with this Fort; which by reason of its scituation being just upon the mouth of the River of Sei~ne, where it disgorges it self into the Ocean, is a place of huge impor|tance.
These discourses and Apprehensions made the Dutchess of Aiguillon's complaints, for the injury done to the Family of Richlieu, to be much listned unto and resented. This great Lady was Niece unto the famous Cardinal of that name; and being of a great spirit, and endowed with a most exquisite Beauty, and all other perfections both of Minde and Bo|dy, thought it a great affront that any other should underhand strike up a Marriage for her Nephew, she having provided for him so advantageous a party, as was the Princess of Chevereux. And the Duke's Mother, being also sensible thereof, highly resented this proceeding of Cond and the Dutchess of Longueville; and being intimately acquainted with the Co|adjutor, knew so well how to make use of this conjuncture, that upon se|veral meetings with the principal of the Frondeurs, they agreed with her to joyn with the Cardinal, and stand for him, in case he would break with the Prince; and then it was that the Cardinal considering the great prejudice his Majesties Authority would suffer by giving way to the pre|tences of a Prince who was so ambitious and greedy of Power and Com|mand, resolved to give a stop to his designes, and at the same time to steer such a course as might hinder all other endeavours of that kinde for the future, by the depressing of those Factions that are dangerous unto the Government, especially when it is engaged in a War against another

powerful Prince or State; to effect which, he thought the best way was to unite the Frondeurs to the Court, and oppose them unto the Prince, as a curb to his proceedings. This affair was for many days very secretly managed, eight persons onely being privy to it: That is, on the Frondeurs part, the Dutchess of Chevereux, the Coadjutor, the Marquiss of Noirs|monstere, and the Signior de Lighe: On the Court-party, the King, the Queen, the Cardinal, and Monsieur de Lyon, who was the onely person whom they thought fit to trust with a matter of that importance to the Crown. The Coadjutor in a Souldiers habit, together with Noirsmonstere, for many Evenings together came to the Countess of Lud's house, from whence Monsieur de Lyon brought them in a Coach to the Palace Royal, where in a private appartment the Cardinal met, and conferr'd with them. The Cardinal was well inclined to grant them whatsoever the Frondeurs desired, for reconciling of them to the Court; but would not consent to have the Prince imprisoned, foreseeing that if this were done, the Fron|deurs would grow strangely high, and think to have the sole management of all affairs: he measured matters with a right Compass, and found 'twas necessary to soment the difference between the Factions, so as neither of them growing too powerful, the Court might reap that benefit which a third person hath whilst two are struggling, till his Majesty coming to age, and finding them both weakned, might at his pleasure overcome and de|stroy them both. The Queen was also of the same opinion, saying, that in case that were done, the Frondeurs would be more dangerous, and have higher pretentions than the Prince.
Those who observed these Noble persons going in the night unto the Countesses House, thought it was about some Love-business, the Countess having a Daughter that was incomparably Beautiful: and this was in par|ticular Beaufort's opinion, who had no knowledge of this Treaty; it being not thought fit to communicate the same to him, for fear he should reveal it to the Dutchess of Monbason; and in truth he knew nothing of the matter until about two hours before the execution of it, at which time he was ac|quainted therewith, that he might keep the common People of the City quiet. The Dutchess d'Aiguillon in this mean time commenced her Suit in Parliament for the avoiding of this Marriage, as being an apparent Rape, and pressed to have it declared such. And as for Havre de Grace, she besought the Queen to take some fitting course about it, who accor|dingly dispatched Monsieur Bar, who had been Captain of the Cardinal Richlieu his Guards, with Letters from his Majesty; but the Prince of Cond having given notice thereof unto the Duke of Richlieu, he was de|nied entrance thereinto, to the great trouble of the Court, who thereupon resolved to proceed very cautiously and with great reservation in all their business; as on the other side the Prince took occasion thereby to shew his confidence, and scorn of all that party which did oppose him.
The Duke of Longueville having had no hand in this Marriage, was very angry at his Wife, as also with her Brother the Prince of Cond, and complained publickly, that his Wife should without his knowledge en|gage her self in such a business, so prejudicial to his Reputation, and so injurious to others; and that without acquainting him therewith, she had made use of his House for the Marriage, and of his Guards as a Convoy for the married couple to Havre de Grace. He went also to excuse him|self unto the Cardinal, assuring him that he knew nothing of it. The Cardinal accepted of his excuse, it being reasonable so to do, and drolling with him, said, My Lord Duke, this Marriage was like that of Arlechin

the Player, who having the Bride in his house, and a Feast ready, knew not that he was to be married. The Cardinal knew well this matter would make a strangeness between him and Cond, and resolved therefore not to imprison him, but to engage him in the Court-party; and what was after done to the contrary, was for reasons which shall hereafter be related.
The conjuncture of Affairs at this time seemed favourable to the Court, and to afford them an opportunity to free themselves from the oppression of the Prince of Cond, who treated all men with contempt; and taking to himself the whole Authority, threatned all persons that seemed any way to oppose him. They were perswaded to imprison him, by many important considerations: the Examples of his Grandfather, and Great Grandfather, both Princes of Cond, who were imprisoned during the Regencies of Queens who were Forrainers; the general hatred the Prince by his in|solent carriage had contracted; the just pretext of the great danger to the Government by the excessive greatness of a person, who being resolved to sway the Council as he pleased, was used to Hector all that did oppose him, and threaten to retire from Court, and set up for himself; the particu|lar affronts he had offered to the Queen, and his insolent carriage towards the first Minister of State, and the rest of the King's Servants.
But the difficulty of imprisoning a Prince, who was grown so powerful, consisted not so much in the seizing of his person, as in being able to make it good, considering the condition of Paris, and the four Factions at Court; which kept the Cardinal in great suspence, though he were dayly much pressed unto it by the Dutchess of Cheuveuse. All the Queens Faction was entirely for him: that of the Duke of Orleans had been gained to him by the Dutchess of Cheuveuse, by the apprehensions she gave unto his High|ness of Cond's Greatness, and the suspition he had of the Abbot della Ri|viere his being secretly a Pensioner to him; besides other great promises made him by the Queen. As for the Faction of the Frondeurs, the Treaties with them were long and dubious, as being on the one side grounded upon the mortal hatred which the Duke of Beaufort had publickly professed against the Cardinal, and the loss of Reputation he was like to incur by contracting a friendship with him; so as 'twas probable he might thereby loose his Cre|dit with the Parisians, and so be scorned and laid aside by all parties: And on the other side, being eagerly prosecuted by Cond, and upheld by the Court, that they might more easily ruine them both, there was a neces|sity not onely for him, but also for the Coadjutor, the President Charton, and Monsieur de Brussels, who were the Heads of the Frondeurs, either to joyn with Cond or the Court, to come off the danger which hung upon them, of being thought Complices in the attempt against Cond, to make friendship either with him or with the Cardinal: And therefore, although Cond seemed to be very much animated against them, yet the Coadjutor prudently weighing all circumstances, and being sensible that the ruine of the Prince of Cond would consequently draw along with it that of their own party, it being much more feasible to ruine Cond when they had re|moved the Cardinal by joyning with him, than to carry all things at Court after they had, by joyning with the Cardinal, destroyed Cond; He there|fore thought it fit to make an application to him, before they joyned with Mazarine: and to this purpose, he, together with Beaufort and the rest, by means of some persons of Quality, their Friends, made all the Promises, Submissions, and Protestations possible unto the Prince, to oblige him unto an Union with him, and to take upon them the Protection of them; represen|ting to him, that being Head of the Frondeurs, would be a great increase

unto his power, and secure him against all attempts that could be made un|to his prejudice. They also made great protestations of their innocency, assuring him, The Crime imputed to them was but onely an invention of the Court, to foment a difference between them, that they might with the more ease ruine both parties. But the Prince refusing to accept of any satisfaction, answered with much contempt and fierceness, That if they de|sired his friendship, the Coadjutor and the Duke of Beaufort should do well to leave the Kingdom, and he would then consider of the matter. So as the Frondeurs seeing the Prince so violently bent against them, resolved at last to joyn with the Court-party, to protect themselves against those mischiefs, which otherwise seemed unavoidable. The Treaties therefore were con|tinued with them, which for the better concealing of the matter were se|cretly performed; and therein, amongst other things, it was by the Coad|jutor's means agreed, That in regard the Duke Mercoeur had Estate enough by being Eldest Son and Heir unto the house of Vendosme, and that the Duke Beaufort his young Brother was poor, that therefore he should have the Place of Admiral, and the 20000 Ducats pension which belonged to it, according to the Agreement with the Duke of Vendosme; besides which, there was 3000 Doublons by way of advance delivered to him; in lieu whereof the Heads of the Frondeurs Faction undertook to keep the people quiet, and that the Parisians should not rise, or make disturbance upon any occasion what|soever.
The Factions of the Duke of Orleans and the Frondeurs being thus joyned with that of the Court against the Prince of Cond and his party, it was an easie matter for the Duke of Beaufort to ingratiate himself with the Duke of Orleans, who had a great affection for him, as being his Ne|phew, and assured him, of his favour and protection; the Duke of Beaufort promising his faithful and perpetual service, which they did for their com|mon Interest. The Duke of Orleans thinking it very necessary to be supported by the Valour and Credit of Beaufort against the Court, in case there were occasion upon the depressing of Cond; and Beaufort thought himself, by the Duke of Orleans his protection, much more secure against the Plots and Traps laid (as he said) to circumvent him by the Cardinal, with whom he was resolved he would by no means contract a Friendship. In this secret Treaty the Marquiss of Bollay's return was agreed unto, and a promise made, that as soon as Cond was Imprisoned, he should be declared innocent in Paris, he being fled in a disguise to Flan|ders, not without danger, as being very narrowly searched after, for what he had done the 11th day of December before in the Morning.
But notwithstanding all these Treaties and Agreements, the Commo|tions and Stirs at Paris still continued, by reason of the Impeachments which were furiously prosecuted by the Prince of Cond, and seemed to be supported by the Queens Authority, being carried on by Mole the first President of Parliament, a great friend to Cond against the Duke of Beau|fort, the Coadjutor, and the other Heads of the Frondeurs, with an inten|tion to make use of this opportunity for destroying the whole party; and because Beaufort was upon this occasion always accompanied with a great suit of Friends and Citizens, for his defence and safety, the Prince did therefore also fortifie himself with a numerous attendance of Friends and Gentlemen of several Provinces, that were his Confidents; some of which were maintained by him, and the rest came as Voluntiers upon their own expences; so as there was hardly any thing to be seen in Paris but Officers of the Army, and other Cavaliers, who professed they were come thither to

serve the Prince: and certainly had not Cond's Imprisonment (which soon after hapned) given a stop unto the matter, great store of Blood must have been spilt, considering the obstinacy of both parties; Cond being resolved to drive the Duke of Beaufort out of Paris, and therefore pressed to have the Witnesses examined, that the Impeachment might be drawn up; but the Duke of Orleans, who had now quitted the Prince, was pri|vately joyned with the Court, by several excuses which he made for his not being able to attend the Parliament, delayed the matter so, as nothing could be resolved, notwithstanding the Prince his earnest Solicitations for a dispatch: and the Counsellor Broussel, who was by Cond thought to be a person of great vertue, being involved with the rest in the charge of the intended Assassinate, he sent to the first President to blot his name out of the Impeachment, as being fully satisfied that he was innocent: but this, though several times desired by the Prince, was not performed, because the first President was no great friend unto Broussel, and was be|sides a creature to the Court, and acting nothing but by their direction.
About this time (though no ground appeared for it) there was much talk of the Princes being to be committed, such rumours being sometimes the forewarnings of the Divine Providence which watches over us; but he relying upon the Abbot de la Riviere, who had assured him that he would advertise him as soon as he had notice of any such intention against him; and taking it for granted that neither: the Duke of Orleans would conceal such a resolution from his Favourite, nor the Cardinal dare to attempt it of himself without the Dukes concurrence, slighted the matter; to which he was the more encouraged by the extraordinary court and ob|servance the Cardinal used towards him, his Brother Conty, and the Duke of Longueville; which made him say, the Cardinal had never been so much his friend as then he was. And besides, Cond confided much in Monsieur de Tilliere the Secretary of State, a person of great Wit and Understand|ing, who was most faithful to her Majesty, and expressing a great friend|ship towards the Prince, rendered him totally secure; to as about four days before his Imprisonment, the Prince, having a hint given that there was something privately in hand against him, went to the Secretary, and with great confidence asked him, if any such thing were; and being assured by him that he had heard nothing of it, rested entirely satisfied and secure thereby, not considering that La Tilliere was by the duty of his place ob|liged not to disclose secrets of that kinde, had he known it. But not|withstanding the Princes of Cond and Conty, and the Duke of Longueville, had agreed amongst themselves not to be all at Court together, and therefore onely one of them went to Council at a time, that if any accident should happen to one of them, the other two might with their countenance and party be assistant to him; and the Cardinal on the other side bent all his endeavours to this, that he might have them all at Court together, because out of that place there was no possibility of arresting any of them.
The 18th day of Ianuary being come, the Council had notice given them to appear at four a clock in the Afternoon; and it was given out that they were there to consider touching Costumes, who was Citizen of Paris, a very seditious person, and one who was accused of having had a hand in the attempt against the Prince; and forasmuch as the Examina|tions of the Prisoners brought from several other parts to Paris, made no direct proof of any such designe, 'twas desired Costunes should be taken into custody, upon whose Examination it was believed the whole matter might be discovered, and such as were indeed guilty of the Fact might be

convicted. The Queen and Cardinal were not wanting on their parts to perswade the Prince to a belief of this, by all shews of a sincere affection to, and correspondence with his Interest; and to this purpose told him, They were informed Castures lay concealed in a house neer the Horse|market, behinde the Palais Cardinal; and that 'twas therefore fit to seize him presently: but to prevent all stir or rising of the people, who were much inclined to the Frondeurs, and Enemies unto the Prince and Cardinal, it would be well to have the King's Troop of Guards mounted, and disposed in such places as might be most convenient for that purpose. And the Car|dinal pretending that in case he gave the Orders, it would make the matter to be more suspected, desired the Prince to give command that the Troop should take Horse, and be disposed in such places as he thought fit. Where|upon the Prince himself, by Monsieur de Lion, sent Orders to the Marshal Schaubargh for the doing of it, which was accordingly performed; and so far was he blinded by his Passion, that without ever reflecting upon the Artifices of the Court, he did himself by this means contribute towards his own imprisonment.
The Prince of Cond was not onely desired to be at this Council, but the Prince of Conty and Duke of Longueville were also there, upon the occasion hereafter mentioned; and the Duke of Orleans having by the Queens consent excused himself from coming thither, that he might, being abroad, be the better able to act any thing that might be necessary towards compleating the designe in hand, Cond was much disgusted at it, as be|lieving the Duke had an intention to decline his Interest; but he took order that the Abbot della Riviere should assist there in his stead.
And because you have before heard that there was no designe of arresting the Duke of Longueville, together with the Prince of Cond, it is neces|sary to let you know how that resolution was altered, by acquainting you with this following digression.
The Duke of Longueville being (as you have heard) offended at Rich|lieu's marriage, promised the Queen and the Cardinal that he would abso|lutely espouse their Interests, and the service of his Majesty, against all per|sons whatsoever, not excepting the Prince of Cond himself; who having got some inkling of this Agreement, went the next day unto the Duke, and shutting himself up alone with him in a Closet, wrought so upon him by his perswasions (wherein he was most excellently dextrous) that he drew from the Duke a promise like to that he had before made to the Queen, and an assurance that he would never forsake, but live and die with the Prince, without any expectation or reservation whatsoever. The Prince was won|derfully satisfied with this Agreement; and being apt to communicate his thoughts, acquainted the Duke of Rohan Chabot therewith, who discover|ed the whole matter to the Cardinal; and he thereupon resolved to impri|son Longueville, together with the Prince, as a person who did not in his actions deal so sincerely with the Court as he professed. The Duke was by some friends advertised that the Cardinal had gotten notice of what had passed between him and the Prince, and thereupon went to excuse himself, professing. That he was induced unto it by the assurance the Prince gave him of his being strictly united with the Queen, and with his Emmence. The Cardinal seemed to be very well satisfied (though he was not) with the excuse, and fell to treat of other matters, which were the Duke's particular Concerns, as, To have him declared to be the person who at the King's Coronation was to have place next to the Princes of the Blood, To assist him in reviving his pretensions to the Principality of Orange, To

procure a License for him to buy the Place of Colonel-general of the Swis|sers from the Marshal Schombergh, and to increase the Garrisons he had at Diepe, Caen, and Pont de l' Arche in Normandy; by which overtures and hopes the Duke parted from him extremely satisfied, never considering that those extraordinary Caresses were but like Siren's Songs to lull him in secu|rity, that he might the more easily fall into the Trap they had set for him.
After this resolution taken to imprison the Prince, the Queen began to make more Court unto him than formerly: She would several times ask his advice in matters that occurred, and approve of it. The Duke of Orle|ans went to the Parliament to demand Justice against those who had endea|voured to assassinate him. The Cardinal besought him that he would con|tinue to protect him as he had done during the Siege of Paris. Of the Prince of Conty there was no Speech, he being but a young man, and un|experienced in Affairs, though he were a person of great Wit and Courage; so as all that could be objected against him was, that he was Brother to Con|d, and being a Prince of the Blood, might be the Head of a Faction, which might be raised to disturb the Government; and therefore it was onely upon reason of State that he was put into the number.
The 18th day of Ianuary, in the morning, Priolo, who was employed by the Duke of Longueville in all his Concerns, and managed his Interests at Court with the Queen, went to wait upon the Cardinal, who contrary un|to his usual custom, spake much in praise of Longueville, and seemed to be much satisfied with him; whereas before, he was used to complain to Priolo of the Duke's strangeness to him, and the little care he seemed to have of seconding any Proposition made for the advantage, of his Nephew or Nieces. Whilst the Cardinal was entertaining Priolo, with this Discourse, the Prince of Cond entred the Room, at a corner of which Monsieur de Lion was writing upon a Table which stood by the Fire-side, several things touching the Prince's imprisonment, which that evening was to be execu|ted. The Prince entering, spoke to the Cardinal, saying, Go on with your discourse to Priolo, whilst I go talk with Monsieur de Lion: and coming to him, asked him, Well Sir, what new? He without being any way moved, or shewing any disturbance, hiding the Papers under his Cloke, with a smiling countenance answered, I ought to ask that question from your High|ness. The Cardinal afterwards dismissing Priolo, told him, It would be well the Duke would come that day to Councel, because there would be some|thing treated touching the general Peace, and the swearing of the Marquiss D'Eghetot, Son to the Marquiss de Beveron, Lieutenant Governour of Nor|mandy.
Priolo being dispatched, went to Chaliot, which is a place distant from Paris about half a league, where the Duke then was; and being a person of a clear judgment, and great experience in Affairs, perswaded him the con|trary to what the Cardinal had spoken, telling him, It was not sit for him to go to Councel, for that he saw some Clouds rising, which seemed to threaten a Storm towards the Prince of Cond. He added, That the Prince de Mar|sillac (who knew much of the Court) had bid him tell the Duke, he should remember the Agreement they had made, not to be all of them at Court together, especially at a time when they had some suspition of the Duke of Orleans, and of the Abbot della Riviere. The Duke replied, Those were but suspitions without ground; and that he would be there to serve the Marquiss Beveron, who was then with him to desire that favour. Whereupon they went in|to the Coach, the Duke, Beveron, the President de Thou, and Priolo; and coming to Paris, the Duke went to his house, and sent Priolo to the Car|dinal,

to know from him whether the Council met: his Eminence seeing Priolo come thither at that time, was much troubled, fearing the business had been discovered; and therefore, keeping him at a distance, sent to know his business; and hearing it, ordered him to tell the Duke the Council would assuredly fit: Priolo accordingly let the Duke know it, but added, That he found the Cardinal much discomposed, and that without doubt some great matter was in hand that Evening. The Duke answered, That he was resol|ved to go, whatever was in doing. To which Priolo replied, His Highness might do what he pleased, but that he thought himself obliged in duty to to advise him not to go thither.
The Prince of Marsilliack, who had observed the different kinde of proceeding used by the Duke of Orleans in the Process touching the Assas|sinate; when the Prince of Conty told him that they had gained the Abbot de la Riviere if he had not lost his credit with his Patron, answered, that he thought 'twas so; and that therefore there was no security at Court either for him or for his Brother: and the same thing was also apprehended by the Marquiss de Moussay upon this occasion: the day before the Imprison|ment, a Captain of a Quarter in the City having told him, that being in the Gallery at Court, the Secretary La Tilliere came and asked him whe|ther he thought the People would be pleased in case his Majesty should do some extraordinary matter to recover his Authority. To which the Captain answered, That in case they did not go about to arrest the Duke Beaufort, he thought they would be pleased with all that should be done: whereupon he guessed that they had some designe against the Princes, and promised to advertise the Princes of it; but they denied to have heard any thing from him to that purpose.
The Palace was excellently fitted for the execution of this designe, not onely by its manner of building, but also by the placing and disposing of the Queens Guards in order to it. At the top of the great Hall on the left hand is the Queens apartment, and on the right was the Kings great apartment, where his Majesty and the Court was. The Queen gave out that she was something indisposed, and therefore the first Door of the Hall, and those of all the other Chambers and Cabinets, were kept shut, and not opened to any but those who belonged to the Council; and the Cardinal kept himself private in a Room adjoyning to the Council-cham|ber. As the Councellors came in, they went into the little Gallery be|longing to the Council-chamber, being between the Great Room and the Queens back-rooms; and all their Servants were forced to stay either upon the Stairs, or in the out-Gourts of the Palace.
But the Cardinal, who was resolved not to be present at the action him|self, and was not willing that the Abbot de la Riviere should be there, sent for him into his Room, upon pretence of having something to con|fer with him about; where he kept him till it was over. As for the Queen, she was dressed, and lay upon the Bed in a withdrawing Room, where be|ing visited by the Prince of Cond's Mother, she pretended to be sick, and presently dismiss'd her. This same Princess that very day had the two Princes her Sons, and the Dutchess of Longueville her Daughter, at Dinner with her; and after Dinner advised the Prince of Cond to be careful of him|self, for that the Court intended to play him some trick. He, who thought all as open-hearted as himself, and could not be perswaded that the Car|dinal durst attempt any thing against him, answered, That he was well enough assured of the Court, but that the Duke of Orleans failed him at the sollicitation of the Abbot de la Riviere his Favourite: and saying this,

he turned unto the Prince of Conty, and told him he desired to have him along with him that day to Council, to mortifie La Riviere, who had pre|tended to be in all things ruled by Conty. But the Abbot was innocent of all the Duke of Orleans his Plots, and was at that time out of favour with him.
The Princes of Cond and Conty being come to Court, the Duke of Longueville was there also presently after them; and coming up the great Stairs which was at the entrance into the Hall, the Door was suddenly clapt to, and all those shut out who did attend him: at which time the Duke be|gan to suspect what after followed, and called to minde the good and faith|ful advice he had received from Priolo: they went all three together to wait upon the Queen, who being upon her Bed, and seeming to be some|what ill, they presently retired out of her Chamber; and being then all to|gether mocking and jeasting at each other in the Anti Camera, before they went into the Gallery before the Council-chamber, the Queen (who was something disturbed with the apprehension of what was to be done) prayed the King (who was alone with her in the Chamber) to go softly to the Chamber-door, and shut the same against them. At last the Prin|ces and Duke came into the Gallery where all the Council and Mini|sters of State were, excepting onely the Cardinal, who calling to Monsieur de Cominges Lieutenant of the Queens Guard, told him 'twas time to execute what her Majesty had commanded; he thereupon gave notice of it to Monsieur Guitault his Uncle on the Father's side, a Captain of the Guard, who forthwith ordered Monsieur Croissy Alferes of his Troop to arrest the Duke of Longueville, and Monsieur de Cominges to attacque the Prince of Conty, at the same time as he should seize upon the Prince of Cond. They therefore coming into the Gallery, Guitaust addressed himself to the Prince of Cond, and told him, That he was troubled at the Orders he had received from the King and Queen, to secure his person, but that his Highness knew his part was to obey his Majesty's Commands. The Prince either believing, or desiring it should be thought he believed it was a Jeast, turning to the rest of the Councellors there present, said, Here is a pretty trick, Guitault saith he hath a Commission to arrest me, Guitault replied, Indeed I have an order so to do: Whereupon the Prince, shrugging up his Shoulders, answered Why what have I done? Have I not always served the King and Queen unto the utmost of my power?
Cominges and Croissy said the same thing unto the Prince of Conty and the Duke of Longueville, in presence of the Chancellor, who was desired by Cond to go and tell the Queen, that he humbly begged the favour from her that he might speak a word unto her; which he did, that by that means he might draw neer unto a Window, from whence he might call upon some of his followers to endeavour the rescue of him: the Chancellor readily performed his request, but returned with this answer, That she was reposing her self upon the Bed, and that he could not be admitted to speak with her. He also prayed Count Servient to tell the Cardinal that he would willingly have spoken with him, to assure him he was his Ser|vant, as he had many times before, and very lately also assured him. Ser|vient went; but returning, found that Monsieur Guitault had before car|ried away the Prince; for twenty of the Guard being commanded into the Gallery, the Officers carried the Princes and Longueville down the back-stairs into the Garden, which is divided by a Wall from the Court|Yard of the Palace; all the Doors and Passages being exceeding well guarded by the Souldiers; and the Stairs, the King's Apartment, and the

Courts at the Louvre, being full of persons of Honour, Cavaliers, and o|thers who were friends unto the Princes. 'Tis a wonder how silently this matter was carried, all things being wonderfully well ordered for preven|ting of the mischief which must have necessarily hapned, had it been known; to the well doing whereof the back Private Stairs did much con|tribute, down which they carried the Princes into the Garden, and through the little Door which opens upon the Cardinal Mazarine's Palace, where one Squadron of the Guards is always posted: The Princes were there put into a Coach with six Horses, which going out at the Port, Richlieu with onely Sixteen Troopers for their Guard, which were commanded by the Count Miossan, carried them privately cross the streets that go to Mount Marter, St. Denis, and St. Anthony, along a very bad and myery way, where the Coach broke, and forced them to stay full two hours e're it was mended, brought them at last to the Castle of St. Vincennes, where they were put into the Dungeon, which is a great Tower divided from the rest of the Castle by a Ditch and Wall. The news thereof was presently sent by Guitault with all diligence to Paris. Whilst the Princes were thus car|rying away, a Messenger was sent unto the President Perault (who was Stew|ard or Major Domo to the Prince of Cond, a great Confident of his, and one who under him had got a large Estate) to let him know the Prince de|sired he would come to him to the Palace. Perault said, He wondered the Prince had not sent one of his own Servants for him: But without saying more, went presently; and passing over Pont Neus, was arrested by Mon|sieur de Guiet, and carried Prisoner to his house, where he was kept two days, and then carried to the Castle St. Vincennes, and his house searched to see what Papers they could finde, and the Lieutenant Civile was ordered to take an Inventory of them.
Upon the first report of this news, all the Lackeys, Servants, Coach|men, and others who waited for them at the Court-gates, ran about like Mad men, some here, some there; and the same did the Noblemen, Ca|valiers, and others of their Friends and Kindred; so as upon the noise made in the streets, and the running up and down with Links and Torches (it being then far in the night) the people were extremely frighted; and presently suspecting that the Duke of Beaufort was imprisoned, (which by some of the Prince's friends was given out) many of them took Arms, and began to rise; but they were presently quieted when they saw Beau|fort, who took horse to hinder the Prince's party (who began to draw to|gether about L' Hostel de Cond) from doing any thing: and certainly if those of Cond's party had followed after them, instead of going to con|dole with the Princess of Cond, they might easily have rescued them, they being guarded onely with sixteen Troopers, who by the breaking of the Coach were forced to stay a long time, as you have heard, upon the way, er'e they could get unto the Castle.
The Frondeurs were so well pleased with this Arrest, that many of them made Bonfires, and divers others sung Ballads, and Rhymes, whereby they and their actions were censured: and whereas it always happens that few are friends to those in misery, there now appeared many who made it their business to censure the Princes, and their actions, who were before thought very much devoted to their service.
Orders were at the same time given for arresting the Prince de Marsillac, and Count de Moussay; but they suspecting it, retired out of the way, and escaped: and now, as in a Lottery, where the loss of one man is anothers gain, so this misfortune of the Princes, was the reason of great good hap

unto some others. The Marquiss de Ranzau, who, as we have before told you, had been a Prisoner in the same Castle for about a year, was about this time released; Messieurs de Charost, de Chadenier, and de Geunes, being all three Captains of the Guard, who had in Iuly before been banished the Court; and put out of their Commands, were now restored; and the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, Broussel, and Chartou, were all of them quitted by the Parliament from the imputation which lay against them; who thereupon waited on their Majesties and the Cardinal, to return thanks. A Judgment was also given in favour of Monsieur Iolly, and others: And his Majesty gave a general Amnesty for all who were engaged in the Broyl that hapned on the 11th of December before.
The City of Paris (where the Princes were much hated) being thus satisfied by their imprisonment, the Cardinal began to be of better cou|rage, and to apply himself more closely unto the Functions of his Ministry: and to the end more notice might be taken of the good Correspon|dence between him and the Duke Beaufort, by whose means he had quieted the rising of the people, and removed the prejudice they had against him, as thinking him an Enemy unto the Duke; He went to give him a Visit at his house au Rue de Provelles, which was in the midst of the City; but the Duke received more prejudice than advantage by that Visit, because they took occasion thereupon to murmur, and give out, That he was grown a Mazarinist. Notwithstanding which, the Frondeurs after the Princes im|prisonment, became united both in Friendship and interest with Mazarine; and that continued until the Coadjutor, for attaining his own private ends, enterprized that Novelty, whereof in the sequel of the ensuing discourse you shall have notice.
Presently after this, Monsieur de la Ferte Imbaul was sent with several Troops unto Nivers, and Commissions were given out for the government of several Provinces: That of Burgundy was given to the Duke Vendosme, Normandy to the Court Harecourt, Compeigne to the Marshal de L'Hostel, and Berry to the Count de Sant Aignon.
The Government of the Provinces and Fortifications in France, are always given for life, and are never vacant, but by the death or voluntary cession of the party intrusted; which is always done by a publick Instru|ment with his Majesties consent. Now these cessions being required from the Princes, who were imprisoned in his Majesties name, they all three re|fused to make them; and therefore the Commissions to those persons of Quality, were made onely by way of provision for the time being, be|cause the Governments were not void: but when a Governour is found guilty of Treason, his Command ceases, though he be living, the Condemna|tion being accounted a civil Death. There was besides an Exempt de Garde sent to the Duke de Richlieu in Havre de Grace, to give up that Fort into his Majesty's hands: The Duke refused to speak with the Exempt, and see|med unwilling to obey the Order; whereupon the Court endeavoured to gain it from him by a Treaty; and to that purpose, a Pass was granted unto the Dutchess his Wife, that she might come to Court and treat about it. And because the Ladies in the Court of France are very considerable, by reason of the great regard is had unto their Rank and Quality, the Dutch|ess having made an Agreement, returned to Roan, where the Marriage be|tween her and her Lord being confirmed, the Tambouret (which is a pri|viledge granted to the Dutchesses and Peers of France to sit in the Queens presence) and other Recompences being allowed in lieu thereof, she a|greed that her Husband should quit the place; which he did, and Monsieur

de St. Maur was put into it by order from their Majesties: Monsieur de Montigny also gave up the Castle of Diepe, and that Command was by his Majesty conferr'd upon the Marquiss du Plessis Belliere; and his Govern|ment of La Basse was bestowed upon Comte Broglia, a person of great va|lour, and wonderfully affectionate unto the service of his Majesty. The Castle of Caen, taken from Monsieur de la Croiset Lieutenant-Governour to the Duke de Longueville, was given to the Count de Quince: In Pont de L' Arche Monsieur de Beaumont, who had been formerly Governour there, was resetled, the same being taken from Monsieur de Chambois; and Mon|sieur de Goville, a Mareshal de Camp, was placed Governour in the For|tresses of Charbourg and Granville.
At this same time the Count de Sant Aignon, who had made his entry into Bourges, the principal Town of Berry, wrought so by his Authority and obliging carriage on the affections of the Inhabitants, that he not onely gained them, but induced them also to take Arms for him, and joyn with 300 Gentlemen that he brought with him. The great Tower of that Ci|ty, which serves for a Castle, was kept by Monsieur de Grasset, who had been placed there by the Prince of Cond's Father. Aignon thought it not sit to be in a City where the Castle was disobedient to the King, and there|fore made a Speech in the Town-house unto the Citizens, so efficacious and full of vigour, that he perswaded them not onely to undertake the Enterprize, but also to be sharers in the Glory of it. He therefore present|ly sent to Grasset to yield the Castle; which he (upon the confidence he had in the strength of his Garrison, and the Fortifications about it) refu|sing to perform, the Count putting himself in the head of those Gentle|men he had with him, and seconded by two Bodies of the Inhabitants which were drawn up, made so fierce an Assault upon the Ramparts, that Grasset, forsaken by his men, who were terrified with so unlook'd-for an attempt, rendered the place upon Composition in less than an hours time after it was attacqued.
This good success was seconded by the surprize of the Castle of Cler|mont in Lorain, by means of an intelligence which the Marquiss Ferte Senneterre, Governour of that Province, had with two Serjeants of the Garrison; and the Kings Forces took possession of it on the 27th day of Ianuary. And the Fortress of Danvillers (which was commanded by the Prince of Marsilliack his Brother, as hath been said) returned unto the Kings obedience, the Garrison rising against him by the perswasion of Captain Bocherelle, who imprisoned their Governour, and gave up the place; in the doing whereof, he was not more commended for his Loyalty, than the Governour was blamed for his great indiscretion, in not foreseeing of the danger, and changing some of the Officers of that Garrison when he took the resolution to change his party. The Duke of Vendosme coming to Dijon in Burgundy, removed the Garrison and Governour out of the Castle there, putting into it other Souldiers, under the command of Mon|sieur de Conetty, taking security from the Inhabitants for their fidelity, as he did also from those of St. Iean de Losne, and of Verdune, by means of some Commissioners whom they sent to him. This was the more resented by Cond, because he believed those people would shew their affections to his Family, by the close espousing of his Interests on this occasion. And this was thought to be the cause that he never after had any kindness for the Burgundians, and when he was released declined the coming into that Province.
The next care of the Court was to regulate the affairs of Roan and Nor|mandy,

where Count Harcourt was placed to prevent any rising of the Friends, or Party of the Duke of Longueville; the Garrison and Gover|nour of the Old Palace were removed thence, and 100 French Souldiers placed there under the command of Monsieur de Montroit Fourville: The Count Harcourt took the ordinary Oath of Fidelity, as Governour-Gene|ral of the Province, before Monsieur D' s second President of the Parliament there; and Monsieur de Montenay a Councellor of Parliament, appointed principal Captain of the City by the Parliament, voluntarily quitted his command, to take away all occasion of suspition from the Court, he being a very intimate friend of the Duke's; and Monsieur de Sallet had his command.
And because the same day the King went to Roan, the Council of State published a Declaration, whereby the Duke de Bovillon, the Prince de Marsilliack, and the Marshals de Breze and de Turenne were commanded within the space of 14 days to come to Court; and that in case of failer, they should incur the crime of Lease Majest, and be prosecuted as Rebels to the State; this Declaration was verified by the Parliament of Paris, by whom the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, Broussel, and Charion, were the same day declared innocent of the crime whereof they were accused. His Majesty returned after upon the 22th of February, having quieted all Normandy without any blow struck, and changed the Gover|nours in the strong Holds there without stir, excepting onely in Pont de L' Arche, where Monsieur de Chambois being Governour, refused at first to submit, upon pretence of some thousands of Crowns which he alledged to be due unto him; but the matter was afterwards adjusted by a compo|sition.
Presently after this, his Majesty sent Monsieur de Villiere of the Family de Phillippeaux, Secretary of State, a person of excellent parts, to require the Seals from the Chancellor Seguier, and restored them presently to the Marquiss de Chasteau Neuf, at the instance of the Frondeurs, who did very earnestly desire it, they having been 17 years before taken from him by Cardinal Richlieu, for the intelligence he had held with the Dutchess of Chevereux in opposition to him.
The Court resolved to take away the Seals from the Chancellor, and restore them to Chasteau Neuf, because there was a necessity to satisfie the Frondeurs, who were very earnest for it; and though Seguier were a very able person, and truly faithful to his Majesties Interests, (for which cause he had a great esteem from the Parliament) yet the Council thought it ne|cessary to sacrifice him for the satisfaction of those Malecontents, to avoid the ill consequences which otherwise their jealousies and complaints might have occasioned. The Court was also very desirous to have setled all things in Burgundy, as they had done before in Normandy; and to that purpose, upon the fifth of March, the King, the Queen, and Duke of Anjou; attended by the Cardinal, the Dukes of Ioyeuse, and Les Diguieres, the Marshals de Gramont, Plessis Pralin, and Villeroy, and many Lords and per|sons of quality, marched thither by the way of Melun and Monteraux; and the 24th day of the same Moneth the Cardinal came to St. Iean de Loue, whither he caused the Troops, drawn together in the neighbouring places, to advance, under the command of the Duke of Vendosme, notwith|standing the great Rains, to attacque Seuvre, which the Prince of Cond had late before caused to be called by the name of Belle Garde.
This place was kept by 500 Foot, and 400 Horse, commanded by the Count Tavanes, and Monsieur de St. Muand, the Duke of Vendosme, to|gether

with the Count de Palau, the Lieutenant-General, and the Count de Navailes, and Monsieur Plessis Besansson, Marshals de Camp; and one part of the Army took up their Quarters at Champblanc, and the Marquiss d'Vxelles Major-general, and the Marquesses de Chatelluau, and Roncelvo|les, with the rest of the Army, quartered at St. George, where they began presently to make their Approaches with about 1200 Pioneers brought from the neighbouring Towns; it being not thought necessary to fortifie their Camp, by reason that Marshal Turenne was far off, and had no reason to suspect that any such thing should be attempted; but principally be|cause he was to pass divers Rivers, and leave several Garrisons of the King's at his back, in case he should have a desire to relieve them. The besieged made what provision they could for their defence; and suspecting the In|habitants to be inclined to the King, took away their Arms, and set Guards upon them. His Majesty being at this time in Burgundy not far from the Camp, and being moved by a curiosity natural to his Martial inclination, and a desire to hasten the taking of the place, came to St. Iean de Losne over-night, and the next morning into the Camp, to view the several Posts; and the besieged being summoned to yield by Monsieur Tivoliere Lieute|nant to the Queens Guards, he gave them notice of his Majesty's being in the Army, and commanded them not to shoot whilst he was there: which was accordingly obeyed, as being a Respect always used to be paid to the King's person. But his Majesty being gone, and the Cardinal staying be|hind, they began to shoot again; and his Eminence was in great danger by a shot, which killed one of his Servants that stood close by him. The next day the besieged articled to deliver the place upon fair Quarter (if they were not relieved before the 20th day) and a general Pardon for all within the Town, the principal of which, were the Count Tavanes, Monsieur de St. Mecaud, the Count de Coligny, and several others of the Princes friends. The Cardinal having gained great honour by this Action, caused his Majesty to return to Dijon, and from thence upon the 2d day of May to Paris.
Two days after his Majesty's coming thither, the old Princess of Cond (who, during the King's absence, was come privately to Paris, with designe to have raised some Commotion in favour of her Sons and Son-in-law) was commanded to retire out of Town unto Argeville, a house belonging to the President Perault; and the Superintendance over the Admiralty was con|ferred upon the Duke Beaufort, notwithstanding it had before been promised unto the Duke Mercoeur his elder Brother.
Meantime the Dutchess of Longueville, having staid some days at Roter|dam, went to Mastrick, where Don Gabriel de Toledo came in the Arch-Duke's name to complement her, and to propose a Treaty with his Highness; which the Dutchess refused to enter into, until she had first spoken with Monsieur de Turenne, who expected her in Stenay. Don Gabriel being satisfied with this Answer, resolved to wait upon her thither. When she came within two days journey of the place, Turenne came to meet her, with all the Troops and Officers he had with him, and brought her into the Town, with the general applause of all. Presently after her coming, she and Turenne began a Treaty with the Arch-Duke; and upon the 30th of April following, they concluded an Agreement with him, upon the terms here|after mentioned. That they should unitetheir Forces under the Protection of his Catholick Majesty, and should employ them for the attaining of two things; that is, for the obtaining a just, equal and sincere Peace between the two Crowns, and for procuring the release of the Princes from their Imprison|ment:

That they would not lay down Arms till both those ends were first ob|tained; his Catholick Majesty promising, that he would not consent unto a Peace with France, but upon that condition, unless the Princes were first released by other means. And in case the Princes before any general Peace should be released, they should notwithstanding be bound to employ their Forces to compel the French to such a Peace. The King of Spain should pay 200000 Crowns unto the Dutchess and Turenne, whereof 100000 should be paid fifteen days after the signing of the Articles, and 100000 more within a month after; all which moneys were to be employed in raising Forces for the Publick Cause. Vnto the Dutchess and Turenne, for maintenance of their Troops, and for their own subsistance, should be paid 40000 Crowns monthly from the subscription of the Articles; and 60000 Crowns more yearly, to be paid at three payments, for their own expences.
There should also be added by the Catholick King 2000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, with all Ammunition necessary for the whole Army, which were to be commanded by Turenne, and march into France for the enforcing of those two things from the Cardinal. The Dutchess and Marshal should put the Spaniard into possession of all strong Towns and places which they held, ex|cept the Citadel of Stenay, into which his Majesty might put what men he pleased, to keep them in depositum, till the delivery of the Princes, and con|clusion of the Peace; at which time they were to be restored unto the Princes, his Majesty being permitted to take away his Cannon and Ammunition out of them as in such Cases is usual. The Places in France which should be ta|ken upon the Frontiers, should be also kept by the Spaniard, till the Peace be|tween the two Crowns: but those within the Country should be kept by the Princes. All the said Moneys, excepting onely the 60000 Crowns designed for the particular Expences of the Dutchess and Turenne, were to be paid according to the Orders of Turenne, and of the Controler or Pagador-gene|ral; who was to be appointed in that Army by the King of Spain. The 2000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, should be commanded by a Spaniard, who was notwithstanding to receive Orders from Turenne: The said 5000 men were to live in France, and be paid by the Spaniard; onely the Princes were obliged to finde them Ammunition-bread, whilst they were in France, unless they were in Quarters, or sat down to besiege a Town within Eight leagues of Flanders: in which Case the said Ammunition-bread was to be provided by his Majesty; and a Confirmation of the Agreement was to be procured from Spain, within three months from the Subscription of the Treaty.
The League between Longueville, Turenne, and the Spaniard, being thus concluded, the Duke of Bovillon, who was then in Turenne, and the Prince Marsilliac, who was at his own house, began to cast about, and con|sider how they might be assistant to them; and because of themselves, wan|ting both Men and Money, they could do nothing, they resolved to engage Bourdeaux, upon pretence of getting the Duke of Espernon to be removed from that Government, as those people desired, and had been at Court to have it done. In this mean time Monsieur Todias, one of the Prince of Cond's Gentlemen, had been several times to confer, sometimes with the Duke de Rochefaucault, and sometimes with the Duke de St. Simon, who was Governour of the most important Fort of Blaye, scituate upon the mouth of the Garonne, where it disgorges it self into the Sea; and it was proposed, that a Conference should be between those two Dukes and the Dukes of Bovillon, and de la Force, at which, two Counsellours of Bour|deaux were also to intervene. The designe was to have the Duke d' A|guien onely Son to the Prince of Cond, to be received into that City: or which purpose Gourville went to the Princess his Mother, who was

then at Chantilly, to propose it to her; which she at first could not consent unto, but gave two thousand Ducatoons which she had received unto Gourville; and with that small sum of Money they gave beginning to so great a War. Monsieur Todias went from Blaye to the Duke Rochefaucault, to appoint the day and place for the meeting; but two hours after his com|ing, a Gentleman was sent from the Duke San Simon, who in his name prayed to be excused, if he did not proceed in that affair, because having found that they intended to break with the Court, and set up a party a|gainst it, he was resolved not to engage therein, it being contrary to the duty of a good Subject, and the gratitude he owed unto the King, by whose Father he had been so highly advanced and trusted: as to the single per|sons of the Princess, and Duke d' Auguien, he would be ready to receive them into Blaye, in case they were resolved to continue there quietly, without endeavouring to make any alteration in the Government. The Dukes de Bovillon and Rochefaucault saw themselves then totally deserted: the Marshal de Breze, who was a Kinsman to Cond, being late before dead, and the Duke de la Forie irresolute, and not willing to proceed fur|ther; but being unwilling to quit the Kingdom without doing something that was considerable, they besought the Princess to let them have the Duke d' Anguien, as well to make use of his presence in Bourdeaux for the encouragement of the Inhabitants, as also that he might not be exposed to danger, being the onely person of the house of Cond who was at liberty. The Dutchess of Chastillon, Widow to the before mentioned Duke, who was killed at the taking of Charenton, and Monsieur Lenet, assured Gourville that they would obtain this from the Princess very suddenly: and the Duke de Rochefaucault, who had no strong place in his Government of Poicon, nor any Troops of Souldiers under his command, was notwith|standing the first that took up Arms in favour of the Imprisoned Princes.
The Commander in Sauur, whereof the Government had been assign|ed to Monsieur de Cominges, delayed the rendering of it, and sent unto the Duke of Rochefaucault, offering him to be of his party, in case he would bring Forces thither to defend it. This place was of great importance for the Interest of the Princes; but Rochefaucault could not then bring any Forces together, but such as depended upon his own particular credit, and that of his Friends: He therefore made use of the occasion (being to Inter his Father) to draw together some of the Nobility, and others of his Country, to the number of about 2000 Horse, and between 600 and 700 Foot, with which he marched towards Saumur, which was then invested by the Kings Troops; and although he came before the expiration of that time until which Monsieur Dumont the Governour had promised to defend it, yet he found the Articles agreed upon, so as he was forced to return home; where notwithstanding he could not long continue, be|cause the Marshal de Milleray Governour of Britany marched against him with all his Forces; and he not having any strong place unto which he might retire, went into Turenne, after he had posted 400 men in Montrond, and there joyned with the Duke de Bovillon, who having great store of acquaintance in Bourdeaux, sent Monsieur d' Anglade his Secretary thither, who was a person though young, yet very able, and full of Spirit, who knew so well how to demean himself, as in a short time he raised a very great and powerful Faction in the Parliament against the Court.
The Duke of Bovillon used also another Artifice to ull the Duke of Es|pernon asleep, which was, to assure him that he would interpose nothing against his Government: to which purpose he frequently sent Monsieur

de Champagae to give him the assurance of it; and in the mean time Mon|sieur de Savagnac was sent to bring away the Princess and the Duke de Auguien, who had resolved privately to leave Montrond. Bovillon and Rochefaucault with 300 Gentlemen raised in the Marquisate of Sillery, marched into Auergne to meet the Princess, and conducted her into the Vicounty of Turenne, where they made a halt for eight days, took Brivola, and broke the Prince Toso of Savoy his Troop of Gen d' Armes, whom they encountered neer that Country.
This delay, which was necessary for disposing those of Bourdeaux to receive them, afforded the Cavalier dela Valette, who was watchful, and had taken care to inform himself of what their designes tended unto, (and who had at last got notice of what they intended) to march out against them with 600 Horse, and 1200 Foot, with which he posted himself at Font de Terrason, to hinder their passage; but the Dukes passed above it, making a semblance that they would with the assistance of Monsieur de La Fore seize upon Bergerac; the fear whereof made La Valette quit his post to oppose them, where he found the Duke of Espernon. In this mean time Bovillon with his party passed to Liment, Rochefort, and Linde, Ca|stles belonging to him; and conducting the Princess along the River Dor|doyne, as he passed by Limeul, sent out a Squadron that fell upon and took Valette's Baggage. But the Duke d'Espernon coming up, pursued the Dukes, who with some difficulty saved themselves with all their Forces in Courtras; there making a halt, they sent the Princess before them, and endeavouring to cast a Bridge over the River Iald, for passing off their Troops, they were opposed by the Kings Forces commanded by La Valette, who suspected they had a designe to surprize Libourn, by means of some intelligence within the Town.
The Princess continuing her Journey, came without any other stop to Bourdeaux, where the Inhabitants at her first coming shut the Gates, refu|sing to admit her; but this refusal caused so great a heat and dispute be|tween the Nobility and the Common people, that for preventing a Com|motion, they resolved to admit her, and the Duke of Anguien her Son, with their Domestick Servants, into the Town; refusing entrance unto Bovillon and Rochefaucault, who declared to those of Bourdeaux, that they intended not to engage in any thing against his Majesty, having no other intention but to secure the person of the young Prince against the unjust violence of Mazarine; and that they had a confidence in them, and hoped they would not quit the protection of a Prince who was imprisoned for no other cause, but for the kindness and respect he had shewed unto their City, which he had endeavoured to right against the injuries offered unto them by the Fury and Injustice of the Duke of Espernon.
The same night that the Princes remonstrated these things unto the Ci|tizens and People, they crossed the River, and went to quarter in the Sub|urbs there, where they staid three days; during which, they were visited by the principal persons of the City, whom they endeavoured to gain, by several kindes of applications made unto them. Monsieur Lenet, who was a great Servant and Confident of the Prince of Cond, and a person of great Wit and Judgement, being with some few others admitted into the City with the Princess, began to make some Pactions and Parties, and had gained some Men, and several Women, who are not onely easily per|swadible themselves, but are also fit Instruments to perswade others; so as the Princes growing daily more and more in vogue, and the Court being deied there, the Dukes one night came into the City upon pretence of

visiting the Princess; and seeing that no notice was taken of their being there, they staid, and each of them presented a Request unto the Parlia|ment, desiring their Protection for six Weeks onely, within which time they promised to justifie themselves and their proceedings to his Majesty.
The Forces they had brought with them were quartered neer the City; but they durst not propose the undertaking of a War to those of Bour|deaux, that being a nice point, not to be mentioned but with great caution and dexterity. And in regard the undertaking of a War without money, was an extravagance like to that of going to Sea without Oars or Tackle, the Duke of Bovillon, who was a person of great Valour and Wisdom, considered that to engage in a War, having no other foundation to rely on but the people (who the more furious, are generally so much the more sickle and unconstant) were a great imprudence; and that 'twas therefore fit to rely on some surer basis, by craving the assistance of some Prince that might be able by his Forces to give a ballance to the Christian King. In order thereunto, they dispatched into Spain Monsieur de Baz who depen|ded altogether on the Duke, and Monsieur de Mazarolles who was a Crea|ture of the Prince of Cond, with charge that they should endeavour to engage the Catholick King to assist them with Ships and Money; and at the same time sent Gourville to the Dutchess of Longueville and the Marshal Turenne, to give them notice that they should use their interest with the Arch-Duke and Spanish Ministers in Flanders, to promote their Proposi|tion in the Court of Spain, and to perswade them not to neglect the making use of a conjuncture so advantageous to the Interests of Spain.
Gourville was in his journey taken within a quarter of a league of Ste|uay, by a party of the King's Horse, and brought to Sedan; but not be|ing known, he was by the Dutchess of Longueville freed upon the ordinary Ransom, and in few days after, sent back into Guienne, with the Orders agreed upon touching the management of a War on those two sides of France: And the Princess, the Dukes of Bovillon, Rochefaucault, Lenet, and others of their party in Bourdeaux, continuing their Negotiations there, the Parliament at Bourdeaux resolved finally to take the Princes under their protection, and continue the War against the Duke of Espernon.
For carrying on of this, the Duke of Anguien was declared Generalissi|mo, the Dukes of Bovillon and Rochefaucault Generals under him, and the Marquisses of Sauebeuf and of Lusignan their Lieutenants; and the Marquiss of Silleny, being of the Family of Brullart, and a Kinsman to the Duke of Rochefaucault, was sent after the former into Spain, with the news of this Declaration; who found in the Court of Spain as great a readiness to entertain a Correspondence with the Princess, as the Dutchess of Lon|gueville had met withal in Flanders. The Spaniards well knew, that a Ci|vil War kept up in France, was a powerful remedy to cure their own in|ward distempers, and therefore applied all their study and endeavour to foment it; and Don Giuseppe Osorio was thereupon presently sent by the King of Spain unto the Princess and the Generals, with Money and Provisions fit for the carrying on of the War: so as from that time, new Levies, and all other necessary Preparations, were publickly made for the encourage|ment of the people, and complying with the ambition of the discontented party; the Spaniards having thereby compassed their ends, and raised a flame in Guienne and Champaigne, which are two of the principal Provin|ces of France.
The Cardinal knowing of what importance it was to hinder the increase of this mischief, which, if neglected, was like to prove so fatal unto France,

thought there was no delay to be used in it, nor any time to be afforded for letting it take further root; and therefore proposed, That the Duke of Or|leans should undertake a Journey unto Bourdeaux, as the most proper means to reduce that City, whilst the King should, at the same time, by his presence, quell the Disorders raised by the Spaniards on the side of Flanders: but his Royal Highness having refused to undertake that charge, either upon the uncertainty of the success, or being disswaded from it by the Frondeurs, who suspecting that the King, if he should quell the Bourde|lois, and prove victorious in Flanders, might re-establish his Authority, were fearful they should then be punished according to the greatness of their demerits. The matter therefore coming again to be debatd in the Council, the Cardinal represented at large the importance of it, and de|clared his opinion, that although the Enemies Army lay encamped upon the Frontiers of Picardy, and notwithstanding the ticklish condition of Paris, and that in Flanders they began to stir afresh, and notwithstanding the danger his Majesty might incur in his health by the fatigue of such a Journey, and the great heats in that Province; yet his Majesty was ra|ther to go in person thither, than that the motions in that Province, being one of the greatest and most famous in the Kingdom, should be negle|cted. The Council being perswaded by his Reasons, it was accordingly resolved by the Duke of Orleans and all the rest; and thereupon, that they might loose no time, notice was given of it to the Duke of Espernon, that he might be careful to draw together what Force he was able; as also to the Marshal of Milleray, who was then with some Troops in Poictou, that they should come and draw towards Bourdeaux with their men, that so when his Majesty should come into the Province, they might presently fall upon action.
In pursuance of this Order, the Duke of Espernon drew what Forces he could together, and went to Agen a pincipal Town in Guienne, scitua|ted about eight hundred paces from the Garonne, which heretofore ran by the Walls thereof; during whose absence, Monsieur de la Valette, who, as you have already heard, was by the retreat of the Dukes left Master of the Field, having in vain endeavoured to pursue them, upon his return home seized by surprize the Island of St. George, kept by some unexperienced Citizens, and placed a Garrison therein, leaving Monsieur de Canoles a Lieutenant-Colonel to command them.
This Island lies about three Leagues above the City of Bourdeaux in the Garonne, not much inhabited; but the possessing thereof hindred the Commerce, which by that great and Navigable River those of Bourdeaux held with the neighbouring Provinces; and this hapned upon the 22th day of May, at which time the Island was seized, and the Inhabitants there|of plundered. Those of Bourdeaux finding that by the reception they had given to the Princess of Cond and other the Enemies to the Court, they had incurr'd his Majesties displeasure, and drawn a War upon them|selves, the event whereof was uncertain, but the miseries they were to suffer by it most assured, began to make preparation for defence of their City; they shut up several Gates that were not necessary, placed Guards upon all the Avenues, and made some Outworks, but those weak, and not defencible, because the Supplies of Money from Spain were not paid in that proportion as was agreed, or if sent from thence, were ap|plied to private uses. The Dukes of Bovillon and Rochefaucault, and Monsieur Lenet the Prince of Cond's Agent, made Levies of about 3000 Foot, and between 6 and 700 Horse; and shortly after, with a good number

of Citizens and Souldiers marched out of Bourdeaux, to fight Monsieur de la Valette, who was quartered at Chastillon upon the Dordoyne; and finding him too well fortified to be attacqued, they marched into Medoc, where they surprized Chastelnau, a Town four Leagues from Bourdeaux; and had advanced farther, if the Duke of Espernon and the Marshal Milleray had not by their marching up, and joyning with La Valette, stopped their fur|ther proceeding, and enforced them to retreat to Blanchefort. Espernon upon the 26th of Iune drew towards Medor, and engaged the Enemies Forces commanded by Monsieur de Chambou, a Mareshal de Camp, in a fierce Skirmish, which ended with equal loss on both sides; those of Bour|deaux retreating in good order to the City, which gave such an Alarm there, as they suddenly took Arms, and about 4000 men under command of the Dukes of Bovillon and Rochefaucault, sallying out, fell so briskly on the Kings Forces, as they enforced them to retire over the River Iala, with the loss of about 50 Officers and Souldiers; and of the Citizens were a|bout 25 Souldiers, and Monsieur de St. Brixlalerimont killed, and de Guitault and de la Rosiere wounded. And because the Island of St. George was a Pass of huge importance to Bourdeaux, the Dukes considering the great forward|ness of the Citizens and Country adjacent, took a resolution to endeavour the recovery of it; and in order thereunto, sent Monsieur de Rochelaura, and Mon|sieur de la Motte, with 400 choice Foot, and some Companies of the Citizens armed, upon the enterprize, which they happily performed, falling upon them suddainly, so as they were constained to retire into a Church and a Mill, where being attacqued, they were forced to yield themselves Prisoners of War; there being about thirty Souldiers killed, and 100 taken, amongst whom was Monsieur de Cavoles the Governour; those of Bourdeaux being thereby freed of a Thorn which sorely troubled them, and leaving to the Royalists onely the sense of their miscarriage, in neglecting to fortifie a Post of that advantage when they had seized it. Espernon's Forces having repassed the Iala, took up their quarters in the Town of Mecau, which they plundered; and marching into the Medor, recovered Castlenau, the Garrison surrendering upon good conditions: from hence they passed into the Grane, a most plentiful Country full of little Hills, on which are pro|duced all sorts of Fruit, and great quantity of Grapes, whereof are made the best Wines in all those parts, which are therefore bought up by the English, Hollanders, and other Nations, to so great an advantage of the Owners and of his Majesty, that the sum of 150000 Doublons is said to be yearly paid onely for the custom of it.
The King's resolution to go for Guienne being divulged, the Duke of Orleans (though he had before approved the Counsel) and the Frondeurs shewed to be dissatisfied therewith, giving out Reports, That 'twas a thing advised by the Cardinal, onely for his own particular designes. They said, He was to marry his Niece the Countess Martinozzi with the Duke of Candale, and settle the Duke of Espernon his Father in that Government: That from thence he designed to go for Languedock, and solemnise the Marriage of Mancini with the Duke Mercoeur in Tholouse; turn out the Count de Alez from that Government, and get the same unto himself. With these false Reports they endeavoured to poyson the people, and raise sinister opinions in them, contrary unto the truth of the Fact; it being most certain, that both the King and his Council were willing, and had desired the Duke of Orleans to make that Voyage. The Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and the Parliament, seemed also to be troubled at his Majesty's going; and ta|king this for a fixed Maxime, That they were not to suffer those of Bourdeaux

to be overcome and punished, because 'twould be a great addition unto his Majesty's power; which by that means would become much more absolute, and would be also a great increase to the Cardinal's Reputation in managing the Affairs of State. They therefore took from thence an occasion to make a second Rupture between the Cardinal and the Frondeurs: The Duke of Beaufort, and those of his party, said, 'Twas not reasonable that the imprisoned Princes should be in the Courts power, because they having had the greatest share in the imprisoning of them; and having by that means incurred their hatred, and desire of revenge, It was but just and reason|able, that they should also have a hand in their deliverance whensoever they were released, and their share in the thanks should be due for it. This see|med to proceed from the jealousie they had, left the Prince of Cond, being released by the Cardinal, should in acknowledgement of that Obligation, side with him against them. But the truth was, the Frondeurs had them|selves a great desire to joyn with the Prince of Cond; and a Marriage be|ing proposed to be between the Princess of Chevereux and the Prince of Conty, to unite together against the Cardinal.
The Parliament of Bourdeaux having in this mean time got notice that the Court was highly incensed against them for having entertained the Prin|cess of Cond with her Son, and for other declarations they had made in favour of the Princes; and had resolved to punish them for having acted therein contrary unto their duties, and the trust reposed in them; and be|ing sensible that of themselves they were not able to beat off the Storm was falling upon them, resolved to try if they could awake that Spirit in the Parliament of Paris, which seemed to be at present quieted, and laid a|sleep; and resolved therefore on the 18th of Iune to send Monsieur de Voysin to them with a Letter and Instructions; which because it contains the Reasons upon which they seemed to justifie their proceedings, is here inserted.



IT is now neer two years since this Province, and in particular the City of Bourdeaux, lay under all the injuries and persecution imaginable: You have been pleased, my Lords, to publish unto the world how sensible you were of our afflictions: at such time as having eased the City of Paris, and obtain|ed a Declaration from his Majesty for confirmation of their Rights and Pri|viledges, you were also pleased to contribute your assistance to this Pro|vince, as a Member of the Kingdom which continued still under affliction; so as we must acknowledge that the resentment you were pleased to express of our injuries, was the great motive which induced his Majesty to grant us that Peace, whereof we have hitherto enjoyed no other benefit save the name onely, it being broken and denied unto us, contrary to the knowledge and gracious intentions of his Majesty, by him that hath for his own private ends raised and fomented a War against his Fellow-Citizens, and the Me|tropolis of his own Government. And although we have not ceased humbly to represent and make known our grievances from time to time, it hath been to so little purpose, that it seemed they intended by continuing him over us, who is the cause of all our misery, to deprive us of all hope ever to be released or quitted of it. This being our condition, some few days since the Princess of Cond with the Duke of Anguien her Son came hither without any other company but their Afflictions and grief for the Imprisonment of the Prince her Husband, contrary unto the purport and effect of the late Declaration, and desiring our protection for the security of their Lives and Persons. Her Sex, the Age of her Son, and their Quality, might justly challenge from us

not onely Iustice, but Compassion also; and yet we resolved, according to the duty and obedience we owe his Majesty, not to interest our selves in the mat|ter, but onely to receive them into the City during his Majesty's good pleasure, and humbly to beseech him that he will refer the judgement of the Princes unto competent Iudges, with such Instructions as he held to be most for the advantage of his service, and the quiet of this Province, which is now go|ing to be the Theatre, where several Tragedies are to be acted, by reason of the many Factions risen upon the publishing of that so famous Declaration which your Zeal and Care of the publick benefit of France procured to be made in the year 1648, and for the overthrowing of that which his Majesty had been gratiously pleased to declare in favour of this Province, where we have seen les Intendants des Finances to return, and notwithstanding all their fair pretences, to exercise most barbarous cruelties, where Monsieur de Foule hath been seen by his presidial Sentence to adjudge whole Towns and Pari|shes to be burned down, and to condemn the Inhabitants some to be hanged, some to the Gallies, and others to banishment, without distinction of Age, or Sex, for not having paid what the covetousness of the Partisans would ex|tort from them, making their disability pass for a Crime, and executing those inhumane Sentences by force of Arms, and without any other form of Iustree. We are therefore in hope, that as the said Declarations, and the Peace, which was the consequence of them, were obtained by your Inter|cession, you will also employ your selves to obtain for us the effects of them; and that you will make use of your interest with his Majesty in such manner, that by your Intercession there may be a stop given to those clamours and oppressions, under which this Province groans, and which may probably oc|casion the ruine of the State by the destruction of this Province, which is one of the most considerable parts of France, and is now upon the point of being torn in pieces by his Majesties Subjects the Inhabitants thereof, and other strangers, who are desirous to make use of this conjuncture of affairs, to the destruction of the Monarchy. This is the subject of our presen ap|plication to you upon occasion of the Princess her coming hither, whereof we hold it our duty to advertise you by a member of our own, unto whom we humbly pray you to give credit: And that you will believe we are your most humble Servants and Brothers.



Monsieur Voysin, who was the Person intrusted with the Letter, coming to Paris, desired audience from the Parliament, who met the 4th of Iuly to register the Letter from his Majesty under his Seal, whereby he left the Duke of Orleans his Lieutenant-General there during his absence: the Parliament, before they admitted him, or received the Letter from those of Bourdeaux, thought it fit to adjourn till the next day, and in the mean time to beseech his Royal Highness, that he would be present at reading of the Letter, and the discourse which Voysin was to make upon it. The Duke readily consented, and came accompanied with the Duke Beaufort, the Marshal de l'Hospital, and the Coadjutor: The question being then put whether they should receive this Deputy, after a long debate to was re|solved in the affirmative; wereupon being called in he presented his Let|ters of Credence, and that directed to the Parliament, and made a long discourse, wherein he represented what he thought most conducing to the advantage of his Country, inveighing particularly against the actions of the Duke d'Espernon, and those of Monsieur de Foule Master of the Re|quests, who had a while before been sent an Interdant de la Iustice in La|mousin, according to the Agreements in the Treaty of Peace, made in pur|suance

of the Declaration dated the 28th of October 1648, and touching the Imprisonment of the Princes, but it being then late, the Court was adjourn'd till the next day, at which time the Duke of Orleans was also present. The first President there gave an account of the Note passed for admitting the Deputy sent by the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and that the motive they had for desiring his Royal Highness presence at the doing of it, was, that they might by his assistance be able to resolve something wor|thy the reputation of that high Court, and convenient to be put in pra|ctice, having regard unto the present posture of affairs as they then stood. The Duke told them, That he desired the Parliament should know, his Ma|jesty had late before sent for the Duke of Espernon to Court; and that by Letters of a fresher date he had seconded that command: That their Maje|sties went into Guienne with a resolution to deal gratiously with his people, and redress their Grievances: That he was resolved not to be rigorous against the Parliament, as being satisfied that if they had in any thing transgressed their duty, they were forced unto it: That he was resolved to pardon all that should submit unto him; such onely excepted as should be found to have held intelligence with the Spaniard, against whom Process should be made before competent Iudges to be appointed for the Tryal of them. The Parliament then adjourned till the next day; at which time, upon debate touching the resolution to be taken in that affair, it was resolved, that the words spoken by the Duke touching Espernon should be entred upon Record: That the Deputy sent by those of Bourdeaux should give a Copy of his Deputa|tion in Writing, which together with the Letters from those of Bour|deaux, should be sent unto their Majesties by Messengers from them, who should have orders humbly to beseech the King and Queen that they would be gratiously pleased to condescend unto the Petitions and Com|plaints of the Bourdelois, and restore Peace and quiet unto the afflicted Province. It was also resolved, that the business of Foule should be ex|amined, and that he should be proceeded against upon the Informations gi|ven that he had been guilty of much Violence and Extortion in the ex|ecution of his Commission. The President Bailleul was ordered to go to Court with these Instructions, who was to be attended by one Councel|lor out of every Chamber, and two out of the Grand Chambre; these were the Messieurs Meusnier, St. Tot, Canaye, Camus, Pon Casse, Bitrult, and the Counts Montanglau, Mangis, and Martmean, who set forward upon the 8th of Iuly towards the Court.
There were in France at the same time several Councellors sent from the several Cantons of the Switzers, to sollicite on the behalf of their se|veral Countries the payment due by the King unto the Forces of that Na|tion under his pay, the same amounting to a very considerable sum; up|on occasion whereof, many of the Commanders and Souldiers, being dis|contented, had in several places laid down Arms, and declared that they would serve no longer unless they were paid all their Arrears, and secured of their Pay as it should grow due for the time to come. This affair was a matter of great consequence in that conjuncture of time, and was also very carefully considered by his Majesty's Council, who were sensible that 'twas a thing of huge importance not to disoblige these Forces, which be|ing well paid, do serve truely and faithfully on all occasions. And the Marquiss of Chasteau Neuf Keeper of the Seal, Monsieur de Longue Trea|surer, and Monsieur de Tillier Secretary of State, were therefore appointed to treat and agree with them; who after several Meetings and Treaties had between them, at last upon the 20th day of Iune came to the conclusions following.
First, That they should be forthwith paid in ready money 40000 Doublons, and 60000 more at three days of payment; the first at the end of July then next following; the second upon the last of September; and the last Payment to be made on the last day of December the same year, together with 1000 Doublons more for the Interest of those Sums; For the Payment whereof, his Majesty was to deposite some Iewels as a pledge for the securing of those Payments.
Besides which, his Majesty was to pay in five years following the sum of 250000 Doublons more, by 50000 Doublons at each Payment. The first to begin upon the first of January 1651, and that the sum of 66000 Dou|blons more should be paid in the year 1656. all which said Payments should be secured by assignations to be made upon the Kings: Revenues of Lyons, Va|lentia, and those of Paris; for which the Farmers of those places were to give security.
As to the payment of the Colonels, Captains, and Souldiers that should be in his Majesties service, there should be a Fond established, and 15000 Dou|blons paid monethly until all was satisfied.
This Agreement was signed by both parties, Registered and Verified by the Parliament in solemn form; with which the Cantons were all satisfied, and the Deputies returned home highly contented with the Honours and Favours his Majesty had been pleased to bestow upon them, declaring that they would continue to serve him faithfully with their Lives and Fortunes upon all occasions.
The end of the Fourth Book.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE The FIFTH BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The King and Court Return from Champagne to Paris; The Spaniards raise their Siege from before Guien, a Iourney to Guise is proposed, and resolved upon. The Frondeurs are apprehensive thereof, and Mutiny again against Mazarine; commotion in Burdeaux at the news that the King is marching that way. The Princess of Conde incourageth the Burdelois, who therefore joyn with the Princes, and prepare to make Resistance: something of action insues, and soon after agreement is made. The Kings entry into Burdeaux, who within a few days parts from theme and comes to Fontenbleau. The Spaniards besiege, and take Piombino, and Portolongone in Italy, and make themselves Masters of La Capella, and of Rethel in Flanders. The Princes are carried from the Castle of St. Vincennes to that of Marcoussi. The Archduke moves a general peace with the Duke of Orleans; his ends, and Artifice. Mazarine goes to the Army in Champagne; Marishall Plessis Pralin, takes Rethell, gives Battel to General Turenne, Routs him. The Spaniards take Flix, Mirauet, and Tortosa in Catalonia. The Princes liberty is proposed by the Duke of Orleans, and by the Frondeurs; Many Treaties are had, and many disorders arise thereupon.

THE Court being returned from Champagne to Paris, it was not hard for the Cardinal to free himself from being Prest to Trans|port the Princes into the Bastile, as well out of his great affection which he bore unto the King and Queen, as by the instigation of the Princes Friends, and Kindred; who apprehended Cond's life, if he should fall into the hands of the Frondeurs; and especially of such, as be|ing full of Malice and Revenge, made them not a little afraid: knowing very well, that all of them being fully bent to effect their desire; which was to strengthen their Faction the most they could, either by totally an|nihilating the Prince, or by winning him wholly over, so to destroy after|wards, either by his assistance, or without his obstacle, the Cardinals Au|thority; which made them press the Queen, that the Princes persons might be secured rather in the Bastile than elsewhere.
News came this mean while, that the Spaniards had raised their Siege from before Guise, whereat the King's Ministers did not a little rejoyce,

seeing their advice had succeeded so well. Wherefore the courage of the Cardinals Enviers failing, who saw him grow daily stronger and stronger; The Duke of Orleans took occasion thereupon, (being eg'd on by the Coad|jutors) to joyn the rather with the Frondeurs; so to counterpoize that greatness which did not a little vex him: They therefore by common con|sent resolve to hold up their Authority, especially in Paris; wherefore the time of choosing the Provost of Merchants (a place of concernment, especial|ly then when the City was divided into Factions) being now at hand, they gave out, that for the following years they would have Monsieur La Feure have that Office, who was a Counsellor of Parliament, and in whom they did much confide: to the end that being joyn'd in interest with the Inha|bitants, they might the more freely dispose of the Counsel of the City; so as they press the Cardinal now no longer in a fair becoming way, but told him boldly that they would be gratified in that person. And the Dutchess of Chevereux, the Dutchess of Monbazon, and Duke Beaufort, told him freely, that if he would have them esteem him their Friend, he must by no means refuse it. The Cardinal was much troubled at this, he complained much of the Frondeurs boldness, which setting aside the re|spect they ought unto the King, they durst so sawcily meddle with that which did not belong unto them: but as in a great storm a wary Pilot strikes the main yard, and takes down the Masts to keep the Vessel from being exposed to the injury of the winds; so the Cardinal, the weak con|dition of States being considered in the Minority of Princes, to keep from breaking with those who perswaded him to clap up the Princes, was content to give them satisfaction, suffering Feure to be chosen, whom the Frondeurs pretending to make use of as partial to them, and as an instru|ment to work their ends; so the Cardinal by his innate attractiveness, and assisted by Fortune, which commonly favours him that can sooth her up, knew so well how to handle La Feure, as at last he prevailed with him upon the weightiest concernments. The Cardinal thinking by the Spaniards raising their Siege from before Guise, that they were weaker than indeed they were, and consequently less to be feared, was the more minded to make the Journey to Guienne, to suppress the designs of the Burdelois, hoping to reduce that City to obedience within a few days. But the more successful he fancied his designs, the Frondeurs jealousies grew the greater; wherefore they studied all means possible, whereby they might either to|tally ruine him, or make him more pliable to their wills. So as keeping still close together, they gave out that they would never tolerate the sup|pression of Burdeaux, nor yet the Marriages, nor his establishment in France; and by the way of friendship they made it be insinuated into him, that he should not do well to suffer the King to go from Paris, and leave affairs in the condition they were in. But the Cardinal professing that his main end was to restore the King to his Regal Splendor and Authority, which was not a little obscured by the disobedience, and exorbitant pre|tentions of Subjects, he minded not the Frondeur's threats; but defending himself on the one side from the Treachery of his Enemies, and fencing himself on the other side from the infidelity of his Friends; he by his wit and simulation rendred all prejudicial attempts vain.
But for that the Frondeurs pretention to divert the King from his Jour|ney to Guienne, which was intended to suppress the Burdelois, tasted of insufferable boldness and petulancy; and that being no good pretence whereupon to raise novelties, it would have wanted the general applause, to gild over the indecency thereof, they made use of a palliated zeal to the publick good, as if they desiring the general peace, found no obstacle but

the Cardinal, who did in several manners divert it; though when he ar|rested the Princes, he promised to conclude it, and thereby to put an end unto the peoples miseries, and these affections were so zealously carried on by Beaufort, and his Adherents, as if the Cardinal had had the disposal of his Enemies will, and as if the Spaniards were to have given way to what|soever should be demanded by the French. Whereupon the Parisians were more exasperated, and people murmured in all places, not being aware of the art wherewith affairs were masked, nor of the cheat which was put upon them, whilst the Cardinal wisely knew that to have peace, the Kingdom must be in a condition of continuing War, and not to dis|compose Treaties by civil discords: it not being to be doubted, but that the Spaniards would have cooled in their desire of agreement, and would have heightned their pretentions the more by how much they should see France involved in intestine troubles. Thus by degrees they began to colour over the breach, which they were resolved to make; Beaufort coveting popular applause, desired a breach, knowing that the best way to become powerful with the simple people, was to seem to hate what they hated; he therefore used all means to be accounted an Enemy to the Cardinal, and this the rather for that by reason of the visit which was made him (as hath been said) he began to grow less in the opinion of the Parisians; people ran not after him, as they had wont to do, when he past through the Streets, and many of the Licentious people would call him a Mazzarinian: so as it became him to think upon new ways to regain their good will, and to remove the opinion, that it was not the publick interest, but his own private concerns which made him close with the late Revoluti|ons.
The Journey to Guienne being upon these Reasons resolved upon, the Duke of Orleans remained chief Governour in Paris, assisted by the Marshal de L' Hospitale the Marquis of Chasteau-neufe, and by Monsieur de Tillier Secretary of State. The King and Queen, the Duke of Anjou, the Car|dinal, with the whole Court and all the Agents of Forraign Princes, went from Paris on the 4th of Iuly, towards Guienne; and some speech of peace between the Two Crowns being renued, the glory whereof was desired by the Cardinal, he desired the Venetian Embassador Michiele Moro|sini to follow the Court, that he might make use of his Mediation, if the Adversaries should incline to agreement. This news coming to Burdeaux, the Citizens thereof were much troubled; many publick and secret meet|ings were had to find out what best expedient was to be had. Some were for humbling themselves, and for submitting to the King, rather than to expect force, and to dismiss the Dukes of Boullion, and Rochfaucolt, to the end that they might expect some good by Clemency.
What can we expect (said one that was of that mind) but that the King being made more certain of our contumacy by our resistance, shall for ever shut his ears against any subjection that we can offer? that being berest of all the Prerogatives that this noble City hath ever injoy'd, we be for|ced to receive such hard Laws, as are usually put upon the Conquered by the Conquerour? Why do we carry our selves so proudly against our King, who passing by all the injuries that we have done him, hath never shewn himself loth to pardon us? there is no doubt but that the Duke of Espernoun, exceeding the bound of conveniency, hath injured us in many things; but these are miseries common to all states, which have not their Masters ear. And upon this occasion, who knows not that more good may be had by humbly acquainting our Soveraign with our grievances, than by having recourse to violent means, which

are always hurtful when accompanied with want of respect to the Soveraign; by what forces shall we oppose the whole Kingdom, which attributing not only her losses, but the retarding of her Victories to our persidiousness, will be upon our backs to vindicate the injuries of their betraid Country, and the outrages done to Majesty? if commerce cease, if Traffick fail, what helps can you expect from an afflicted City which hates the Authors of her miseries? you will not therefore look to do any thing of your selves, will you perhaps hope for good from forraign forces? say I pray with what heart shall we see the Spaniards within our Walls, who from their very Cradles hate our Nation? who having been so often beaten by us, wish nothing more then to make themselves whole by our losses? for my part (said he) I cannot think that the Heavens mean us so much mischief, as to blind us thus. But if our sins shall pull down such mischiefs upon us; may the Heavens be propitious to me in shutting up mine eyes in an everlasting sleep, that I may never see Garomne swoln with our blood, or hear my Country, as flourishing as any other in all France, groan under unevitable slavery and ignominy, to the eternal testimony of her contumacy, when her King stood in most need of her.
The pathetick commiseration of this pious and prudent Citizen, had well nigh prevailed to perswade the Assembly to humble themselves unto the King; but, for that Offices are vendible in France, which makes them be usually confer'd upon those who are the most wealthy, though perhaps upon those who are most ambitious and incapable; it was strongly opposed, particularly by those that were of riper years; for the young men were more moderate. Moreover the name of Conde was almost adored in that City, nor was his Wives being present there of small moment, in making the Citizens well minded towards him, by reason of her rare indowments both of mind and body: she incouraged those to stand upon defence, who hating the present Government, did unwillingly hear such discourses as tended to surrendring; which as they presumed, would make Espernoun's Government more cruel than before, wherefore one of the Graver sort did with much vehemency exaggerate the grievances which he pretended to receive daily from the said Espernoun, which were not to be remedied but by the change of Government: for the Duke, working (as they thought) according to the dictates of the Cardinal, it might be concei|ved their sufferings would have no end save by obliging the Court by resistance, to give the Province such satisfaction as was pretended unto.
Have we (said he) past the Rubicon, and shall we not stand to our Arms? what good have we received by our modest complaints made to the King, that he would be pleased to moderate, I will not say Espernoun's Government, but his Reign, who was born to be the ruine of this Coun|try? nothing; but the more consolidating him in his Tyranny, and the making him the bolder to destroy us; nor can he do otherwise, whose hopes being grounded upon alliance with Mazarine, we can expect nothing but that growing daily more furious he shall prejudice us more by his in|discreet Government, then whole Armies would do. It is not we alone, said he, who are in these miseries, nor are we only they who are compel'd to have recourse to Arms, to keep back force, the commotion is Universal throughout the Kingdom. Paris, the place wherein our Kings reside, finding that it is not justice nor honesty which now prevails, but the Favourites pleasure, betakes her self to those means, which are those alone, that are left her to defend her self against the wrongs which she receives; and shall we fear to be overcome? All other Provinces incouraged by our example, will betake themselves with us to seek out remedies for those

evils which do now disquiet the Kingdom. The Spaniards, if we shall have need of them, will not fail to assist us, without hopes of getting foot|ing in these parts, where they know they can take no root; they will be satisfied in diverting in some fort the King's Forces, which may perhaps bring on the general peace, which is as much desired by all the World, as it is kept of by the King's Ministers of State, and we being the promoters of this good shall purchase praise, whereas by idely looking on, to our shame, we shall at last like Cowards bewail our misfortunes, to the eternal Infamy of this warlike Province.
The Parliament had hardly well ended their discoursing hereupon, when the Princess of Conde accompanied by other Princes and Gentlemen of that party appeared; who renuing by new exaggerations the commotion before awakened in those Councellors, and inciting the mutinous people to adhere to their fury, obtained so much, as they joyned yet more straitly in Union with the Princess, and gave fitting orders for War, declaring still, that they would be good French-men, and faithful Subjects to the King. They did not notwithstanding send any Embassy to the King, but sent Monsieur Voysin with Letters to the Parliament of Paris, and to Monsieur Guionet their Deputy in Ordinary, acquainting him with their Resolution, whereunto they were compelled by insupportable grievances, quite con|trary to that famous Declaration of the Year 1648. whereof the Parlia|ment of Paris having been the Authour, they desired them to interpose in procuring ease to the threatning ruine of that Province. They reduced their grievances to Three heads, their being oppressed by their Governour, whom they therefore desired might be removed: the contriving of the King's Declarations, and Will, concerning the Imprisonment of the Prin|ces; and the extortions, and violences used by the Financiers, and that they might not be opposed by such as adhered to the King, and who com|plained of these proceedings, they drove them all out of the City, calling them Mazzarinians, and bad French-men; they secured the Princess of Conde, and the Duke of Anghienne, and all their dependants, that they might live securely under the protection of the King and Parliament. They made hast to arm themselves, that they might keep the River open, they renued their decrees of Union between all the Corporations, and Officers of the Chamber of Edict, and charged Commissaries appointed to that purpose to proceed incessantly in execution of the decree against such as were suspected.
Not long after this decree, Marack a servant of the Queens, came to the Parliament with Letters from the King, dated the 22. of Iuly, and he was bidden not to stay at Poictiers, but to go strait on to Burdeaux, to cross the proceedings of the Dukes of Boullion, and Rochefaucolt against the King's Service. These Letters were accompanied by others, from the Secretary of State; Monsieur de Vrtiere, directed to the Procurator General, where|in he acquainted him with the King's Journey to Guien, to the end that the Parliament might appoint Commissioners to meet his Majesty, and render due and usual respects.
When these Letters were delivered to the Parliament, they resolved to make an humble Remonstrance in writing to his Majesty; that the Cardinals coming near Burdeaux, who was an Enemy to that City, and a favourer of Espernoun, might cause diffidence, and despair in the exaspe|rated people. But that his Majesty should not doubt of the Parliaments sincere fidelity, and it was also resolved that the Procurator General should answer Vrtiere, that the Cardinal was the occasion why they durst not send Deputies to their Majesties, to assure them of the Cities intire

Loyalty, and unalterable obedience, and all these were delivered to the same Marack.
The Cardinal finding that it would be a long and difficult business to make the Burdelois not adhere to the interest of the Princes and that if they should fight, the Victory must be very bloody; and being desirous that the Subjects might be reduced to obedience, with as little shedding of blood as was possible, he did again endeavour an agreement before he entred the Province, which he gave in charge to Monsieur de Lavie, who took upon him to write to Monsieur Mirat, chief Counsellor of the Par|liament of Burdeaux, desiring him that he would come himself in person to Roquedetau, that they might confer touching the propositions to be sent to the Parliament: the invitation was embraced, and Mirat being come to the place of conference, Lavie told him that the King was willing to listen Graciously to the Remonstrances of Parliament, and to the Princess of Conde's intreaties touching the Princes liberties, and that he hoped to get a Gracious answer from their Majesties within 15 days, if that the Dukes of Bulloin, and Rochfaucolt would withdraw, and that the City would lay down Arms: it not being fit that the King should set the Princes at li|berty, whilst his Subjects were in Arms. Miratz ingaged himself in the names of the above-said Dukes, that they should speedily retire to their own houses, and should quit the Kingdom, if the Queen should so com|mand them, so as the Princes might be set free; and thus the conference ended. Yet the same Dukes indeavoured still to unite themselves more firmly to the Burdelois; and to get speedy succour from Spain, which de|clared it would assist them, but would first see the Parliament declare it self more openly, which occasioning some difficulty, it was so handled, as some of the more seditious sort made the meaner sort of people Mutiny, besieging the publick Palace, so to force the Parliament to make the pre|tended Declaration, which they did, but much against the will of the Assembly, who were about to accept of the King's proposal. Giurato Pontack went with a great Squadron of armed Inhabitants to assist the Par|liamentarians, and by the death of 3 or 4 of the most seditious freed them; whereupon the Princess of Conde went to the Parliament, and excusing her self, said she knew not of it. Osorio, to incourage the Counsellors, caused some chests or Patacoons, covered over with doubloans to be brought, which made a sumptuous shew, that all appearing to be Gold, the publick might hope for assistance, and particular men for profit. Things being thus establisht, it was thought fit to send Osorio out of Burde|aux, so not to make the Court party more Jealous: and to let the Princes do what they should please upon this occasion; and so to cover over the loathsomness of that disobedience which was deeply rooted in the hearts of ill minded men.
The Duke de St. Simon, Governour of Blaye went at this time to pay his respects to the King, and to assure him of his Loyalty. The Count d' Ognon, of the Family of Faucot, Lieutenant of the Governments of Rochell, of the Islands of Oleron, and whereof the said Ognon, after the death of Marshall de Breze had made himself almost an independent Master, would not go to Court, feigning himself to have the Gout, thinking to stand looking on, and to advantage his interests according to the conjun|cture of times, either by absolutely establishing himself in the close of affairs, in those Governments; or by becoming necessary to the Court, oblige their Majesties to make him Duke, and Peer, and Marshall of France, which he very much longed to be. The Cardinal was aware of his designs, but did dissemble, seeming to believe otherwise than he did; and think|ing

it better to leave him quiet there, than by seeming to distrust him, to put him upon some headlong Resolution; especially since he seemed ra|ther inclined to follow the Princes party, than to be Loyal to the King.
His Majesty being advanced to Sibour, the Parliament of Burdeaux sent President Pichon, with some other prime Counsellors to him, who being brought into his presence, in few words told him that nothing better be|came a puissant Prince, than Clemency; which was the bait which did captivate hearts, and establish Scepters; who by their Birth-right were acknowledged to be the Sovereigns of State, and by their mildness be|came masters of men. That the Parliament hoped for these favours, which had always kept within the bounds of duty, nor had ever any other aim but the service and glory of his Majesty, through whose goodness they hoped to see that fatal Tree eradicated, which brings war and confusion with it wheresoever it comes.
The Court was no ways satisfied with this complement, which was specious in appearance, but unaccompanied by effects; for the Burdelois continued disobedient, and still strove to bring over the people of other Provinces to joyn with the Parliament, together with their secret intelli|gence still held by the Princess of Conde with the Court of Spain, where|in their chiefest hopes lay; and they strove particularly to keep corres|pondency with the Parliament of Paris. From whence they were still incouraged by express Letters, Offers, and Messengers, saying they would serve them; as also did Duke Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and the Frondeurs; still endeavouring to seduce the people against the Cardinal; yet the aforesaid Deputies were civilly heard, and answered with like civil words. Monsieur de l' Vrliere being appointed to treat with them, and to produce such proposals as should be thought convenient. They also tried the Loy|alty of the Parliament of Tolouse, to interess it with that of Burdeaux. But, those of Tolouse proceeding maturely in their resolves, and not caring much whether the Cardinal, or any other were the director of Govern|ment, would not joyn with them, especially since their City not being Fortified, and lying in the Center of the Province, it would upon all oc|casions be subject to the evils of War. But in regard of the publick good they mediated with his Majesty that he would grant the Burdelois desire, by favouring them with the removal of the Duke of Espernoun from that Government.
Whilst affairs went thus, Marshal Millerey, who was ordered to go into those parts, with such Forces as he had got together in the Neighbouring Provinces, about the end of Iuly, entred into that Tract of ground which lies between Garomne and Dordone, called the Country between the Two Seas; and assaulted the Castle of Vaires; there was a Burrow be|neath it, intrencht by the Burdelois, and guarded by 300 Foot, Com|manded by Monsieur Richon, a Citizen of Burdeaux, who did defend it Valiantly, till the 3. of August; but was afterwards overcome through intelligence, which was held by Marshal Biron, Camp-master, with a Cap|tain that was a kin to him that commanded the Castle. Here was Richon made Prisoner, and being brought to Sibour, was by the Court hanged for a Rebel: notwithstanding means used to the contrary by the said Marquis Biron, and at last by Madamosella de Orleans, who had her request granted, though too late, for sentence was executed before the pardon came. In this interim the form of Agreement was drawn up on the Courts part by Vrtiere, and made known to the Deputies of Burdeaux, the effect whereof was, that the King was come into Guien, to shew his goodness to Burdeaux by a general act of Amnesty or Oblivion, and was therefore to
 be received in like manner, as Kings were usually received in the Towns of their Dominion, that the Dukes of Boullion, and Rochefaucolt were to be sent out of the City, as being declared by the Parliaments of France guil|ty of High Treason, as chief inciters of all the disorders; and that things should be put into their former condition. But just as it was hoped that this would take happy effect; the news of Richon's death discomposed all, and did so incense the people, as they ran up and down the Streets crying Justice and Revenge, but no peace. Wherefore the Duke of Boullion, who had divers Prisoners in his hands, which were taken in the recovery of the Island of St. George, on the 6th. of August, caused Monsieur de Caroles to be hanged.
The Marshal Millerey being gone from about Vaires, incamped at Creon three Leagues from Burdeaux. The Knight of Vallette, Lieutenant General under Espernoun, commanding all those Forces in chief, in the Dukes ab|sence, undertook to recover the Island of St. George; but as he advanced too forward to discover the Enemy, he was shot by an Harquebuse on the Thigh, whereof he dyed at Cadilliack, four days after the Court came to Libourn, to the great grief of as many as knew him: he was a Gentleman of much Generosity, and very faithful to the King, he had served the Commonwealth of Venice long in Italy, and it was he who entring Paris when it was besieged, threw divers Papers amongst the People, wherein he exhorted them to expell the Frondeurs, and to submit unto the King, for which he was imprisoned, and hazarded his life. Count Palaw was by the King put in his place; and Island being stoutly defended by Monsieur De la Motta Delas, the Kings men were forced to tarry there some days longer than they had thought, waiting for their Canon, which made much for the Burdelois, for if this important place had been lost, the City had been re|duced to great straits, and want of many things, wherefore it stood the King's men much upon to perfect this enterprise, who did therefore plant some great pieces of Canon upon the hill of Cambes, wherewith playing incessantly upon the Fort, and making several assaults, they forced it to surrender, which redounded much to the prejudice of the City, which was not far off. So as thinking how to defend 'this place, they caused some Baracadoes to be made at Sansurino, which were furnisht with Soul|diers of Fortune, to keep the Inhabitants from going out. There was also a Fort with four little Bulwarks at Bastida, a place beyond the City, over against the City. The Port of Dicoux was fenced by a woful half Moon made of Marle without a Ditch, some other armed Vessels were put into the Water.
Affairs passing thus in Cuien, during the Kings absence from Paris, the Court being ingaged in Arms before Burdeaux, could not supply the needs of all Parts, States, and Cities, which required defence; wherefore the Spaniards took the advantage of the present conjuncture of times, being well informed by Count de Ognate, Viceroy of Naples, who knew very well how much it concerned his King to bereave the French of Piombino, and Portolongone, which were receptacles for the Enemies Fleets, to the prejudice of that Kingdom, and therefore resolved not to let slip that op|portunity which was now offered by the troubles of France. He prepared all things sitting, and betook himself to that expedition, which was ap|proved of by many Princes of Italy, and also by some Forreign Princes; for these Harbours were become receptacles for French Pirates, which troubled Navigation, not distinguishing Friends from Enemies, to the great hindrance of Traffick; Nor did the Court of France remedy this, as well because it was not good for her to disgust a number of men well experien|ced

in conducting Fleets at Sea; as also that they pleaded a Law in their defence, which was confirm'd by the States General in the time of Francis the first, permitting the reprisal of all Vessels which carried Mer|chandize of any whatsoever sort, belonging to the Subjects of any Prince with whom France was in War. The Viceroy having mustred 6000-Foot 800 Horse, and being accompanied by many Gentlemen and Titulado's imbarqued on the 10th of Iune, seconded by Don Iohn of Austria, who as the Kings Son had the chief Command; one part of the Forces imbarqued in the Island of Elbe; one part with Count Connersano, who upon this oc|casion was made General of the Horse, incamped before Piombino; and Cannon was planted at one and the same time, against both these places; they began to dig Trenches, that they might hasten the Conquest before succour could be sent from France; which being impossible to be done in those Domestick Wars, he had of himself provided for the Defence of Portalongone; and orders were sent to Provence, that all possible means might be used to send some relief thither. But nothing being to be done without money and experienced Commanders, the orders availed no|thing. The French Agents who were in Rome foreseeing these difficulties, thought good to interest the Pope, and the great Duke; but all their rea|sons could not prevail with these Princes, who prohibited their Subjects to assist either party.
Count Conversano did this mean while straiten Piombino being recruited by Don Iohn de Austria, with 1000. Foot, and having driven the French out of the Town, he betook himself to oppugne the Castle, which was constantly defended by the besieged, who were incouraged by the Arrival of Seignior Valperga, a Piamontese, well experienced in the Military Mystery, who was come into Provence, hoping assuredly to relieve it. But the place not being able to hold out longer by reason of the scituation, which was so weak as it was not to be fortified; the Governour parlied on the Eighteenth of Iuly, by vertue of which capitulation the French and Swissers being to go out, Valperga was detained as an Italian, and not com|prehended in the Articles; the place being Garrison'd, Conuersano went with all his Forces to strengthen the Vice-Roy before Longone; whither 500. Foot were come, sent by the Marquess of Caracena Governour of Millan; and Skirmishes past daily between both parties. But whilst Cavalliere Poll was providing a Vessel in Thouloen to attempt Relief, Cardi|nal Mazarine gave order to Monsieur Lauriere, the Lieutenant of a French Gally, to arm it suddenly, and that taking in 100. of the Queens Guard, he might indeavour succouring the place. Lauriere, who was very vali|ant, but not over good at ordering affairs, instead of going the nearest way to Monte Christo, from whence (the Winds having kept the Spanish Gallies aloof from that Haven) he might have effected his design, he wheel|ed about by the Coast of Corsica, and came late to the aforesaid Island; which the Spaniards being aware of, they sent Ianettino de Oria, General of the Neapolitan Squadron, to find him out, with two good Gallies; which Lauriere perceiving, he got underneath la Bastia a City upon the Strand of Corsica, and craving protection of the Governour Iouan Bernar|do Veneroso, obtained it, and de Oria was wisht by the same Vencroso, to bear respect to the Commonwealth of Genua, which stood neutral, giving order that in case he should assault Lauriere, the Canon should play in his de|fence: But Lauriere not daring to tarry on that shore, where there was no Haven, unarmed his Gally, and made to land, whereof de Oria being aware about the Evening, and seeming as if he would return towards Elba, he caused three pots of Artificial fire to be put into a little Boat with

only three men in it, who seigned to go to land, but dexterously accosting the Gally, threw the fire-works into her, which burned all that was above water, which the Corsicks perceiving, the whole City was put in Arms, and the Governour did what he could to chastise the Transgressors; but the Boat got away, the Commonwealth was much displeased at this action of de Oria's, who being a Subject of theirs, they called him to account for it, and for his contumacy condemned him to perpetual Banishment.
The mean while, on the 28th. of Iuly, the Spaniards fiercely assaulted the Tenaglia, and the half moon, which they took, by which loss the De|fendants were totally deprived of Water; and Monsieur de Novalliack Governour of the Town, hearing that the Gally was lost, and that there was little hope of any other succour, parlied on the first of August, to surrender upon fair conditions of War, if he were not relieved by the 16th. of the said month, the news whereof he speedily sent into Provence, that the Commanders of those parts might have sent Relief, which might have come time enough, had it been in readiness. But the Forces being imployd in Guienne, it was impossible to apply due Remedies to the affairs of Italy; So the time being expired, the agreement was made: And thus the Spaniards recovered a Fort which was not likely to have been so un|fortunately taken.
The Spaniards began also to cheer up in Flanders, being incouraged by Marishall Turenne, and by the weakness of the French Army, which was much lessened by drawing out the best Troops to march towards Burdeaux, and by the Kings being gone from those parts with the sinews of the Sol|diery; wherefore on the 21. of Iuly, the Spanish Army came before La Capelle, to get an entrance into Champagne by the acquisition of that place; and in 3. days they perfected the line. The Archduke came also thither to incourage his men the more; and on the 27. the Battery began, so as Plessis Pralin, wanting Forces sufficient to relieve it, and the Governour thereof Monsieur Roquepine being badly provided of defence; he parlied on the 2d. of August, and marcht out with Arms, and Baggage, to the great confusion of all the Inhabitants upon those Frontiers, as well for fear that Wars might happen, as for the indiscretion of the Souldiers that were their Friends, who wanting pay, made Plunder lawful. The Spaniards being so luckily gotten into that Fort, General Turenne did continually soli|cit them to get farther into Champagne, and prevailed with the Archduke to give 4000. of his own Army commanded by Count Fusendaglia, to fa|cilitate the taking of Rethel, a great Town upon the River Aisne, by means whereof the Spanish Army did not only secure it self from the French Army, but from the fear of wanting Victuals, by reason of the fruitfulness of that Country. They fell furiously upon it and took it within two days, there being none but Inhabitants in it, who did at first resolve to article, so to keep from being plundered. He at the same time took Chasteau Porcienne, two Leagues off upon the same River; put a strong Garrison into it, and fortified it.
Marishall Plessis Pralin being much troubled at this the Enemies good success; and seeing that by reason of the weakness of his Forces he could only mind defending the greatest and most important Cities, came to Rheims, to incourage those terrified,  tottering Citizens, with his presence, and to shelter his Army in that City, the Metropolis of all Champagne; Marishall d' Ertee went to Laon, whereof he was Governour.
But the Spanish Army being strongly recruited grew bold, and hoped to make further acquisitions; yet not being able to make the Inhabitants of Rheims waver, by reason of their hopes of the Kings Army which was

incamped near them, and out of their Loyalty to the King, the Archduke advanced, and took Newcastle, Pontevera, and Basochies, where they took up the Generals Quarters. The Count of Fusendaglia, advanced to Breme, four Leagues from Soisouns, and quarter'd there. The Spaniards took also Fimes and Fer, two little Towns weakly walled about, and marching as far as Marne, booties were continually taken to the terror of the Whole Country, and in this march Marquis de Hoihencourt, who defended some passes with his Troops, was fought, routed, and pursued even to the Gates of Soisouns, and narrowly escaped falling into the Enemies hands, whose Scouts came to within ten Leagues of Paris; where fear increased mighti|ly, by the flight of many Country people, who brought what they had into that City. Many of the Citizens, and people, were rather glad, than sorry for these disasters, as were also the Parliament, and Frondeurs, who solicited the Duke of Orleans, that by his Authority, assisted by the Fron|deurs, and Parisians, he would take the imprisoned Princes from out of the hands of Monsieur de Bar, thinking that the Princes being to acknow|ledg this as an Act of theirs they might be bound to depend always upon him, and that thereby the misdeserts of the Frondeurs might be conceal'd, who having had a hand in their imprisonments, assisted now to their free|doms. They did not care much for the advancement made by the Spani|ards, nor for the Countries destruction, nor for any other disorder to the prejudice of the Crown; Thus the whole affair of the Parisians, Frondeurs, and of the Court, was reduced to the imprisonment of the Princes; But Monsieur de Tillier, who was left by the King with the Duke of Orleans, did so strongly oppose the Frondeurs design; as the Spaniards being ad|vanced so near Paris, as that they might assault Vincennes, and make them|selves masters of the Princes persons, he prevailed with the Duke that they might be removed to beyond the Rivers of Seene, and Marne, and put into the Castle of Marcussi; where they might be kept till the Court should return from Guienne; and that then it might be resolved whither they should be sent, to the satisfaction both of the King and Duke. They spoke also of carrying them to Haure de Grace, but Tillier durst not be too forward therein, least they might have been taken from them by the way, as they might easily be.
But things went otherwise in Berry, for the Queens Regiments of Horse, and those of Bougy, being come to Count de St. Aignan, he went in August near to Montronde, where he continued for a month, still defying the Garrison, though it were more numerous than his men, but as he returned to his Camp with but only 30. Horse, he fell into an Ambuscado of the Enemies, who shot at him with Muskets, and Pistols, wherewith he was wounded in the hand, and had his face burnt; yet throwing himself fiercely amongst the Enemy, he forced them to fly, without loss of any one of his men, and having slain some of the Enemy with his own hands, he returned to his Quarters; and was no sooner healed, but being advertised by Cavalliere Barada, that a party of the Enemies were in the Castle of Garghelissa, he presently got on Horseback, accompanied by 300. of those of Tsouldon, and set upon Garghelissa, where the Enemy wanting all things, particularly water, they yielded the 2d. day, Eighteen Officers remaining Prisoners, and above 150. common Souldiers.
A Trumpet came in the interim to Paris on the beginning of September, with Letters sent from the Archduke, to the Duke of Orleans; wherein boasting of his good intentions to a general place, he invited him to ac|cept of the offer. The Duke listned to what the Trumpeter said, and he being also desirous of peace, sent the Baron of Verderonne, Gentleman of

his Bedchamber with a gracious answer, shewing a reciprocal good will; which was not altogether well approved by all men, as misbecoming the respect due to the King, without whose consent no treaty ought to have been held with the Enemy: and the Duke after this having sent a Messen|ger to Court, to crave leave that he might apply himself to the Treaty, the King's servants observed that he had ingaged himself further than he ought to have done. Yet to keep from irritating the people more, who already complain'd that no means was used to make peace; and also not to distaste the Duke totally, Commission was sent him to Treat, but with some others join'd with him. It was thought that these projects of the Spaniards tended to two ends: the one to increase the peoples hatred yet more against the Cardinal; the other to win the good will of the people, who were opprest with continual grievances, and by insolencies of War. And in earnest by this cunning things were reduced to that condition, as the Archdukes name was publickly cried up in Paris, and he, as well as the Spaniards were said to have deserved well of the Parisians; nay singing Songs and eucomiums in praise of the Archduke, they called him a good Frondeur. But the Archduke knew not how to make use of the Parisians applause, as he ought to have done; for having so far ingaged himself in the aforesaid offers, and his after proceedings not corresponding with his beginning, it was thought he did not mean sincerely, and that he did not really desire peace, so much as he seemed to do. On the other side, the Duke of Orleans imbarqued therein, incited by vain glory, thinking to win the peoples applause by so good a work; he sent Messengers continually to Court, the Officers whereof spying into the Spaniards deep designs, laugh|ed at the vanity of the business, which being built in the Air, vanisht soon away in smoak. The Count de Avaux knowing how much his power in Court was lessened, and thinking how to regain it, grew in love with these Treaties; and intending to be the guider thereof, so to win credit with the people, he went with the Pope's Nuntio to Soisouns, to confer with the Spanish Commissioners; but he found none there for the Archduke, as was appointed: nay Don Gabrielle di Tolledo at his return to Paris, said that Orders were first to be expected from Spain, contradicting plainly what the Archduke had said, who affirmed that he was Plenipotentiary to conclude all things. But the Prince of Conde's Friends finding that the Parisians were pleased with nothing more than with this whisper of peace, framed some Libels in the name of Marishal Turenne, though he knew nothing of it; and on the 4th. of September they were found fastned upon all the Corners of the Streets, and the people ran to read them with such delight, as the Duke of Orleans striving to have them pul'd down, the people did oppose it with so much heat, as two men were upon that occasion kil'd. The Contents of these Libels were verbatim as followeth:



The Marishal of TURENNE to the good Citizens of PARIS.
IF Cardinal Mazarine, who is the disturber of publick Tranquillity, had not refused to make the most advantagious peace three years since, that France could desire, the Kingdom would not have been troubled with so many commoti|ons as hath cost it so much blood and Treasure; and you should not now grieve to see the fire which is preparing to consume so many fair Provinces; unless you extinguish it. The Archduke, who might justly make advantage of the disor|ders of France, and of the Confusion whereinto it is put by the wickedness of

some particular men, who prefer their own particular interest before the peace of Christendome, comes to your Gates to offer you that peace, which till now the Cardinal Mazarine hath hindred. This design appears to me to be so generous and so good for the publick, as it is fitting to follow it. Friends! you are in|vited to receive it, he himself presents you with it, it now depends upon you. Lassure you the intentions of this Prince are sincere; his offering to Treat with his Royal Highness, and with the Parliament, the moderation which he will use during the whole course of this Negotiation, will justifie to all Europe his intentions to make it peaceful; he tells you that the disloyalty of Cardinal Mazarine, which is better known by strangers, than by you, hath made his Ca|tholick Majesty resolve not to accept of any proposals made by him, but to make use of his absence to Treat thereof with the Duke of Orleans, and with the Par|liament of Paris, who are bound to be accountable to the King, and to the State, of the publick conduct of affairs, and of the disorders which the continuance of War will occasion.
It is you that must solicit your false Tribunes, who are become Mazarine's Pensioners, and Protectors, who have long laughed at you, who have sometimes excited you, sometimes allured, sometimes cooled you, sometimes held you back, (according to their Capricioes and different progress of their ambitions) from preferring the publick interest, and the general good to the welfare of this States-man, whom afterwards, when he hath paid them for their friendship, they exalt unto the Heavens, notwithstanding the continuance of this War.
The Archduke comes with a spirit of peace, intending to facilitate the con|clusion of a Treaty so necessary for the two Crowns; but he protests, that as he will leave nothing undone to effect so noble, and so glorious a design to Christen|dome, so he will imploy the Army which he commands, to revenge his Catholick Majesty, in case these just and reasonable conditions, to which he submits him|self, shall be refused; and will allow of whatsoever the licentiousness of a law|ful and necessary War will permit, to punish your obdurateness.
People, do you second these good intentions, demand peace boldly; this is the means to re-unite the Royal Family, and to free your selves of your Enemy Car|dinal Mazarine, and from the combustions, ruines, and desolations, which you see are preparing, and from all the evils whereunto the Cardinals bad guidance, his ignorance, insufficiency, and malice does continually expose the state, and all the King's Subjects.



This writing made a great noise, and was greedily swallowed down by the people, uncapable of the artificial imposture to render the Cardinals administration of Government generally more odious. This was therefore one of the chief motives which made the Duke of Orleans apply himself to the Spaniard's proposals, so to pacifie the Parisians, who were much incensed by reason of the assured hopes they had to have peace in this present conjuncture of time.
The Duke of Orleans, and the Frondeurs did this mean while go about to destroy the Courts designs against Burdeaux; least if that Town should be lost, and that thereby the King's Forces should cease being diverted in those parts, the Kings concernments should prosper better in all other things, to the destruction of their ends, and the establishing the credit which he had won. And truly the Kingdom was then in a sad condition; for the very Nations, who were obliged to concur to the greatness thereof, were those who diverted its glory, and wrought all its disturbance. Wherefore the Frondeurs finding that the Burdelois were not of them|selves able to defend themselves against all the Kings party, and that they were therefore liable to an irreparable loss, they imployd all their industry, and did what they could to assist them; they cried out that that Journey

was destructive to France, whilst the Spanish Forces proceeded on in Italy, Catalonia, and in Flanders to the prejudice of the Crown of France. The Parliament sent President Balieule, and seven other Counsellors to desire his Majesty that he would appease these commotions; the King answered that all convenient means had been used to reduce the Burdelois to their duty. Who instead of corresponding to his Princely clemency, had made small account of it, hanging up a Prisoner of War, contrary to all custom; and giving other aparent signs that they had no thoughts of peace; and thus the Commissioners were dismist, and returned to Paris. But the Par|liament not satisfied with this answer, resolved to send Messieurs de Meusnier, and Biraut again to the Court with the same desires, whither they went on the 8th. of September, together with the President de Gourges, and some other Counsellors, who were come from Burdeaux to Paris: and to these the Duke of Orleans added Monsieur de Coudrey Monpensiere, to be assistant to them. When Coudrey was come to Libourn, he sent a Trumpet to Burdeaux to acquaint them with his coming, but the Letter being only su|perscribed Aux Messieurs, and the Parliament thinking that the superscrip|tion should have been Aux nos Messieurs, four days were spent in the dis|pute thereof, at last Coudrey being come into the City, he presented the Assembly with the Duke his masters Letters; together with two Records of the Parliament of Paris, touching the conditions of peace, which the Duke his master had drawn up. Whereupon the Parliament being to consult, and the ten days contained in the agreement being well nigh ex|pired; they told Coudrey, that it became them not to begin, till from the day that the Parliament knew the Dukes intentions, by the Letter which they had writ unto him; that then the Letter being of great importance, it should be participated to all the Corporations of the City, and to the parties interessed, and they desired him to make this time be agreed upon, and that in the interim all Hostility might cease, and that the passage upon the River might be open. The Cardinal shewed Coudrey the Original pro|posals of the Dukes of Boullion, and Rochfaucolt, and of Fontenella Guira|to de Burdeaux, with those of the Spanish Agents, which were intercepted by Monsieur Landa Basco, late Serjeant Major of Burdeaux, who afterward became obedient to the King, by the perswasion of Vicount Virlada. The said Landa got the Original of these Letters, and of the answers from Spain, wherein he faithfully observed the Cardinals Orders; and though the Original of these proposals was carried to the Parliament of Paris, for the Letters were in Cyphers: those Gentlemen took occasion to throw them away without perusing them, but did notwithstanding applaud the
Spaniard's offers, and desire of peace, to make their actions grateful to the people by this specious name, though they knew there was no reality in it, for the Enemie would have appeared to have been unwise, in condescend|ing to a peace in a time when War was to be very advantagious to them, by increasing dissention in France, which was the only object of their thoughts. But the Court reflecting upon these proceedings, prejudicial to the Kings Dignity, for that the Parliament of Paris, had nothing to do to meddle with what did not belong unto it, would lose no time about it, having means by force to expedite all differences; and therefore resolved to pursue the business, which being brought to an end, paid every one in the moneys which they deserved. Thus on the 23th. of August did Marishal Millerey with all his Forces appear upon the mountain of Cenon, within a quarter of a league off Bastida, and incamped upon the side of Fenilats, and Cenon; and went with 1700. Foot to discover Bastida, resol|ving to do as he should see occasion. But finding it well fortified, and in

condition of being continually releived by water, he returned to his for|mer station; and the Cardinal being desirous to hasten affairs before fur|ther troubles arose in Paris, he made his men pass over the River near Cambes, and approached with them near Burdeaux. The Inhabitants being resolved to defend the Town, fortified the Suburbs of St. Surine, the Wo|men, Children, and the Religious people labouring continually thereupon. And for that the whole confidence of the Burdelois lay on this Suburbs, the King's Counsel resolved to expugn it. The Marquesses of St. Magrine, and of Rochelaure, were appointed to fall upon the Barracado upon the head of the street Coderan, which was defended by Duke Rochefaucolt with 400. Soldiers, assisted by Count Colignie, by the Cavalliers de la Riviere, by Todias, and Boves, both of them being Camp-Masters, by two Brothers of Carbonieres, and by Monsieur Meuvile. Count Paluau advanced with other Troops to assault the other part of the Suburbs called the Carthusi|ans, scituated upon the River, and so to pass to the Pallace Calliano to cut the Enemy from retreating from the Suburbs, the Church whereof was in part fortified, and defended by the Duke of Boullion, with about 200. of the Inhabitants, 60. Voluntiers on Horseback, led on by Count Briola, and with some other Soldiers of the Prince of Conde's, and of Rochefaucolt's guard, commanded by Roche, and Baron; and another Barracado upon the way to the Carthusians was guarded by the Count de Meille with Counti's Regiment. The assault being thus ordered by Marishal Millerey, he order|ed the Marquesses of Rochelaure, and of St. Magrine, to go with their men to a certain Cross, above the said Church; but they losing the sight of this Cross, and falling upon an other nearer the Suburbs, they were set up|on by the Duke of Boullion, and a skirmish immediately ensued. The Marishal not having as yet given all requisite orders, nor disposed of all the Soldiers as he intended, sent to Rochelaure, and St. Magrine, willing them to retreat immediatly; but the Soldiers being already ingaged fell confusedly upon Rochefaucolt's Barracado, which was stoutly defended for a while, till some more of the Kings men came in by another way, assaulted them on the back, and overcame them; Monsieur Menville being slain, and Boves, Carboniers, and Todias, together with divers other Officers and Soldiers taken: and Duke Rochefaucolt ran great hazard of being either slain or taken himself; wherefore the Princes forsook the Suburbs, and retreat|ed to the City. Count de Paluau not being yet come, who was ordered to place himself with his men between the Suburbs and the City, to keep the Enemy from retreating.
Thus was the Suburbs taken by the King's men; and the action was re|markable for the forwardness and generosity of the Combatants on both sides. But it was more bloody on the assailants side, for a great many Soldiers and Officers were taken. Choupes, and Marin, both of them Camp-masters, Genlis and Riberpre, Captains of the King's Guards were wounded. The honour of this Day belonged to Marishal Millerey, and to the Marquesses of Rochelaure and St. Magrine, who commanded the Forces that day, and ordered the assault; and such was the Burdelois terrour and confusion, as had the Kings men then advanced, the Enemies affirm they had assuredly taken the half moon, which was almost already abando|ned.
The City was much troubled at this loss; the rather, for that the Soldi|ers who were within the walls, did not satisfie the Inhabitants expectation. The Dukes of Boullion, and Rochefaucolt fired the Suburbs in several pla|ces, and several Houses near the City, before they retreated; so as Millerey quartered some of his men the next morning in the Houses that were un|burnt.
On the 7th. of September, two Batteries were made against Port Dolphine, but without effect: for it was platform'd presently, and another Battery was made to make a breach between the Gate de Diaux, and the Tower Trombette. But the Burdelois being very diligent to repair the ruines made by the Artillery, fallied out the next day, being the 9th. of September, against the Barracadoes of Croix de Spine, and at the same time another Troop assaulted the Trenches of Pallace Galliane; in both which sallies the besieged received some prejudice. The same day the Dukes of Boullion, and of Rochefaucolt, went out with a great many Soldiers and Gentlemen against the quarter du Croix de la Spine, which they stormed, though the Kings men resisted stoutly, and firing it retreated, being pursued by the besieged, who were come thither, and in that heat assaulted the half moon Porte Diaux, which was valiantly defended by the Burdelois, who beat back two fierce assaults, slaying above 100. of the Kings Foot, and divers Officers of the Guienne Regiment. The Cardinal was much disquieted, for the business required expedition, and seeing how hard it was to get the half moon, he confided more in Count Paluau, than in any other, who was to command the next day: he ordered him to expugn it with all his might; which he attempted on the 10th. of September, orderly, with ex|traordinary violence. But Rochefaucolt came in with the Prince of Conde's Guard, and made it good thrice, forcing the Kings men to retreat, with much loss to Navaile's Regiment, whereof some Officers were taken: The Cardinal finding now how hard it was to overcome the obstinate valour of the Defendants, went to the King to Burg; and Millerey despairing of success on that side, went further off, to batter the City Wall, but still un|successfully.
But the Burdelois were much troubled to see no succour come from Spain, as they were made daily to believe; and the King had but six Vessels to oppose them, if they had come; wherefore the Cardinal moved a con|ference, which was well accepted; with intention notwithstanding on the besiegeds side, to bear the business yet a little longer on, if they could, still expecting relief from the Spaniards, which the Burdelois would have made use of, though peace had been made; so resolute they were, that the Cardinal, nor Duke of Espernoun, should never boast of having brought them to their beck. The Parliament and City sent their Commissioners to Burg, without any in the name of the Princess, or Generals; and to keep the Citizens from making any final agreement, the Princess made Mes|sengers sometimes appear as if they had come from Spain, with assured hopes of succour: and though the Court indeavoured to raise jealousies between the Dukes of Boullion and Rochefaucolt, yet could they never make any impression of distrust, for each of them was sufficiently assured of one another for the common concernment that was between them; nor was there ever a party more united than that of Burdeaux, where eve|ry one strove to do his utmost; nor was there during the whole Siege any falling out between any particulars, save between Count Colligni, and the Marquesses, who was wounded, and dyed two days after.
A new Battery was made in the base Court of Buriera, to play upon that part of the Wall which joyns the Archbishops Garden to la Toure delle Strage, against which Wall they plaid furiously for three days together, and began to make a considerable breach therein: though it were conti|nually repair'd by the Defendants. And doubtlesly if the City had been assaulted at first in that place, so many men would not have been lost, and the Court might have had its ends sooner; wherefore the Cardinal con|sidering that by the prolongation of this Siege, no good might peradven|ture

be done upon Burdeaux, and much mischief might fall out in Paris, where there were very great commotions. And on the other side the Par|liament of Burdeaux finding their Foot destroyed by continual action, and the aid from Spain come but slowly on, they resolved to imbrace peace, to which they were invited.
The Princess of Conde, and the Dukes of Boullion, and of Rochefaucolt, were therefore perswaded to send one for each of them along with the Parliament Commissioners, but they declaring that their whole concern|ment lay in the Princes their liberties, and knowing it unseasonable to Treat thereof now, refer'd themselves to the Parliament, whom they de|sired to have a care of their interests, and of the rest that were ingaged in this business. Thus the Treatie of peace advancing, and no relief appear|ing from Spain, the Burdelois bethought themselves of setting some treaty on Foot; and the Cardinal (being willing to admit of any rea|sonable desires) gave way that the Duke of Candalle might send a Pasport to Gouruille by another name for him to go to Bourg. Whither being come, he offer'd in the names of the Princess of Conde, and of the two Dukes of Boullion and of Rochefaucolt, all the security that the Cardinal could desire: nay they went so far, as the very Generals themselves offe|red to become Prisoners for six months, to assure him the more of their real intentions. They also propounded a marriage between the Prince of County, and a niece of the Cardinals; and though the Burdelois had an unspeakable aversion to the Duke of Espernoun, who by that Treaty was to be removed from that Government; yet they offered to beg him upon their knees for their Governour, provided that the King would grant the Princes their liberty. But the Court could never be brought to de|clare it self in this; for it had ingaged its word to the Duke of Orleans, to do nothing without his knowledg: Affairs being upon these terms, the Treaties of peace commenced with the Commissioners of Burdeaux, assi|sted by those of Paris, who were come purposely to Burg; and after seve|ral conferences, it was resolved that conformable to the proposals made by the Duke of Orleans, Articles should be made, as they were, without the knowledg of the Princess of Conde, or of the Dukes of Boullion, or Roche|faucolt.
These Articles consisted of a general Amnesty granted by the King to all the Inhabitants of Burdeaux, to all the Generals, Captains, and Soldiers that served in that City; that the Princess of Conde might retire with the Duke of Anguienne to one of his or her Houses in Anjou, where she might live, and injoy all her Estate, and that of the Prince her Husbands secure|ly; she being to renounce in writing, which was to be delivered into the Kings hands, all Leagues and confederacies made by her, as well within as without the Kingdom; and that in performance thereof, she should give order for the ceasing of all hostility made or ordered in her name, or in the name of the Prince her Husband, in his Towns of Berry, Turen, and in other parts on this side the River Loire, and to withdraw Garrisons from divers Towns possest by them, which should be put into the Kings obedi|ens. And that she the Princess might go to Montrond, upon condition that she would reduce that Garrison to bare 200. Foot, and 60. Horse, to be paid from the time forward by the King out of the Revenues of that Province, provided that she put in necessary caution, that the Militia of that nor of any other Towns should make no outrodes, nor commit any Hostility against the Subjects of those Provinces, and all of them might enjoy the present act of Amnesty: by vertue whereof all Prisoners of War, on both sides should be set at liberty; that when this Declaration should

be published, all were to lay down Arms; and that all the Soldiers in Bur|deaux, and in all the Towns confederate therewith, should be cashiered, and have Pasports, and Safe-conducts given them; that all decrees, and or|ders made, as well by the Parliament of Burdeaux against the Duke ofEspernoun, as by him against the Parliament, upon the occasion of the pre|sent commotions should be void and null; and all things should be put into the same condition as they were before the War: that the better to facili|tate the performance of this present Treaty, and to content the City of Burdeaux, and all Guienne; the King would remove the Duke of Espernoun from the Government, and send them another Governour.
The Princess, and Dukes being advertised, that the agreement was made without them, sent Monsieur Figean to be present at the Treaty, and to subscribe the Capitulation in their names. The agreement being publish|ed, on the 2d. of October, and all Hostility ceasing, the Princess of Conde, the Dukes of Anguien Boullion, and Rochefaucolt, together with a great many Gentlemen went the next day from Burdeaux, toward Contras; and within half a League were casually met by Marishal Millerey, in one of the Vessels of the Fleet, and by divers other Vessels of Monsieur Mautrick who saluted the Princess with all their Artillery; and the Marishal accost|ing her, asked her, whether she would pass under the Windows of their Royal Majesties, and not come out of her Barque to kiss their hands. To which (being so advised by the Dukes) she answered, that she would wil|lingly go do her duty, and upon her knees beg her Husbands liberty, if she thought her doing so might be acceptable. The Marishal presently dispatcht away a Boat to tell the King that the Princess was coming to pay her respect to their Majesties; who soon sent Duke Danuille with many Coaches to meet her; and when she was come to Court, she was lodged in Millerey's house, and was complemented there in the name of the King, Queen and of all the Court; though the Marishals invitation was not well liked, since no good could come by this visit, and that it might rather cause (as indeed it did) Jealousie and Suspicion in the Duke of Orleans, that the Cardinal meant to set the Princes at liberty without his consent or knowledg. The Princess afterward visited their Majesties, and comple|ments being past, with bended knee, and pouring forth abundance of Tears, she humbly beg'd her Husbands liberty, using such passionate, and affectionate Speeches, as did not only move their Majesties, but all the standers by, which when Madamoselle heard of, believing that at that meet|ing the freedom of the Princes was concluded, without searching further into the truth; she dispatcht away a Messenger to the Duke her Father, at which news he was much troubled, as was also all the Frondeurs; but hearing afterwards that the Princess had got nothing but hopes, they were pacified. The Dukes of Boullion, and of Rochefaucolt, did also press the Cardinal in private to the same effect, intending either to obtain the Princes their liberty from the King, or to make a breach between the Car|dinal and the Duke of Orleans; they told him that the Princes would be the more obliged to him, when they should see their liberty proceeded merely from his affection, and not inforced; that it would redound much to his glory throughout all Europe, when it should be seen that it lay in his power, to restrain, and also to reestablish the Prince in his greatness. That the demeanure of the Frondeurs might make him know that their designs were first to ruine the Princes, to the end that they might after|wards more easily pull down him the Cardinal; or else by giving them their liberty, ingage them to joyn in his, and the Queens ruine; that the War was ended in Guienne, but that the desire of re-kindling it would ne|ver

end in the Kingdom, as long as the Princes were imprisoned; that this was plotted in all parts, and that the thoughts of the Parliament of Paris, and of others, aimed all at this: and that finally they themselves would not deny, but that all their endeavours should tend to the same end, as those who were bound to prefer this before all other interests.
This discourse wrought the effect which the Duke desired; it wrought upon the Cardinal, and did infuse such jealousie into the Frondeurs, and Duke of Orleans, as it made the Duke resolve to reunite himself with them, and again to endeavour the Cardinals destruction. The Queen, nor the Cardinal were neither of them well pleased with Madamoselle; for having always thought her well affected to the Court, she upon this occasion appeared otherwise.
But this agreement did disturb other affairs; for the hatred of the Parisians, and the authority of the Duke of Orleans, and Beaufort, and of their adherents did thereby increase the more against the Cardinal, whom they told, that howsoever they would have the Court return speedily to Paris, and that the journey to Tolouse, and Provence should be put off to another time, which was intended, that the States General might be held there, and to raise monies, which they wanted much, to provide for the occurrences of the Kingdom, and particularly of Catalonia, and for pay|ment of the Servants of the Court, who had not received any monies of a long time, the Cardinal was minded that the King should go to Languedock and Provence, before his return to Paris; for besides that the People should thereby see the Kings Person, which wins upon the peoples love; there was some need of his Majesties presence in those Provinces, as well to hold the States General in Languedock, as to quiet the differences in Provence between the Count de Ales, who was Governour of that Coun|try, and the Parliament; but the Cardinal being told that for certain the Duke of Orleans did extreamly desire the King should return to Paris, to take order for affairs there, and to provide for the safe custody of the Princes, who were not thought to be safe enough in the Castle of Mercou|sy, he resolved to return to Paris, where the Frondeurs grew daily more desirous to deprive him of the glory which he might have gotten with apeasing the uproars of Provence.
On the 5th. of October the King, Queen, and the whole Court, entred into Burdeaux, with above 4000. what Horse, what Foot, which were brought in, not so much for the Kings safety, as for his Grandezza, whereat the Frondeurs were so terrified, as many of them sought to hide themselves. The Burdelois appeared mightily pleased with the King coming; they lodged the King, Queen, Cardinal, and Duke of Aniou in the Arch|bishops Palace; Madamoselle d' Orleance in President Pontacks stately Palace, and the Cardinals neeces were lodged in the Doyen. The Court tarried ten days in Burdeaux, and being solicited by the Duke of Orleans to return to Paris, it marched thitherward.
The Court being come to Orleans, instead of going streight to Paris, went to Fountainbleau, to take order for securing the Princes; who on the 15th. of November were removed from the Castle of Mercousy, and were convey'd to Haure de Grace, conducted by Count Harcourt, with 400. Horse, and as many Foot; and after Eleven days march, they were shut up there, being still under the Guard of Monsieur de Bar, and of those whom he confided in. After which the Queen was not affraid to return to Paris, since the Prisoners were gone so far from thence, and that they were now at her disposal. The Frondeurs were much troubled thereat; who with all the other Malecontents ceased not to exclaim against the Duke of Orleans,

that he had deluded them, that the Cardinal did not desire the general peace, nor the peoples ease, but aimed only at his own private ends; where|fore they altered their minds, and began to commiserate the Princes, not so much for their imprisonment, as for the danger of their lives; so as the Princess their Mother, and all their Kindred and adherents began again to plot their freedom; and though by the death of this Lady, who died on the 2d. of December, it was thought the servour thereof would abate, yet it proved otherwise, and it turned rather to the advantage than to the prejudice of the imprisoned Princes; for the Dutchess of Orleans, and Madamoselle inclined more to the Princes party; their envy, and hatred ceasing, which they bore for her too great Fasto, and Intonatura.
There were two means to be used for getting the Princes liberty; the one by closing with the Cardinal, the other by joyning with the Frondeurs; the Princesses would not by any means abase themselves so far as to receive help from the Frondeurs, they rather inclined to lean towards the Cardinal, and to agree with him. But since the Court cared not much for the Fron|deurs, now that the Princes were secured, and did mind nothing but ag|grandizing the Kings Authority, it was not judged fit, to trust too much to Conde's sickle nature, and that it would be better to expect a while; so as the Princesses finding that their Husbands were not likely to get their freedom, at least for some time by the Cardinals means, they had recourse to the Duke of Orleans, and to the Frondeurs, and the Treaties were very privatly begun by the Princess Palatine, who in the managing of this Affair behaved her self very discreetly, for spinning on the time of Treaty as long as she could with the Frondeurs, she was perswaded she might bring them over to the Queen, and Cardinals party. She therefore negotiated this with the Court equally affectionately, and with equal Dexterity: shewing them how much more worthy they would be of commendation, by obliging the Princes to eternal gratitude, by an act of singular clemen|cy, and confidence; and that by persisting to be rigorous they would af|ford the Frondeurs occasion to merit this from the Princes, and consequent|ly to increase their pretentions, with evident danger, that being so strong|ly backt they might make way for more pernicious consequences; but all this did nothing with the Cardinal, who thought he could not now con|fide any longer, and held it dangerous to bring the Princes back to the Court, during the Kings Minority; so the Palatiness was forced to advance the Treaty with the Frondeurs.
The Dutchess of Cheuereux, with many others entred likewise into this new confederacy against the Cardinal under a publick pretence, but with private ends; and they strove to shew their Majesties, how necessary it was for them to return to Paris; but the Cardinal strongly opposed this, shewing how dangerous it might prove to the Kings power, and how un|safe to the Court, to put themselves into the peoples hands, and into a faction, which having broken all the bonds of Duty, they might expect all bold attempts from them, and he moreover made it known, that the King|doms peace consisting in the imprisonment of those that might subvert it, this maxim was constantly to be insisted upon, without fearing the Duke of Orleans, or the Frondeurs, who could do little, or nothing out of Paris, without having the imprisoned Princes at the head of an Army, and with|out the joyning of the other parts of the Kingdom, which being all very obedient, were of themselves able to curb Paris, if it should attempt any novelty.
But the Queen being perswaded by the Dutchess of Orleans, and by the Dutchess of Cheuereux, who negotiated as a friend and confident be|tween

the parties, resolved at last to do against the Cardinal's Counsel, and to return to Paris; from whence all the mischief ensued which befell the Court afterwards.
And the Kings concernments were no less prejudiced in Catalonia, Italy, and in Flanders, than in France. For the Commanders in Flanders being but ilfavourdly paid, were forced to give way to Military licentiousness in those Towns which were wont to be civilly dealt with; which caused them to complain bitterly, being indiscreetly plunder'd by the Horse of Flix. And though process were made against Monsieur Santa Colomba Marin, Governour of Catalonia, by the pressing of the Countrey people; yet nothing being able to refrain their licentiousness, the Catalonians re|solved to acknowledg him no longer for their Commander, but to deny him those contributions, which they were forc't to pay him, to preserve themselves from Military insolence, grounding themselves upon the agreement made with the King of France, that none but those of the Na|tion, and not any French should be made Governours of any Towns there.
But Duke Mercure not being satisfied with this reason, resolved to force them to obedience; sent Colonel Baltazar thither with 1000. Soldiers, part Horse, part Foot, wherewith entring Mora, a great Town upon the Ebro, he plunderd it, using great extortions, and did the like in many other Neighbouring Towns; which made the people take up Arms, and besieged the French in the said Towns of Mora; so as the Vice-Roy finding violent means hurtful, he sent Don Giuseppe Margherite thither, one who was in good credit with them, to reorder affairs with his presence.
He marched thitherward, not without danger of being slain, for by in|telligence held by the Baily of Vilboda, (who feigned to be his friend) an Ambuscado was laid for him in certain narrow ways through which he was necessarily to pass, which was to give the sign when the Enemy was to advance. But Margherite advancing so fast, as he had not time to give the sign, the Enemy moved not, but suffered him to advance on to Falset, a chief Town of those parts, where by his credit he accommodated diffe|rences, promising the Countrey people that the French should go out of their Towns, and that the Garrison of Flix should not injure them; and having satisfied them all, he went to Mora, drove out Baltazar; whereof Marquess Borry, who commanded the Spanish Forces in chief, being adver|tised, he laid another Ambuscado for him, as he returned from Flix to Mora, near Composina, but Baltazar being overseen in Wine he went by water instead of going by land, whereby the Spaniards were deluded, and his drunkenness was Margherite's safety.
Borry staying afterwards with his men in those parts for seven or eight days, he made the Catalonians be assaulted by an Ambuscado, conducted by the aforesaid Baily of Vilboda, and by Lewis Magrinate, an Inhabitant of Falset, but the Castilians came off with the worst, for about 40. of them were slain, and as many taken Prisoners, and the rest saved themselves by the Mountain. Margherite being afterwards sent for by the Vice-Roy, came to Santa Colomba, where the Vice-Roy was with the Marquesses of Marsilly, and Marinuilla; and went from thence to Barcellona; but before he went from thence, a Council of War was held, wherein it was resolved to divide those Forces into the most considerable places, as well to rein|force those places, as to spare the Country from quartering; but this was not affected; for news being brought, that a body of Spaniards was en|tred by Granadiglia (a Country lying between Flix, and Lerida) the Vice-Roy would fight them; but failed in his designs, for the Spaniards

were seasonably retreated, and Falset being at the same time revolted, the Vice-Roy was forced to come before it with 3000. Combatants, and with the Artillery drawn out of Flix; wherewith he forced those Country peo|ple, and 200. Spaniards who were come from Taragona, to yield upon usual conditions of War, and with general pardon to those that rose. Here were the Regiments of Mount Paullion, La Motta, and Baltazar quartered under this mans Command; who pretending afterwards that the Citizens went about to revolt again, made the Town be plundered, with so much terrour to the other Neighbouring Towns, as the Spaniards were thereby invited to besiege Flix, which they took.
Duke Mercure endeavoured to releive Flix, and came to Compossina, where it was resolved to fall upon the Spanish Camp, and get into their Trenches. He therefore came within sight of the Enemy; but finding them too well provided, he suffered that Town to fall into their hands; Mercure having been incamped four days, and suffering much for want of Bread, for all the Corn that was in the Neighbouring Villages was brought into Mirauet; he went from thence to Tineza, where he routed 50. Spani|ards that were quartered in Reux, and slew the Baily of Villebay, and from thence fell into the vally of Taragona, a fruitful Country, where the French tarried two months, doing nothing, wherefore the Spaniards making use of the Enemies negligence, went speedily to take in Mirauet, upon the same River of Ebro, half a days march from Flix, towards Tortosa where|in there was a Garrison of 500. Foot. At the first onset Dolerier, Gover|nour of the Town was slain, and within eight days the Town was taken. By reason of these fortunate proceedings, Marquess Mortara went to be|fore Tortosa, where Seignior Launage Gringenier Commanded, and Mon|sieur de Chaison, as the Kings Lieutenant (a brave Soldier, and well beloved by those people) with about 1500. Soldiers, and though the Spaniards were then so strongly recruited, as that they had 8000. fighting men, and that the Citizens, and Country people stood for the most part for Spain; yet not being able to do any good by storming, as at first they indeavoured they resolved upon a Siege, wherewith in six weeks space they reduced it. Duke Mercure knowing the importancy of the place, strove to relieve it, and writ to Don Guiseppe Margherite, to send him Victuals from Barcellona: Margherite forthwith hired four Merchants Ships which were in the Haven at Barcellona, and fraughting them with great store of Cattle, he sent them to the French Camp in the plains of Taragona. And whilst the said Muni|tion was unloding at Cambrils, where the Vice-Roy was, seven Spanish Gallies, Commanded by Duke Alberkirque, fell upon them, and after a long fight, and with loss of some few men, made himself master of the four Vessels; so as the Duke wanting means to make his attempt, the City capitulated, and surrendred; after which losses, Duke Mercure, though re|cruited with 1000. Foot from Barcellona, and with as many from Provence; seeing the Spaniards were retreated to their Winter quarters, and that he had had but ill success in that imployment, he also retired with his Army to their quarters, and with leave returned to France; leaving the Marquess of St. Magrin, to Command the Forces.
The Archduke making use also in Flanders of the French being ingaged in Guien, went to Rethel, where was great store of Corn and other provi|sions, and consulting what enterprise he were best to fall upon, the Count Grandpre, of the Family of Ioyence, and who was then a great favourite of the Prince of Conde, propounded the taking of Moson upon the Mose, which had been his Government, and he prevailed that it should be attackt with 4000. Spaniards under Don Stephano di Gammarra, and with 2000.

French, of Longueville, and Turen's Troops, who passing over the Mosa on the 4th. of October began the expugnation; but they found greater re|sistance than they expected; yet being loth to give over a work of such importance, the Count of Fuenseldagna came before it also with other Spanish Forces. The Archduke with part of the Horse retreated to Brus|sels, leaving Don Iohn delli Ponti, a Neapolitan, Governour of Rethel; he hastned the business before Marishal Plessis Pralin should be able to relieve it. And though the Defendants, out of hope of being relieved, and for fear of being ill treated by Granpre, did stoutly defend it, yet not being able to resist so many reiterated assaults, they yielded on the Eleventh of November; the French Garrison marched out, and the Spaniards entred; who not thinking it fit to give the Government thereof to Granpre by rea|son of his instability; nor yet to deny it him, left he might be displeased, they took a middle way, which was to declare him Governour thereof, but not put him in possession, pretending need of him in the Camp; and promised never to make peace with France, till he were re-admitted there|into; which the Spaniards did, that they might be free masters of that Town, which was of such importance to their affairs, least Granpre might be won over by the Cardinal, whose Maxim it was, rather to sweeten his particular Enemies by fair means, than to ruine them by rigour.
After this, Turen went over the Mose to Olesy, and quartered between that River, and the Aisne, that he might inlarge his quarters in more commodi|ous and plentiful places, and to refresh his Army, which was much weak|ned, and wearied with this Siege: since he could not perswade the Count of Fuenseldagna to stay with his men between those two Rivers, as he had wisely advised. Wherefore the Cardinal finding that he should have done but little, if after having subdued Normandy, Burgundy, and Guienne, he should not also have freed Champagne from the Enemy, he resolved to go himself in person to the Army, and to drive the Spaniards, and Turens Troops from Rethel, and the other Neighbouring Towns, having to this purpose re-inforced the Kings Camp with part of the Forces brought from Guien, and with other taken into pay by the Prince Taranto, some to the Duke of Tremaglia in Poicton, and by the Marquess of Aligre, and others in Auuergne, he doubted not but to have the glory of driving the Enemy out of the Country.
The Cardinal parted from Paris about the end of November in great Pomp; leaving the Parliament, and the Frondeurs much mortified, to see that to the power of Government he had, the Command of the Army was added. When he was come to Reimes with an Army of 12000. choice veteran Soldiers, the recovery of Rethel was resolved on by a Council of War, towards which the Army marched on Friday the ninth of December, Commanded by General Plessis Pralin, and by Messieurs Villaquiere, and Oquincourt, Lieutenants General; the next day they took the Suburbs, and began to play upon the Gate, and passing over the Bridge, assaulted the Town, from whence they were at first valiantly repulst by Iouan delli Ponti, a Neapolitan, who Commanded within the Town with 1200. Foot, and 200. Horse. But at the second assault, those that were within know|ing that they could not defend those imperfect Walls, they capitulated on the 13th. day; though it was but a false Alarm on that side, given by only two Regiments, the Kings Army being all on the other side the River; This happened just when General Turen was come with his Army as far as Tagni, to releive the Town, which he did not doubt to do; for the French Camp having no line about it, and being divided in several quarters on both sides of the River; he would have made them rise, or would have entred the

Kings quarter by the intervall. Turen moved this, for if the Town should be lost, his quarters would have been straitned, and he could not have maintained himself long, but all his men would have been ruined this winter; for the Spaniard would not suffer him to quarter in Flanders, where the Archdukes Forces were already quartered; who for the ex|pence, and in consideration of the time of Year, would not tarry there, but declared that he left the care of that place to Turen; who was more concerned in the preservation of that place than the Spaniards, they being content to keep Moson, la Capelle, and Catellet, into all which they put good Garrisons, for that they afforded good conveniency upon any occa|sion to enter into Champagne, Picardy, and into the Bowels of France, and the Kings Army could not be re-inforced save only with 2500. Horse from Lorrain, conducted by Monsieur Fouges a Savoyard, and by Count Ligne|uille; and with 2500. Walloon and Lorrain Foot, Commanded by Don Stephano Gammara a Spaniard; which being join'd to 2000. German Horse lately raised, the whole Army consisted of 5500. Horse, 4000. Foot, and six field pieces. Turen hearing by some Prisoners that were taken, that the Town had capitulated, and fearing to be faln upon by the Victorious Army, faced about, and marching all night, went to lodge in Vallatadi Eurg, near the River Aisne. Then Marishal Plessis Pralin, though he had not as yet possession of the Town, called a Council of War to advise of what was to be done, before he would adventure to give Battle: where it was conside|red, that the Spaniards chief design being to drive Turen's Army into the French quarters, so to ease the Towns of Flanders, it would be a masters part to disturb their design, and to drive them also from Chasteau Porcienne; which would redound much to the prejudice of the Enemy, their ends being thereby broken, for which they had taken, and fortified those Towns, to effect which it was thought there was but two means; the one to op|pose them with the Army all the Winter, by which trouble and sufferings their own Army would either be destroy'd, or so lessened, as that the next Spring they should not be able to make head against the Enemy: the other to come to a general action of Arms, before the French Forces should be diminished, and before Turen should have recruited his, as he easily might do by the neighbourhood of the Spaniards: or leaving both these to betake themselves to a third means, which was to go to their winter quarters, which would be as bad, if not worse than to lose a Battel, for thereby Turen would obtain his intent; all these reasons being weighed by common consent, all pitcht upon the resolution of fighting as soon as might be. Plessis Pralin, solicited the Governour of Rethel, therefore to end the Capitulation by the next day break, and at the same time when the Garrison began to march out, he hastened his march after the Enemy, that he might overtake him, and ingage him to fight. But being come to Geneuille, he was told by a party of Horse which came then unto him, that the Enemy was already so far advanced as it was impossible to reach him with his men, who were already wearied with the Siege, and with their march; wherewith he acquainted the Cardinal, who sent him word, that if he could do no otherwise, he should retreat and that he would expect him at Dinner that day; but he was advertised by the forerunners of another party of the quarters of Oquincourt, and of Lieutenant Gene|ral Le Rose, who were further advanced, that Turen had haulted in the said vally of Burg; wherefore without sending to the Cardinal, he hasted thither, being resolved to fight, and by Moon-shine he came on the 15th. of November before it was bright day to the vally of Smide; from whence the Enemies Croats were just then gone, having heard news of the ad|vancing

of the Kings men. Then General Turenne giving sign to his Troops by three several shot of Cannon, that they might rank themselves in order, the Commanders were so diligent, as the most of them were in Battle|array upon the tops of the Mountains, before the Kings men could come up unto them, as they indeavoured; which when Plessis Pralin knew, finding how he had failed in his first design, which was to have gotten be|tween the Enemies quarters, and to have kept them from joyning, he be|took himself to march with much diligence upon the parallel line to the Enemy; and getting the upper hand with his right wing, on the part where Turenn's left wing stood, intending to play upon it on the Flank, now that they were weak, and that the Lorainers were not yet come up unto them, who came not long after; but Turenne also hastning his march, both the Armies marched in a parallel line for above a League, not far from one another, and then came the Lorainers in, with whom Turenne finding himself able to resist the Kings men, he staied upon an advantagious scitu|ation, to put his Army in Battle-array, and to put the business to the arbi|trement of Fortune.
He drew out his men into only two lines, that his Front might be the larger upon the top of the Hill, which extends it self into a large plain; and he according to his custom, placed himself upon the left wing of the Horse, assisted by Count Duras, by Baron Bouteuille, and by Messieurs de Beaunau, and Montelieu, who were the prime Commanders. Monsieur Fuges, and Count Lignauile Commanded the Lorainers, who ranked them|selves on Turenn's left side. The right was possest by the five newly raised Regiments of the Germans conducted by Monsieur Lanau. Don Stephano di Gammara, assisted the Walloon, and the Lorain Foot; and the French were led on by Messieurs di Betbets, de Rosopere, and by Count St. Quinten; whereof the first Commanded Turenn's Brigade, the 2d. that of the Crown, and the 3d. that of Stenay, on the head of which Battailions stood Mar|quess Hocourt, of Omale, and Count Bossu a Fleming. The six field pieces were placed on the Front of the Army, preceeded by the Forlorn hope who were to give the first Skirmish; some Croats were to scour the Country, and to Skirmish with the forwardest of the Enemy.
Marishal Plessis Pralin having discovered the vally which lay between the two Armies, divided his Army, which consisted of 4000. Foot and 500. Horse, into two Battailions also; the first whereof was led on by the Marishals self, accompanied by Monsieur Maincamp, Monsieur Villaquiere, the Marquess d' Oquincourt, and de la Rosa, all four Lieutenants General; by Count Plessis Pralin Son to the General, by Count Nauailes Vicount Corvalle, Monsieur de St. Gervies, and Monsieur Fleshenteyne; with whom were divers other Officers, and experienced Gentlemen. Messieurs de Valle, and de Pradell commanded the Foot, which were divided into six Battai|lions, on the Front whereof were placed two pieces of Canon. The 2d. Battel contained five Battailions of Foot, part French, part Dutch: led on by Messieurs Chaumontelle, la Susa d' Emeraut, la Flotte Venciuille, and others, in the intervall between these two Squadrons of Foot were two Squadrons of Prince Thomaso of Sauoy his Gens d'arms, some Companies of the Generals, and of his Sons, and of my Lord Digby an Englishman. Monsieur d' Invile, Marishal of the Camp had the care of the reserve of Horse of this 2d. line. The King's Army advancing in this order, Gene|ral Turenne, to keep the Foot from adjusting themselves between the inter|vals of Horse Squadrons, as they began to do, advanced himself in person with his wonted courage, and the Lorainers were so ready on the left hand as they gave leave only to three Squadrons of the Enemies Horse to op|pose

them: for the Kings men had regulated their first body on the right hand according to the number of Turenn's Troops, which as yet had not the Lorainers joyned to them, and therefore finding this advantage, he furi|ously charged the Enemies line, who with no less valour incounter'd them, so as without giving fire their Horses heads shook one against another. Marishal Plessis Pralin being on the head of the first Squadron on the right hand, thrust forward to incounter him, and at the same time sent Cavaliere Barada to wish Marishal d' Hochencourt to fall upon his Flanck; but the Enemy not having at all sustain'd the onset on that side, d' Hochencourt could not make use of the advantage of his station; but being advertised by Monsieur de Quay, Marishal of the Battel, that five of Turenn's Squa|drons marched a little lower to fall upon his Flank, he was forced to quit his first design, and to fight these with the Queens Regiment and that of Carlo Broglia, who put them to flight: Monsieur de Cosse who was to have backt him on the head of the second Battle, seeing that d' Hochencourt had escaped danger on that side, advanced with Vatimont, and Cimitiers Squa|drons against others which were led on by Count Ligneuille, who hasted to assault the Dutch Troops of Lieutenant General Rosa, and routed them. But the conflict was much hotter on the right wing, where Turen's left hand Squadrons, he himself being with his Sword in hand on their head, fought egregiously, and charged the Kings Horse home; amongst whom Count Plessis the Marishals Son, and many other Gentlemen of note were at the very first onset slain, and the rest routed; but with so much loss to Turenn's men, who (though victorious) were so much lessened, and so confused, as they might almost be said to be routed, as well as the others. In this dan|gerous emergency the Marishal General gave singular proofs of his expe|rience and valour; for incouraging those that gave back with his own presence, and rallying those that were routed and fled, he ordered his Adjutant Monsieur Lomenet, to make the Horse advance who were upon the Foots Flank, and who not having yet fought, were fresh and intire: with these he himself and Monsieur Manicamp, fomented by Prince Thoma|so's Gensd' Arms, which were led on by Cavaliere Vssinga gave furiously on upon the first line of the Lorain Horse, which were disposed of in seven Squadrons; and finding them already in disorder, and wearied with ha|ving fought till then against three great French Squadrons, he burst in amongst them; in relief of whom came Count Bossu, who with two Squadrons fell upon the French Foot, who wanted Horse to back them, for Monsieur d' Inville after having charged with the reserve, was faln back. Here the fight began hotter than before; the Pikes opposing the fury of the Horse with much undauntedness, and signal example; at last Monsieur de Villaquier came in with the fresh and intire Battles of the se|cond line, and Turenne having but two Battles of the second line to oppose them, one of them which was led on by a Dutch Commander, who was there slain, was routed. The other being commanded by the Serjeant Major, made forward, and routed two of the Kings Battels; and here the whole second line of the Lorrainers mixt with the first, so as when the 2d. line of the French Army, which was wholy composed of Veteran Germans, came up in good order, it found them in great confusion; Turenne who would have brought up the ranks of the first line to charge, and then have faln back into the second, had his Horse wounded under him, so as he could move but slowly. Count Duras, Baron Bonteville, and Messieurs de Beauneau, and Montilieu having routed those that withstood them, marcht up with the remainder of their Troops to the Cannons mouth, and broke some Squadrons of the 2d. French line. But this mean while whilst Mon|sieur

Lanau, who commanded the five Dutch Regiments in Turenne's right wing had his Horse slain under him, and was himself taken Prisoner in the first charge wherein he had some advantage; all his men were put to flight, which caused the Kings men of the left wing to return to the right wing, where charging the second fresh line of the Lorrainers they routted them utterly, so the field was won, wherein Count Lignaville was taken Prisoner, and Mounsieur Fouges; who had received two wounds, and Edward Prince Palatine, together with two other German Colonels were slain.
General Turenne as he past between the Lorrain Squadrons, and his own Troops, finding himself alone, for all his Gentlemen were mingled with the Enemy, and his Horse being again twice wounded, was invironed by some of the Kings men, who asked him if he would have quarter, when Monsieur de Berge, Captain of his Guard coming in, they defended them|selves with unparalled courage, and throwing two of the Enemies to the ground, they luckily got free from the rest, crying out that they were the Kings Officers, and that those Dutch men would have kil'd them. Thus they escaped out of the Field; and Turenne met with Monsieur de Vaue, Serjeant Major of Beauveau's Regiment, who lent him a Horse wherewith he saved himself: so as finding both the wings of his Army utterly routed; the Foot presently threw down their Arms, and ran all, save Turenne's Briga|do, who refusing quarter, fell in with unheard of boldness into the midst of the Kings Squadrons, where they were all either slain, or taken, after an hours fierce conflict. Here was Haucourt taken Prisoner, who commanded two small bodies of Horse, and Don Stephano de Gammara General of the Spanish Artillery, Count St. Quinten, and Colonel Capion, and divers other Officers and Soldiers were slain. Thus the Kings men won the day, were masters of the Field, took 24. Ensigns, all the Drums, and about 3500. Prisoners; and about 1800. were slain. General Turenne, the Counts Bossu, and Reens, and some more Horse, retreated towards Barledue, and from thence to Stenay, the rest who escaped the Victors fury, dispersed them|selves several ways.
Of the Kings Army there died upon the Field, beside Count Plessis Son to the General, Aluimare, Vale, and Carualle, all of them Field Marishals, Serjeant General Rosa, Colonel Beus, and the Vicount de L' Hospitale, be|sides many that were wounded, about 480. Soldiers, and Officers of lesser account.
After this Victory the Garrison of 300. which was in Chasteau Porcien yielded upon discretion to Camp Master Bougy, who during the Battel, was besieging it with 1500 men; and all the other Garrisons under Turenne in the Towns beyond the River Aisne did also surrender.
This Victory was accompanied by the taking of Barleduck which the Lorrainers held; Viscerge, which was stoutly defended by Maileferd, a French Colonel; the Town and Castle of Miracourt, which yielded upon discretion to Marishal Ferte Senetre; who was he that took all these Towns, as also the Castle Gardia, with the Garrisons of Vic and Mongenu|ick.
But the season being unfit for further proceedings, and rest being rather to be thought upon for the Soldiers, than new enterprises, they were put into their Winter quarters; the Cardinal being thus Victorious, no less by this fortunate success, then by having secured the Princes this year in the Kings name, taken the Towns from them which they possest, succord La Guise, recovered the Castle of Dijon, Belgarde, Danuilliers, Cleremont, St. Iohn di L' Ansne, Verdun, Caen, Diepe, secured Haure de Grace, and Roan, ended the commotions in Guienne, reduced Burdeaux, and driven the Spa|niards

from Rethel, it is impossible to relate what confusion they were in, who murmured against his Government of affairs, and who were jealous of his actions. His Friends, who according to the fashion of the Court, do flatter Fortune more than persons, solicited him by their Letters to come  receive Triumph in Paris, telling him that these happy successes had stopt all mens mouths, wherefore he returned to Paris on the last of December, which occasioned the bad accident which followed, as you shall hear, which he had shun'd, had he tarried but one month longer in the Army out of Paris. The Coadjutor after the Battle at Rethel, being desired by his especial friend Monsieur di Militiere to mind his studies, and not to med|dle any more in factions, and in the intrigues of the Court, where the Cardinal grew daily greater; answered that he would follow his Counsel; but that he must first end two things; which were, to drive the Cardinal out of Administration of Government, and to set the Princes at liberty; and that then he would betake himself quietly to his book.
The Cardinal afterwards thinking himself obliged to put some esteem upon those who had signalized themselves in the late Battle, made the King bestow the Marishal staff of France upon Villaquiere, who was after|wards called Marishal d' Aumount; upon la Ferte Imbault, called the Marishal d' Estampes; and upon the Marquesses of Oquincourt, and of Ferte Senatre, the one Governour of Peroun, the other of Lorrain. He gave the Government of La Fera, intending him further honours, and he consolated all the rest with hopes and promises; he had also promised Count Grance to make him Marishal of France; but the Duke of Orleans, who growing jealous of the fame which the Cardinal had acquired by so many conquests; and seeing that in the Election of the four Marishals there was none chosen that depended upon him but Estampes, and that he could not get him to have the first place in precedency, though he were the antientest servant, opposed Grance his Election. So as the Cardinal not thinking it fit to exasperate the Duke any longer, hoping to bring him over afterward upon better reasons to his designs, he forbore conferring that honour upon Grance, who not well contented with the denial of what his so long service had deserved, retreated to his Government of Graveling, and by causing jealousies afterward in the Court, he made Orleans suffer the intended honour to be confer'd upon him. Thus every one rejoycing at the Cardinals prosperity either really, or in appearance, according as they shared therein; others were so full of fears, and emulation as not govern|ing themselves by what was just or reasonable, they fell upon all destructive Resolutions.
The imprisoned Princes Friends who labor'd their freedom, when the Cardinal was absent, finding how generally it was desired, got the Princess of Conde, and Madamoselle de Longueville, to present each of them a Peti|tion to the Parliament, to move them to protect the Princes, and to inte|rest them in their dis-inprisonment. The Petition being delivered in the Princess of Conde's name on the first of November by Monsieur Deslandes Payer a Councellor, it was read the next day in the Parliament. After a Narrative of what had been done touching the imprisonment of the Prin|ces, it contained that in conformity to the Laws of the Kingdom, and answerable to the Declaration of the 24th. of October, 1648. Process might be made and expedited against the Princes, and that in the mean time they might be brought to Paris, and placed in the Lore with such guards upon them as should be thought fit. The prime President said it was a business which would suffer much discussion, and moved that it might be put off till the next week, so it was put off till the next Wednesday:

on which day Monsieur Talon strove with a pithy Oration, to inform the Assembly that the Declaration of the twenty eighth of October could not derogate from the Regal Authority, the Kings Council being concerned in the Princes their affairs: that therefore the said Petition should be trans|mitted to the Queen Regent, desiring her to reflect upon it, and use there|in her accustomed goodness and clemency. Monsieur Crespine Dean of the Parliament presented the other Petition of Madamoselle Longueville, which concerned the same business, desiring that they might be placed in L' Hostell de Soissouns in Paris, where she might render the Duke her Father the service and assistance to which she was by birth and nature bound. This Petition was not well read, when Monsieur de la Roche Captain of the Prince of Conde's Guard, came to the Parliament door, demanding to be let in; for he had a Letter to present from the three imprisoned Princes, which he was commanded to deliver to the whole Assembly; when he came in, the Letter was read, which contained the same things as did the Petitions presented by the two Ladies. The Letter was written by the Prince of Conde's own hand, and subscribed by the other two, dated from Cudbouille the 19th. of November, after that Teloune had replied, that the Letter, and the supplications ought to be sent to the Queen, the Assembly rose, adjourning their meeting till the next Friday. Then the Princes their Friends represented to the Duke of Orleans how that it was a strange thing to keep the Princes of the blood in Haure de Grace, an unwholesom place, scituated in the Sea, where they were continually in danger to die. To which he answered that they were sent thither against his will, and that they ought to be removed from thence. The Parliament meeting on Friday to resolve upon these supplications, Monsieur de Saintote came with a Letter from the King, wherein he commanded the Parliament not to re|solve upon any thing, till they should know his will, this was readily obey|ed; to which purpose the first President, and one other President, four Counsellors of Le grande Chambre, and two of every Chamber of In|quests, met the next morning. These Commissioners being brought into the Queens Chamber, who for some indisposition of health kept her bed; her Majesty told them that by reason of her being ill, she could not say much to them, but made the Lord Keeper tell them that they should not meet any more upon any whatsoever occasion, till she were better: for she was resolved as soon as she should be well, to take order for all things, and to give them all satisfaction. That as for the business of the Princes it was of high consequence, and that before she could resolve any thing therein, she must advise with her Council, and with the Duke of Orleans, which she could not now do by reason of her sickness: when the Com|missioners made this report to the Assembly, they agreed all in putting off the business, but they differed in the time; some would have it for eight days, some for four; but four days was resolved upon. Monsieur Crespine moved that publick prayers and procession might be made for the Queens health: but was not seconded by above 10. or 12. voices, all the rest be|ing exasperated against her for upholding the Cardinal. At the next meeting, the King sent them another Letter, charging them again, not to meet as concerning the business of the Princes; for that his Majesty would shortly take order therein. But the Assembly continued, and in contempt of the Kings Commands began to treat of the Princes concern|ments, they read the Petitions of the two Princesses, and the Princes Let|ter; several motions being made, it was resolved to send Douyat, and Maynardau to desire the Duke of Orleans to come to the Parliament, for Naiau said the business was such, as he could not speak his opinion but in

the Dukes presence. Thus the Assembly was adjourned till the next day, as the Assembly rose a great noise as heard in the outward Hall of the Palace made by divers who were hired to do it, amongst which one was so bold as to say, and swear to President Mesnies in an outragious manner, that they would have justice, and a fig for Mazerine, which made the President return into the Chamber, fearing worse. The Duke of Orleans answered to the desire made unto him by the two aforesaid, That he would not come to the Assembly for that there was so great tumultuating; and that when he should come, it should be to the cost of some body, who made it lawful to publish that the Princes were removed from Marcousi to Haure de Grace, without his consent; that knowing they would not meet without he were present, to treat of affairs of such importance, he would not come to them; but let them do what they would, nothing was to be done but to remit that business to the Queen, to do what she pleased therein: and that it had never been heard that the Parliament did meddle in any such affairs; That whereas it seemed strange unto them that Monsieur di Bar should guard the Princes, let them consider that the late Prince was guarded in the Castle of Vincennes by a Lieutenant of the Navarre Regiment. Not|withstanding they continued to treat of the Princes, and the aforesaid Dandales moved that a Remonstrance might be made both by word of mouth, and in writing to the King, that Haure de Grace not being a sitting Prison for Princes of the blood, nor la Bar of a sitting condition to be their keeper, (it being a place belonging to the Guards of the Kings body) the Princes might be removed to the Louvre, and be there guarded by the Kings Officers. Crespin being of the Kings party, asked where the Parliaments Artillery was to force Bar to let loose the Princes? and whether they had 50000. Ussieri or Serjeants to make an Army and besiege him in case he refused to obey them. Thus the Assembly ended without concluding any thing, and adjourned till the next day. When the Marishal de L' Hospital being in the great Hall, and hearing himself called a Mazarinian, turned about and said aloud; who is he that calls me a Mazarinian? one of the insolent people replied, I am he that says so, but who are you that ask me? The Marishal wisely said nothing, finding that they were people who de|sired nothing but to raise Tumults. When the Assembly met again, the same Dislandes propounding what he had done before, added, that if the Parliament should think good to fall upon the Cardinals bad Administrati|on of Government, he would lend his helping hand, but that then the o|ther Parliaments must be invited to co-operate joyntly for the good of the State, this being well liked by many, afforded occasion to many to com|mence the discourse. Counsellor Brussels, seconding Dislandes, added, that all the Evils that had befaln France for the four last years, had pro|ceeded from the Cardinals bad guiding of affairs; he imputed unto him, that he had appropriated unto himself almost all the Revenues of the King, that he detain'd the pay of the Armies, and of the Fleets for his own use, which occasioned the Soldiers plundering and extortions even to the Gates of Paris. That it was a shame for France to tolerate a stranger so long, he then fell to speak of the Prince of Conde, shewing that in the Kings own Declaration he was charged chiefly with being too ambitious of having the places of Government bestowed upon his Friends; which if it were a fault in him, it might much more be called guilt in the Car|dinal, there not being any strong place whereof he was not now absolute master; that his going to Rethel, was only to treat of Charleville, and of Monte Olimpe, and alledging divers other examples, and reasons, concluded that in their Remonstrances, they must mention the Cardinal, and declare

unto the King in writing, the unless speedy remedy were taken, he went about to undo the State. Champound, Refuge, Meusiner, Sevin, Coqueley and others continued to inveigh mightily against the Cardinal; but nothing was resolved upon, for the delight of backbiting spun out the time till it grew late; nor was there any thing concluded the Munday following. For news coming that the Battel of Rethel was won, the Chambers were invited to assist at Te Deum, which was no pleasing news to many, for that it was altogether in praise of the Cardinal; in whose behalf Malnerdeau Champre advancing, said, (that all the good Fortune of France proceeded from the Cardinal, who was the cause of obtaining that Victory, and of all the advantages gotten by the former Champagnias.) He commended his Government, and joined in opinion with those that were for the King. And for what concerned the Prince they were to be given into the Car|dinals custody, who would have a particular care of them, but he was not listned unto. The Parliament met the following days, and the Coadjutor discoursed vehemently against the disorders of the State, not naming any body; he said that the Victory being gotten, and the Enemy being so re|duced as they could do nothing, they must think upon home affairs, and free the Kingdom from the bad Administration of the Finances; but that all things could not be done without setting the Princes at liberty, which was a point of State, and ought to be done, though they should not prove innocent. Barine master of the requests, Aisne, and other Councellors, continued still to blame the Government; but President Viola was more passionate than all the rest, he discoursed largely of the Princes affairs, he spoke of the Cardinal as of the common Enemy. He quoted a place of Scripture, where it is said that Forreigners ought not to be received into the Government of States; nor be acquainted with publick affairs; ad|ding that all the Kings confederates did abandon him, by reason of the bad satisfaction they received from the Favourite, when they were to ne|gotiate any thing. That the few Princes of Italy who were yet Friends to France, were in doubt whether they should continue still so, or no, that Catalonia which had cost the King above 60. Millions, was about to be lost. That the English did threaten, that all France was full of fire; wherefore he concluded for the Remonstrances. Blanmenill, and Gilbert shewed examples out of History, of what disorders had besaln States, which have been governed by Forreigners; and how that all Princes that ever made use of them, have been forced to abandon them, and to send them away; and here amongst other examples he alledged the Declarati|on made by the late King Lewis the 13th. when the late Prince of Conde was set at liberty, after a long imprisonment occasioned by the ambition of the Marquess de Ancere a Florentine. Gilbert remembring violences commit|ted by Ministers of State, against the chief Lords of the Land, added that Favorites thought themselves out of credit, when they did not do some Coupe de Maistre. That Cardinal Richelieu had begun it, and Mazarine had continued it, as was to be seen in divers Presidents, and Counsellors, in Messieurs de L' Hospital, Vitry, Barrillon, Duke Beaufort, Marishal Della Motta, and lastly in Princes of the Royal Family. He did inculcate that evils must be provided against by stout Resolutions of Parliament, which had always upheld Regal Authority, though the Cardinal imputed all the disorders thereunto. And here he called to mind that Henry the 4th. said once to the Duke of Savoy, that he acknowledged his Crown from the square Caps. Lottin said hereupon, that it was no new thing for Parlia|ments to meddle in such affairs; for that it was to be found in publick Records, even to the years 1415. and 1417. that the Parliament had no|minated

Commissioners to make Remonstrances to the King, touching the ill Government of the State; and that the Cardinal said false in saying that the Parliament was an Enemy to the King, and Kingdom. Vedaw condemning the Government of Forreigners, alledged an example, taken out of what History I know not, of a Lake seated between certain Mountains, whereinto if a stone were thrown, it would become Tempe|stuous: others spake in praise of the Princes, and were all for the Re|monstrances: at last three or four days being spent in such like discourses, in which time many Libels were posted up on several corners of the Streets, tending to sedition; the first President finding that the greatest part were for the Remonstrance, and that it lay not in the wit of man to alter them, that he might not appear contrary to the Princes to whom he was also a well wisher, was contented that an humble supplication should be made to their Majesties for the Princes liberties, to which function he himself with some others of the Assembly were deputed, who not having audience before the 22th. of Ianuary, spoke as followeth:



Sir,
It is to be believed that your Majesty is informed of the present conditi|on of your Kingdom and of the late conquests, which have been such as they may be said to be peculiar to your Crown; we have with grief seen the loss of so ma|ny advantages, of so many Towns in Italy, and in Catalonia, which have cost so much Blood and Treasure. The Enemy hath been so bold as to set his Foot in France, and to take Towns in sight of the French Army. Your Majesty hath been forced to go into many Provinces of this your Majesties Kingdom, to quench a fire which seemed to extend it self every where; your Majesty hath been forced to march into several Provinces of your Kingdom to quench a fire which seemed to threaten a general Conslagration, the pains and troubles of which voyages hath prejudiced your Majesties health, and (which is the greatest misfortune can belong to us) hath put your life into much danger: all men know that these disorders have happened since the 18th. of January, 1650 that fatal day wherein two Princes of the blood were imprisoned, together with the Gover|nours of Normandy. Some thought by this to break the thread of all our dis|asters, and to quiet France; but in lieu thereof it hath widened all wounds. We very well know that there are some secrets of State, which it is not lawful to pry into, and that there are some mysteries which ought not to be soon made known; It being sufficient that in time the truth shall be made known. This perhaps hath made us believe there were many strong, and valid reasons for this Imprisonment, which in time might be discovered, had not the Letter which was sent to the Parliament the next day decipherd the Aenigma, making us know the innocency of the rather unfortunate than blamable Princes. We placed the strength and welfare of this Kingdom in the Regency intrusted in our Vertuous Queen, your Sacred Majesties Mother, assisted by the Duke of Orleans, and by the Prince of Conde: but as soon as this knot was loosened, all misfortunes besell us. We had thought that the Authours of this Council might have altered their minds, knowing that there is no way to keep off publick ruine, but to think upon the liberty of these Princes, and to restore unto France those Champions who have kept her so long Victorious, and preserved her from all forreign injuries; but though we have expected this with impatiency, as ne|cessary for the good and safety of this Dominion, we will boldly say it hath been in vain; the liberty of these Captives might make us know that our Enemies were no longer able to advantage themselves by our disorders, and divisions. But when we expected this good fortune, we were struck with astonishment, to see them removed to another Prison, where their lives are in danger, yes I say in danger; and I add, that they may well be kept from our eyes, but never from the hearts of minds of true Frenchmen.
Madam, this is the effect of our humble Remonstrance, who ought to watch, that the publick may receive no prejudice; we have been long silent out of re|spect, and had been so still, had it not been, that we might have been blamed for not giving notice of the threatning disorders. But Sir, as this Assembly (if your Majesty had extended your Authority too far, upon any particular Member of this Parliament) had been obliged to have interceded for that Member, so ought it much more do so for the Princes of the blood, who are children of the Royal Family, the firmest upholders of Monarchy, and the most noble and honourable Members of this Kingdom. So many Victories, so many Conquests, so many Services done to the State, plead in their behalf; as if any thing might be feared from their comportments, the apprehensions which are conceived might suffice, that unless their misfortune have a speedy end, the stones which do inclose them, will speak so loud, as the passers by, who shall hear them, will carry their mournful complaints throughout all France, wll awaken the hearts of all true Frenchmen, which will make such a noise, as it is to be feared, that from this bold action, some inconvenience may result unto your Majesties, in this so great and pressing danger. We humbly beseech your Majesty, Madam, to find out some convenient Remedies; and that you will give us leave with all dutiful respect to say, that unless you provide speedily for it, the zeal, care and fidelity, which we owe to the preservation of the State, and to the Kings service, will force us to lay our hands to it, and to imploy all our endeavours to keep this Crown from falling. We have thought fit, Madam, to represent all these considerations to your Majesty, and humbly to desire that you will set these imprisoned Princes at liber|ty, to the end that they may be able to do that faithful service to the State, as they have formerly done, and Sacrifice the Remainder of their blood and lives to the glory of this Monarchy; further beseeching your Majesty, that you will grant a place of safety to Madamoselle de Longueville, where she may pay her piety to her Father.



This Resolution of Parliament, which was the first thing that was done in favour of the Princes; did much incourage the Enemies of the King|dom to further their wisht for intent, and being backt by the Assembly, they betook themselves to endeavour rather the Cardinals ruine than the release of the imprisoned; for though their projects were maskt over at first with the pretence of the Princes liberty, (which was approved of by many, as what might impede greater disorders) yet the Coadjutors secret meaning being by little and little, to ingage the Parliament and Duke of Orleans in the behalf of the Princes, and in prejudice of the Cardinal, he did what he could to keep off the Cardinal, and to bring the Princes to Paris, under the judicature of Parliament; because unless the Cardinals expulsion had preceded, it might have impeded the Princes freedom, or that if he had furthered it, he might have been upon such conditions, as he might have been arbitrator of the Government of the Court, and of the whole Kingdom, which was the groundwork of all his thoughts, as we shall in all his actions observe; so as it may be conceived, that he had no solid reason for his hatred against the Cardinal, but only the Cardinals glory and fortune. The Queen, who proceeded very considerately in all her Resolutions, and who endeavoured nothing but the service of the King her Son, sought to gain time, hoping at last to make the Duke of Orleans see with what cunning the Coadjutor went about to abuse his na|tural goodness. She defer'd answering the Commissioners eight days, in which time she and her Counsel having dived into the Parliaments design, she answered them, that the Assembly had wont to advertise the King, when they medled with any thing touching his Authority, before they

took any Resolution; that they had done so the year 1562. upon the Letters which were sent them by the late Prince of Conde. That the late commotions were an example of this, when the Parliament would not re|solve any thing upon the Duke of Orlean's Letters, without knowing the Kings pleasure first therein, that now they had altered their course, having resolved upon the Petitions of the Princess of Conde, and of Madamoselle Longueville, and undertaken to make a Remonstrance for the Princes liber|ty, not letting the King know, that any such Petitions were presented them. That though this was a business whereof the Parliament ought to take no cognizance, since it depended soly upon the Kings Authority, and that it could not be granted but by his mere goodness, regard being had to what was contained in his Letters sent to the Parliament, and to all the Sovereign Assemblies, and received with applause by the People; yet all this should not keep the King from giving the Princes their liberty, which he was con|tent they should have without delay, provided that the Forces of Steney should cease, and that Marishal Turenne would lay down his Arms; and to the end, that none that were of that party might have any pretence to re|tard the doing so, the King offer'd pardon to all that had been, or were yet of that party: to which purpose he would order Letters to be sent pre|sently to the Parliament, and that as soon as Arms should be laid down, the King would free the imprisoned. Though some few, who had other designs in their head, were not well pleased with this, yet the greatest part of the Parliament appeared satisfied; and it was ordered, that some should be sent to the King to make the keepers of the Seal expedite this Decree. But whilst affairs past thus between the King and Parliament, we must not omit what was done at the same time on behalf of the Princes. The Princess Palatine, and her friends, seeing a general disposition to favour the Princes, and an extraordinary aversion to the Cardinal, she continued the Treaty, which (as hath been said) was begun, and at last concluded it with the Duke of Nemeurs, who had both of them full power from Conde. It was managed, and ended by Croisy, a Counsellor of Parliament, and sub|scribed by the Duke Beaufort, the Coadjutor, President Viola, Monsieur Arnaude, and by Fosseuse; every one ingaging for themselves.
The principal Articles contained an agreement, how to obtain the Prin|ces liberty, by the Parliament and peoples means. The Coadjutor in|sisted upon the means, how to remove the Cardinal from about the King, and that the Princes adherents should oblige themselves strictly thereunto; And though some of Conde's Friends were for giving all satisfaction to the Cardinal, to interest him in the Prince his liberty; yet all were not of that same opinion, least if it should be discovered, that they should indeavour to pull down the Cardinal, the Princes might be plunged into greater dif|ficulties, either by hazarding their lives, or by losing the hopes they had, of getting their liberty by agreeing with the Cardinal, yet the Coadjutor insisting, that he would do nothing but upon that condition, and promising to ingage the Duke of Orleans therein, they were forced to consent there|unto; and that the Cardinal might not come to the knowledg of this, they resolved to keep it from Beaufort, left he might communicate it to the Dutchess of Monbason, and she to others; so as the Treaty being carried by Croisy to the Princess Palatine to subscribe and read it; the Coadjutor handled the business so, as that this Article was skipped in reading, and that Beaufort did also subscribe it without perusal, but pretending that the Original which was to remain with the Frondeurs, might be delivered to him, and that the Transcript might remain with the Princess Palatine, whereby they might meet with the same inconvenience, they resolved

without her knowledg to put them both into the hands of Blanmevell sea|led up, making him give his word never to give them out, but in the pre|sence and by the consent of the Coadjutor, and of the President Viola.
To this Treaty another was added some few days after, between the Duke of Orleans, the Palatiness, and the Duke of Nemeurs, wherein they ingaged themselves to use all their power for the Princes liberty. And in the same Treaty a marriage between the Duke of Anguien, eldest Son to the Prince of Conde, and the Dutchess of Alanson, second Daughter to Orleans, was concluded, with obligation that the Prince should not change any of the Kings Council, nor place any others therein without consent of the said Orleans, in it was also confirm'd the marriage between the Prince of Conty and the Dutchess of Chevereux; wherein there were some rubs put by Conde's friends, presaging what the consequences might be. But the Coadjutor kept still firm, saying, this was the only means to win the Duke of Orleans his favour, though it was known afterwards that he did not so passionately desire these marriages. After these Treaties the Prince of Conde's Friends put forth a Declaration, wherein the Prince promised to second the Duke of Orleans in making the Coadjutor Cardinal. All these acts were by Croisy, and Camertine (intimate friends to the Coadju|tor) carried to the Duke of Orleans, who underwrit two copies without reading them, nor knew he what the contents were more than what the Coadjutor was pleased to acquaint him with. Without whose suggestion, doubtlesly Orleans intended no ill to the Cardinal, nor would the Princes friends have demanded more than the Prince his liberty, which when it should have been had, the Parliament would not have prest for keeping the Cardinal from Court. These writings being afterwards carried to the Princess Palatine, and to the Duke of Nemeurs, to be subscribed by them, they agreed that they should remain with Croisy, who was to deliver them to the Duke of Orleans, or to Conde, when he should be at liberty.
Incouraged by these Treaties, the Frondeurs began to solicit the Princes liberties; which made the Cardinal aware ere long of Orleans his aliena|tion from him, not so much out of any coolness that he found in him, as for the bad speeches which many of his Court used concerning him; but he was not yet fully inform'd of the secret plots that were a weaving against him; and it was strange that so many days being spent in these Treaties, he got no perfect notice of them, they were too far advanc't before he perceived them; so as after having imploi'd many persons in Messages, and Proposals, he at last offer'd, in the presence of both King and Queen, to be reconciled; but this was rather in appearance, than real, but though Orleans forbore not the Cardinals Conversation, and Dined sometimes with him; yet after he had underwritten the aforesaid Treaties, he could not so well dissemble, as not to discover his inward mind. The Cardinal, who was not to be parallel'd for wariness, finding this, and knowing that there could be nothing but the ill impressions suggested by the Frondeurs, and of his other Enemies, speaking thereof with the Queen in her Chamber on the Twenty sixth of Ianuary at night, told her that her Majesty must warily observe the proceedings of Parliament, where, it might be, there were
Fairfaxes, and Cromwells. The Duke who minded nothing but how to execute the Coadjutors suggestions, thought the pretence fit to give fire to the Mine; so as the Parliament being met on the first of February to think of the fittest means how to get the Princes out of Prison, being per|swaded that the Court did not desire it, and that the Kings promise was only to gain time; the Coadjutor being now sure to be assisted by Orleans, unmasked himself, and spoke more freely than before; he shewed how

necessary it was to get the Princes liberty as soon as might be; and that he had order from the Duke to assure them, that this was his opinion, which he would imploy all his power to effect. The Counsellors wonder'd much to hear this, for believing hitherto that the Duke stood well with the Queen, they could not discern whence this alteration should proceed. Beaufort ratified what the Coadjutor had said, and declared that he was of the same mind; nothing was resolved upon that day, for the Members be|ing astonished at the novelty, adjourn'd till the next day: and the Coad|jutor going to acquaint Orleans how well the Parliament was pleased with what he had told them in his name, made him the more inamored with their applause, and established him more firmly in the Resolution which he had taken.
Monsieur Tillier going at that instant to know from the Duke whether what the Coadjutor had said in Parliament was by his Highness permission or no, or done barely by the Coadjutors self, answered somewhat angrily, that what the Coadjutor had said, was done by his desire, and that he should always approve of what he should say, or do. The whole Court was much surprised with this answer, and made them resolve to send to Treat with the Princes touching their liberty. The next day the Duke of Orleans, moved thereunto by the Coadjutor, sent for the Lord Keeper, for Marishal Villeroy, and for the Secretary of State Tillier, and bad them tell the Queen in his name, That he would never come to Court, nor sit in Council as long as the Cardinal was there; and said further to Villeroy That as Lieutenant General of the State, he assigned over the keeping of the King's person unto him, which his head should be answerable for. On Friday the third of February, having with yet greater energie, by order from Orleans, repeated his opinion touching the Princes liberty, told the Assembly how the Cardinal had told the Queen in presence of the King, that there were Fairfaxes and Cromwells in the Parliament,  that it was to be feared that their intentions were to suppress Regal Authority, according to the example of England. That the Duke not able to tolerate so great a Calumny, had assured the King that it was altogether false, and that there was none but faithful servants to his Majesty, either in the Parliament or City, whereof he would become surety both in general, and in particular; and that the Duke had told the Cardinals self, that he was a wicked man, and worthy to be reprehended, for instilling such ill opinions into a young King against his affectionate Subjects, by whom his Majesty was generally loved; their hatred extending only to the Cardinal, whom they knew to be the only cause of the Kingdoms ruine. And that upon this the Duke had sent the day before for the aforesaid Lords, and had wisht them to tell the Queen that he would come no more to Court whilst the Cardinal was there.
At the names of Cromwell and Fairfax they were all highly scandalized, insomuch as three propositions were made against the Cardinal; the first, that he should be made Prisoner; the second (and this was made by Pre|sident Viola (who was more incens'd against him than all the rest) that he should be sent for to the Parliament to give an account of his Administra|tion, and for the words which he had said to the dishonour of the French Nation. Here the first President interrupted him, saying, he was too hasty; and after some contest between him and Coulin, who spoke impertinently against the Cardinal, the third proposal was made; which was, humbly to desire the Queen that he might be sent from Court; the meanwhile, the Coadjutor's friends having divulged throughout the City the afore|said words spoken by the Cardinal of Cromwell and Fairfax; the male|contents

resented it, and said they were injured; for the French do not only love, but even idolatrize their King; so as in a moment the whole City, which was quiet before, grew mutinous, the people running up and down the Streets, yea even in the Palace it self, crying out, Let the King live, and let Mazarine dye.
The Queen sent the next day to the Duke of Orleans, to know whether he would be content or no that she should come and visit him, and bring the Cardinal along with her: who answered, Her life would not be safe amongst in incen'sd people. The Queen repli'd, she would come alone without the Cardinal; he answered, He feared the people would rise. Then the Duke sent to the Marishals of France to forbid them to take or|ders from any one but himself, who was Lieutenant General of the State, and of his Majesties Armies; they answered, That whilst the King was pre|sent, they were to depend upon the King,  upon no other. He sent the same order to the Provost of Merchants, wishing him to will the Colonels and Captains not to take up Arms without his Command; they excused them|selves with ambiguous words, and went presently to acquaint the Queen therewith; who answered, They might not do ill to receive orders from the Lieutenant General of the Crown, since she could not believe that he would command any thing contrary to the Kings service; at the same time many of the Nobility being assembled together in the Marquess of Vieville's House (who was not over affectionate in his heart to the Cardinal) to think how to get satisfaction from the Cardinal, for what he had said to their shame; he carried them to L' Hostella d' Orleans, telling him, That if he pleased, he would frame their assembly, to which the Duke, not dis|senting, they had their first meeting, and choosing the same Vieville, and the Marquess Lordis for their Presidents, both which were desirous of no|velty, that so they might be of some consideration, and get advantage thereby, since as yet they were in no great credit at Court.
The Coadjutor finding that the Parliament delaid the execution of the three proposals against the Cardinal; and that the first President, with many of the more moderate sort, sought to sweeten bitterness, and that suiting himself to the most plausible opinion, he desired earnestly the Princes liberty; insisted that they were to acknowledg it from the Queens goodness, who had already given way thereunto; and had sent Marishal Gramont, Monsieur de Lyon, and Monsieur Goulas to treat with the Princes selves. And he perswaded Orleans to come to the Parliament, and by his Authority to foment what was desired; the Duke suffering himself to be perswaded by the Coadjutor, came to the publick Palace on the fourth of February, accompanied by the Dukes of Beaufort, Gioyuse, and Rets, by the Coadjutor's self, and by all the great ones of Parliament: he told them that he had given the Coadjutor order to acquaint the Assembly with what the Cardinal had said to the King to their detraction; and with what his answer was, both to the Queen and Cardinal; and how that in regard of such unworthy speeches, he had sent word to her Majesty, that he would come neither to Court, nor Council, so long as Mazarine was there; adding, That he was come to Parliament, intending to joyn wholly with them, and to see all things performed that they should Decree; that for above a month nothing had been spoken of in the Privy Council, but pri|vate business, instead of taking order for the Emergencies of State, or the Princes liberty; that the Cardinal would not have them disimprisoned, though himself had solicited any time these three months. He also de|clared that it was the Queens importunity that had made him consent to their imprisonment, and that she was induced thereunto by the Cardinals

false suggestions. He made also a Narrative of what had been done since the Princes imprisonment; blaming what had been done at Burdeaux by the Cardinal; and that if he had consented thereunto, it was only that he might not displease the Queen, to whom he had always profess'd much obsequiousness: but that perceiving now, that instead of growing better, things grew worse, he was resolved to go no more to Council as long as the Cardinal was there; that he was come to the Assembly to acquaint them with thus much, and to be advised by them, knowing that so he should not erre.
This the Duke speaking so freely against the Cardinal, was applauded, not only by those few that were his Enemies, but made deep impression in many others who had altered their minds, since they had heard what the Coadjutor had related, and which was afterwards confirm'd by Orleans.
The first President who was a good man, and of great experience, answered in very respective terms to the Duke, and with much moderation, That he was absolutely for the Princes liberty, but not by violence, nor by any other hand than the Kings. Then entring upon the Dukes discontents, he said, That if they arose from the Princes imprisonments, he might be sure they should be freed from imprisonment; but if from the Cardinals great|ness he was to make use of his wisdom therein, for it was lawful for the King to make use of whose service he pleased, and that if he thought him|self injured by the Cardinal, if he would declare his reason, there were means to satifie him without putting France into confusion, here the Duke interrupted him; saying, That for what concerned the Princes liberty, he the Duke ought to know more than he; but that he did not believe him, for he had a tye in writing upon Bar, that he would never set them at liber|ty without order from the Queen, and from him the Duke.
Whilst the Counsellors were giving their Opinions, the Master of the Ceremonies came to the Parliament with a Letter from the King, com|manding them to send Commissioners to him. Some were of opinion not to hear him; but the Duke would not suffer any such contempt, they therefore resolved to continue the Assembly, and in the interim to send the first President, and President Bailleul, with twenty Counsellors more, to receive his Majesties commands. Then came Count Brien, the first Secre|tary of State, who in the Queens name, desired Orleans to come and assist in Council in the Court; assuring her self, that he who had always born such affection to her Majesty, would not refuse her such a favour. The Duke replied, he could not answer her there, but when he should be re|turned to his own house, he would, as he did that very night; declaring, that there could be no safety for him, whilst the Cardinal was there: when the Commissioners came before her Majesty, the Lord Keeper ac|quainted them with the reason why the King had sent for them; and at the same time he delivered a writing containing what the Queen had to say to them, to the Secretary of State Guinegaute, who read it. After which the first President said, that the Assembly marvelled, why after the Parliaments Remonstrance, and after her Majesty had past her word that the Princes should have their liberties, there was so little sign thereof: to which the Queen answered that Marishal Grammont was already gone to treat with them, and that she was content they should come out, giving necessary precaution for the safety of the State: afterwards inlarging her self, and re assuming what had been read, she said, That all the relations that had been made to the Parliament, were mere Calumnies, suggested by the Coadjutor, who had told them falsehoods; that he pretended to too much, and that he was of an unquiet spirit; that he infused pernicious

Counsel into the Duke of Orleans, because he was not chosen Cardinal, which he had been so bold as to desire, threatning if otherwise, be would set fire on the four quarters of the Kingdom. She afterwards recounted what had past in Council the Tuesday before between the Duke of Orleans, and the Cardinal; she complain'd of the Duke having refused to let her come unto him, under pretence that the people might commit some out|rage upon her person; which consideration, she said, should not at all have altered her Resolution, but on the contrary, if she should have perceived the people begin to stir, she would have come out into the Streets, being sure that her presence would suddenly have quieted all disorders, for she very well knew what Reverence the Parisians bore to Royal Personages: she added further, that such affairs as these should be carried on mildly. That Marishal Grammont was already gone, and that therefore they needed not have any more meetings about that; and she moreover told them, that the King was growing out of his minority, and sufficiently inform'd, to di|stinguish between those who were seditiously given, and those who were well affection'd of which number, she said, they were, and that the King would one day remember them for it, so she dismist them. The Com|missioenrs being returned to Parliament, the first President related what the King had said, and made the writing which was given him, be read, and which contained almost the same thing; whereupon they began to consult, and there was difference of opinions. But at last Orlean's Authority pre|vailing, the Frondeurs and tumultuous people whereof the Hall was full, joyn'd in a Resolution of beseeching the Queen, to send a letter away speedily for the freedom of the Princes, and to send the Cardinal from Court, grounding their pretence upon what the Duke had said, that he would not go to the Council so long as the Cardinal was there. And they further said, That since there was a necessity, that one of the two should re|tire, it was fair and honest, that his Highness the Kings Uncle, and Lieu|tenant General of the State, should tarry, and that the other who was a Forrainer should be sent away; this being decreed in the Assembly, the first President was sent to acquaint the Queen with it, and humbly to de|sire the Princes liberty. Thus the Assembly ended, and Orleans returned to his own house, attended on by many of the Gentry, and by a great number of the Populacy. The next morning he sent for the Duke of Espernon, and for Marishal Schomberg, and told them, That he being Lieute|nant General of the Crown, they were hereafter to come to him for or|ders touching their imployments, the one being Colonel of the French Infantry, the other of the Switzers, they both answered, That they knew very well what became them to do, and the respect which they were to bear him: but that whilst the King was present, they were only to depend upon his Majesty; the same day the Queen sent for the Dutchess of Orleans, and for Madamoselle, and discoursed with them above two hours; but no good came of this conference, for there were few who through either envy, or emulation did not declame against the Cardinals greatness; nei|ther had the Dutchess of Anguien's indeavours better success, who la|bour'd to take off Orleans from the sinister impressions, which the Coadju|tor had made in him, of the Cardinal.
But though there was so great concourse of people about the Duke, yet the Palace Royal was frequented by much Nobility and those of the greatest esteem, who kept their due obedience to their Majesties. Amongst which all the Marishals of France, except de Estempes, Duke Mercure, who still was of the Queens party, never waver'd from the friendship which he protest to the Cardinal, and sent a challenge that very day to his Brother Beaufort, but Marishal de Estre hindred their meeting.
Whilst things were in this posture, both sides studied how to win the peoples affection, wherein the whole affair did consist; but they being born away by the desire of Novelty, inclined rather to favour the male|contents, than the Court, which made the Frondeurs joyn the more closely to the Princes, and to the Duke of Orleans.
It will not be much from the purpose, upon this occasion, to say some|thing upon the Court interests, which consisted wholly in the Kings and Queens Authority, and in the Forces of the Kingdom, which were firm in the same Resolution with the Cardinal, never to set the Princes at liberty, till the King being come to years of Majority, might be able to divert those Plots, which they had framed in his minority, to the prejudice of his power, for now they were in a safe place.
The Duke of Orleans, together with his Wife and Daughter, being joyn'd to Beaufort and the Frondeurs, solicited the Parliament, and the Parisians to concur in freeing the Princes; to the end that the Cardinal's credit being lost, their Authority might be the more considerable in the King's minority. The Dutchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutors aim was the same; She by reason of the Marriage agreed upon between the Prince of County, and her only Daughter; and the Coadjutor promising himself by this Alliance, that the Dutchess was to have with the Prince of Conde, to arrive at the Cardinals Cap; since he had no such hopes from the Court. Thus Paris being wholly set by the concurrance of so many Princes, and people of quality, upon pulling down the Cardinal, nothing was seen in the Parliaments Palace, but the concourse of people, and of Cavalliers, who publickly cri'd out for the Princes liberty, and against the Cardinal. So as instead of seeing the Court quieted after the favourable successes in Champagnia, and the peace of Guienne, it was on the contrary become fuller of confusion: But the Cardinal not being aware of the correspon|dency which the imprisoned Princes had with their adherents, was not much troubled thereat, by reason of the assurance he received from La Bar, who thought not to be deceived by his own people; for the Prince of Conde won one of Bar's Servants, who was appointed to attend him, by whose means he received Letters, corrupted the Guards, and had notice of all things by the means of Physicians,  Chirurgions, which visited him: so as he sent, and received advertisements without the knowledg of Bar, or of the Cardinal. Thus the Dutchess of Chevereux having made the Mar|riage sure, and the Coadjutor having won the Duke of Orlean's favour, they kept him always firm to them; the Dutchess of Chevereux, and the Princess Palatine carried all things with great dexterity, and secresie; and amidst all the tumultuous meetings that were made in Ianuary, the first President did great service, as well in the publick assembly, as in private discourse with their Majesties, as Commissioners from the Parliament, using his best indeavours for the Princes liberty. The Court and Cardinal be|ing thus undermined, saw they were obliged to give the Princes their li|berty; yet they failed not by means of many Princes, and others on whom they relyed, to handle the agreement so, as that they were to acknowledg their Releasement merely from the Queen, and should be only bound to her, and joyn with her, if they could but break the designs of the Coad|jutor, and of others. The Marquess Chastoneus, who for his venerable age was well thought of by both sides, sent for the Prince his friends to him, as Viola, Vesnsond, Croisy, Arnault and others, and in presence of Se|cretary Tillier proposed a particular Treaty for the Princes liberty. Conde's friends listned willingly to this; for they suspected that the Car|dinal being gone, and when Orleans should be Arbitrator at Court, he

might still detain the Princes in Prison by the Coadjutor's instigation, which they said was the Coadjutor's hidden design, whilst the Cardinal was upon his journey to Haure de Grace, and whilst Grammont, Lyon, and Goulas negotiating with the Prince, did agree together, that Conde should renounce all Leagues as well within, as without the Kingdom, that he should not come into Claremont, Bellegrade, the Castle of Dijon, nor the Tower of Burges till four years after his disimprisonment; that the King should put a Garrison into Steney, that the Duke of Longueville should quit the Government of Normandy, as being too near Paris; having another Government as good given him. The Dukes of Nemeurs, and of Roch|faucolt, who were come to Paris, subscribed the Treaty; and hound them|selves to observe it, since Orleans had not given them the Kings Letter till after they had signed it. The Queen did this to further Lyon's Negotiati|on in Haure de Grace, who had order to handle the business so, as that the King might receive no prejudice thereby: and that it might appear to pro|ceed merely from the Queens favour; but whilst Monsieur Vrliere and others went to see this Treaty performed, the Cardinal set them at liberty, so as their was no more speech thereof; and the Princes came out of Pri|son, as you shall hear in the next Book.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.1651 The SIXTH BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
Cardinal Mazarine parts unexpectedly from Paris, and goes to Haure de Grace. The Parisians rise, and under pretence that the King and Queen might also go out of Paris, they set Guards round about the Palace-Royal. The Princes are dis-imprisoned, and return in glory to Paris. The Cardinal goes to Sedam, and retires from thence to Burles in Germany. The Dutchess of Longueville, and Marishal Turenne are restored to Court. The Marriage between the Prince of County and Madamoselle Chevereux is broken off; whereat the Dutchess of Chevereux is scandalized; and be|come an Enemy to Conde, who loseth many friends. Assemblies of Eccle|siasticks, and of the Nobility insue. They pretend to call an Assembly of the States General and are dissolved, with promise from the King that they shall be called another time. Marishal Chasteauneus is in disgrace at Court, and the Seals are delivered to the first President of Parliament. The Duke of Orleans, and the Frondeurs are troubled thereat; they make the Queen re-assume them, and deliver them to the Chancellor of the King|dom. The Prince takes new distasts at Court, and begins new troubles; at the Cardinals return divers proposals are made by both parties. Conde at unawares retires from Paris, goes to St. Maure, pretends not to be safe at Court, demands that some State Ministers be sent away, which is done; but is not content for all this, he makes other pretentions; the Queen seeks all means how to appease him, but in vain. He makes league with Spain; and by his friends, and kindred is forced to make War; which he does unwillingly, foretelling no good success. The Spaniards begirt Barcellona; and divers accidents happen in those parts.

THE Parliament being fomented by the Duke of Orleans, by the Frondeurs, and Male-contents; and which was of more impor|tance, being frightned at the rage of the people, who ran in great numbers storming, to the publick Palace, after they had made humble Remonstrances to the Queen for the liberty of the Princes, and for the removal of the Cardinal; it was questioned whom the Provost of Merchants ought to obey, in case the people should take up Arms; and the assembly seeming to give that Attribute to the Duke of Orleans, and

the commotions growing hotter, and hotter in the City, the Cardinal was in danger of his life. Wherefore the Dutchess of Chevereux, who did not build too much upon Orleans his stability, and who desired that the Cardi|nal would yield, used all possible means to make him be gone; shewing the Queen sometimes how necessary it was to satisfie Orleans, who being sweetned by this demonstration of esteem put upon him, would be easily won over: sometimes saying, That if the Cardinal would yield but for some few days, till such time as the Duke might be brought back to Council, he would undoubtedly be appeased; and being a Prince natural|ly well given, would by strong reasons be made to see how falsely he had been informed; from whence he might be brought to alter his mind, wherein she would be ready to co-operate, being as desirous of the Crowns good, as any other whosoever; but the Counsel were of several opinions: and though there were but few that did not inwardly desire the Cardinals fall: yet some were absolutely against his departure, advising that 2000. Gentlemen of the Countrey who were well affected to the Court, should enter Paris, make head against Orleans, and drive him, and all the turbulent Spirits out of the City; who wanting the presence of the imprisoned Princes, could expect but little from any else, who wanted credit, and were not fit to govern War, as was Conde; and some that were more affe|ctionate to the Crown, said, That upon this occasion they might follow Cromwell's example, who had reduced London, a great and powerful City, for people and wealth, to intire obedience; by making the Army advance into the Suburbs, and begirt the City again, as they had done the pre|ceeding year. Plessis Pralin, de Eure, and the Father of Marishal Santerre appeared more concerned for the Cardinals tarrying than all the rest; for they said plainly, That they had rather see him in that condition, whom they by experience had found to be cruelly demean'd, than others who per|adventure were more rigid,  had further pretences. Count Servient Tillier, and Lion, were true to the Cardinal, and contributed Counsels becoming the Kings service. But those who naturally were given to love novelty, desired he might absent himself, and these were more in number. Chaste|neus, the Guard de Seaux particularly, strove to shew that there was no bet|ter expedient for the present than the Cardinals absence, and that the effect must be removed by the removing the cause: some others of the Cardinals Domesticks, taking offence at the strange proceeding of the Frondeurs, and Male-contents, said, That he was to maintain himself by force, and to asswage the tumor before it did more insistolize; these said, That the King was absolute Master; and that the Subjects were to renounce, not to censure the Kings actions; that all the strong holds, Soldiers, Sub|jects, and greatest part of the Nobles were for the King. Wherefore they ought not to foregoe the Resolutions of suppressing of some ambitious Spirits, who were incouraged only by the popular breath of Paris, which being a populous City was subject to the fatality of wavering according to the fury of the rabble rout. That the strength of the Duke of Orleans, of the Frondeurs, Parliament, and people, lay only in their opinion of the Courts weakness; which the more reservedly it proceeded against them, it made them the prouder, and made one contumacious act a ladder whereby to climb up to greater; so as to be feared, they must appear not to fear: that the people seeing a Masculine resolution put on, would ra|ther think of saving themselves, than of precipitating themselves into a party which was not able to sustain them. That the friends of the im|prisoned Princes, fearing that their lives might be indangered, would for|bear those attempts which might force the Court to use violence; that

friends would be incouraged, and that it being in the Kings power to be|stow all places, and honours, the desire of merit would prevail more with most men, than the unquiet party. That therefore they must be no longer in resolving, for slow resolutions in such cases shewed weakness, and fear, which was the only reason of the rashness of the seditious; nor did they forbear to say, that absolute power might be used upon the Parliament Commissioners; yea even to life, if their associates should transgress the bounds of duty. The Cardinal thought this advice was not to be con|temned; and had he accepted it, it might peradventure have done the deed, but the Cardinal, though he wanted neither courage nor wit to have done it, answered that since the business concerned only himself, he would not ingage the Kings Authority in his defence, against a Nation to which he intended glory and advantage, not misery and troubles, being confi|dent that the Duke of Orleans, the Parliament, and people, would at last clearly discern the cunning of those that were Enemies to quiet: and that when this cloud should be once over, the innocency of his actions would in time appear more clearly, he therefore did only feel the pulse of the Provost de Merchants, of the Sheriffs, Field-Officers, and Colonels; and finding them readier to obey Orleans, than the King, he resolved to yield to the Popular violence, believing that like an high going Sea, it would grow calm when the winds should cease. Nor would he indeavour to carry the King and Court out of Paris as well for that it would be very hard to do by reason of the strict guards that were kept in all the Streets; as also that the Court being gone, that powerful City would rest at the disposal of his Enemies, which was the thing they would be at.
Being thus resolved to be gone, he acquainted the Queen with it; say|ing, That if the Duke of Orleans, and the Parliament would be satisfied with this, things would go well, the loss of his person not being to be con|sidered, if thereby the publick peace might be purchased. But that if no good should accrue by his absence, her Majesty might then believe there were some conceal'd plots against her service; that she should therefore in such a case keep conceal'd, and indeavour by all means to get the King out of Paris; and that she should not by any means suffer her self to be per|swaded to set the Princes at liberty; for when he should be gone, and that pretences should not thereby cease, they were not to be set at liberty, unless upon such conditions, as that they should owe the Obligation only to the King's goodness, and to no body besides. He caused a Letter to be sent to La Bar, subscribed by the Queens own hand with order to obey what she should command: and to set the Princes at liberty, if agreement were made with them, or else to detain them, till they might in time be set free with more safety; things being thus setled, he left the Abbate Vndedey with the Queen, to have a care of what should occur; and in the Evening upon the sixth of February, he called for Count Brienne, the first Secretary, and acquainted him with his Resolution of being gone: recommending the Kings interest unto him, whose Authority he said was several ways plot|ted against; and without more ado went down stairs, got on Horse back, and accompanied by only three, went by the Rue St. Honore toward the gate de Conferance; but hearing that many were run before to the Twille|ries, where Madamoselle d' Orleans then was (for they had had some inc|kling of his departure) he turned about and went by Porte Richelieu, and got into the Fields where many of his friends waited for him; he went towards St. Germans, accompanied by the Counts of Harcourt, and Palaw, by the Marquesses of Ronserolles, Brevall, Plessis Belliere, by Baron Camilliack, and by many others of good condition, who in all might make about

four hundred Horse. He staid at St. Germans, and sent speedily to Mon|sieur Lyon who was gone before to Haure de Grace, to negociate with the Princes, to know what their intentions were touching agreements, and to know of La Bar, if coming thither with orders from the Regent, he should be received, and obey'd. But Lyons negotiation proved imperfect, by reason of the novelties which had hapned at Paris, by which the Queen was compell'd to send orders for their Releasement without any manner of conditions. She also sent Count Broglio to Tillier with a Letter, acquaint|ing him that the Council stood firm to their resolution of not setting the Princes at liberty, till that acknowledging their obligation only from her, they might have no occasion to reconcile themselves with the Frondeurs, but neither did this hit; for one of the Lords of the Privy Council ac|quainted Chasteauneuf, that the Cardinal had conceal'd that the Princes should be set at liberty by none but him. This man, though he were then an open Enemy to Conde, did notwithstanding consent to his liberty, so to sweeten him, and to let him see that he had forgot all former injuries: wherefore it being given out that Mazarine was gone to free the Princes; their Ene|mies fell to consider what prejudice might redound to them, if Conde should come out meerly by means of the Cardinal: wherefore that they might prevent him, they began with great ardor to procure his liberty. And Chasteauneuf caused President Perault, a great friend of Conde's, to be let loose out of the Bastile, without order from the Queen; but how|soever the Cardinal went to Haure de Grace, with firm intention, either to agree all things with the Princes, or else to keep them still in Prison; and here he was aware of the falsehood of many who appeared to be his friends: and how he had done ill in not making their Majesties go from Paris before he went away.
When it was known for certain that he was gone, many friends of his went after him, causing a noise in the Streets, which began in Madamoselles House: whose Servants going out armed into the Streets, stopt all pas|sengers, as well Gentlemen, as others, whom the common people carried before her; and she making them be detained Prisoners, gave order with a man-like readiness, that all passages should be blockt up, suspecting that the King and Queen would also be gone. One of those that were stopt was Monsieur d' Estardes, the Governour of Dunkirk, a man of great loyalty towards the King, who was soon released by the Duke of Orleans; the noise of their Majesties departure still continuing, they suddenly took up arms. Beaufort, Count Tavannes, Monsieur di Chambois, and a great many other Gentlemen, got on Horse back, and ran in hast about the Palace-Royal; and the aim of some of the most seditious, being to take the King from the Queen, and carry him to Pallazzo della litta, the City Town house. They made it be given out that the Queen was about to go out of Paris, and to carry the King along with her; which made the peo|ple so jealous, as being stark mad, they armed all the ends of the Streets which led to the Palace-Royal, making also some Baracadoes: and this rumour being in a moment spred throughout all Paris, the commotion was great, and the Frondeurs manifested their hatred against the Cardinal with unheard of noise, more than before. The next morning, every one be|ing surprised with this the Cardinals so unexpected departure, the Parlia|ment met, and ordered that humble thanks should be returned to the Queen, and that she should be again desired to give order for the Princes liberty: and hereunto they added a desire that she would make a Decla|ration, whereby all Forrainers should for the future be excluded from the Kings Counsel, and all those of the Nation who had taken any Oath, to any other Prince, than the King.

After Dinner the Queen sent the Guard de Seaux, Marishal Villeroy, and Secretary Tillier to intreat the Duke of Orleans to come to Council: but he by the Coadjutor's Council, refused to come; saying, he could not do it with safety till the Princes were at liberty, the Queen did again under her own hand-writing, desire him to come: but he stood firm upon the negative, replying that he would not come, till according to his word, the Princes were set at liberty; and that there was no safety for him there till the Cardinal were gone further off; nor could he be induced to please the Queen, though those Lords offer'd themselves to remain Hostages, if he doubted the safety of his person. The Parliament Commissioners came to her Majesty to thank her for the Cardinals departure, and to desire her that she would send away her Letters to Haure de Grace; to which she answered, that she was fully resolved to take all necessary order for the Princes freedom; but that shemust first speak with the Duke of Orleans, for there were some particulars concerning their imprisonment, which were not to be communicated to all. That she had offer'd to go to L' Hostelle d' Orleans, or to any neutral place, as to the Queen of England's Court, if the Duke would speak with her touching this affair, not thinking that he would refuse to come and take his place in Council, after she had satisfied him in the Cardinals departure, that if Orleans refused to communicate his opinion to her, she should be obliged to call the great ones of the King|dom together, to advise with them of what was to be done, and that she could say no more till she had assembled her Council.
The next day the Parliament met, where the first President reported what the Queen had said; whereupon Orleans said, It was not at all neces|sary that he should go to the Court to speak his opinion, for he would ne|ver say, but what he had already often said, and which he did now again affirm, that he was ready to set his hand to the releasing of the Princes, and to the sending of the Cardinal out of the Kingdom. That the Queen jested, when she said, that she had sent him away; for she had only made him change his habitation, going from her Palace at Paris, to that of St. Germans, where he still plaid the part of chief Minister of State, writ Let|ters, gave Council, and had ordered imployment as well since he was gone, as he did before; that when the Princes were imprisoned, their Mothers Children, Kindred, Friends, and all that depended on them were sent out of Paris. But when the Cardinal was sent away, with a report that he was not to return, yet his Nephew Mancini, and his Nieces staid still at Court, and complained to the King of their Uncles departure: whence it was easily to be perceived that the Queen had not suffered him to depart, but that she intended he should return; and that she dream't of nothing less, than of the Princes liberty. This being said, the decree was almost resolved upon, which was made the next day. Several opinions being given, many were for the issuing out of a Decree against the Cardinal, his Fautorers, and Adherents, and against all those that were gone out with him. But Orleans said there was no reason to punish his friends for accom|panying him since they had therein behaved themselves honourably; others moved to set a brand upon his house, by declaring him a Perturber of the publick peace. Monsieur Landes Payen, said a man could not serve two Masters, reflecting upon some of the Members, who seemed to be for the Parliament, and yet served the Court; he added that all Cardinals should be forbidden all imployments in State-affairs; as those who by their Dignities are sworn to serve the Pope, and by being State-Ministers, are sworn to serve the King; that they could not serve the one without being false unto the other: there were some who spoke against having any more

Favorites in France; to which the Duke of Orleans reply'd, we are all of us the Kings Subjects, and though I be in a very eminent degree, yet I am one as all you are: we must not give Laws to our Soveraigns, nor force their inclinations, by inhibiting them to love one Subject more than ano|ther; it were I must confess (said he) to be desired, that Kings would never have any Favorite; but they are not to forbid it.
At last the Duke not thinking it sit to make such hast, his opinion pre|vailed, and it was decreed that their Majesties should be desired to give order for the disimprisonment of the Princes, and that they should declare their intentions, touching sending the Cardinal out of the Kingdom; and here it was observed, he answered those with much moderation, who were too violent in their opinions.
The same day the Queen assembled together all the chief Lords of France who were of her party, whereof there were two bodies composed: the one of Princes, Dukes, and Peers; as the Dukes of Vandosme, Mercure, d' Elbeufe with their Sons; Count Harcourt, the Dukes of Espernoun, and of Candalle. The other of the Marishals d' Estree, di L' Hospitalle, Ville|roy, Plessis Pralin, d' Aumont, d' Estampes, d' Oquincourt, and Grance, who being told what had past, it was resolved that Vandosme, Espernoun, and d' Elbeuse, should go and desire Orleans to come to Council. D' Elbeuse delivered the message, who said that his Highness might come with all safety to the Court, offering himself to be an Hostage for him; the Duke repli'd, that d' Elbeuse should rather hold his peace than speak, that it was a pleasant thing to observe, that when he was for the Cardinal, d' Elbeuse was for the Parliament, and that now that he had declared for the Parlia|ment, d' Elbeuse was for Mazarine; which argued his continual aversness to him, though d' Elbeuse had had many obligations to him. The Dutchess told him she was sorry that he was of the house of Lorrain, and Orleans after having used many sharp speeches, told Vandosme, and Espernoun, that he could not go to Court, without bringing the Princes with him. They then returned all to Court; whither being gone late that Evening with the rest of the King's people to acquaint the Queen with what had been decreed, and to know her Majesties pleasure, touching the sending of the Cardinal away; she answered, That she was fully resolved to release the Princes: but that she had somewhat to say to the Duke of Orleans, to which purpose she had desired to speak with him; and that seeing he was full of Jealousies without cause, she offer'd to send the Guard de Seaux, to confer with him, how they were to proceed in the disimprisoning of the Princes: that if he would not treat with the Guard de Seaux, she did not refuse to admit of those that were the Princes Friends into the conference: that for what concerned the Cardinal, he was gone without any hopes of returning, and that she did not know truly whither he meant to go, he himself not being resolved upon it; for he could not return to Rome, till there were a good understanding between him and the present Pope. The Cardinal having afterward written to the Queen, that he thought it fit his Nephew and his Nieces should go out of Paris, and this being grant|ed, his Nephew went out incognue, with the Abbate of Palaw, on the seventh day; as did also his three Nieces the next Evening, by the means of Abbate Vndedey, who taking them out of the Palace, and concealing them that night in a friends house of his, they went afterwards out of the City in a Coach with two Horses, as Citizens; and that being come to St. Denis, where they were waited for, they got into a Coach with six Horses, and being well attended, went towards Peroun, whether by ap|pointment the Marishal of Oquincourt's Lady was gone the day before, who

staid half way to meet them, and to bring them into that place, whereof the Marishal her Husband was Governour, who had renounced Beaufort's friendship, and imbraced the Cardinals, proving himself therein truly grateful.
The Parliament being met the next day, they were acquainted with the Queens answer. Orleans accepted of the Conference with the Guard de Seaux; and told the Assembly, That he would assuredly treat that day touching the Princes liberty; and that they should not be two hours to|gether, before all necessary orders, and expedition should be taken in it; as also touching the Declaration of their Innocence, and that other against all Forreigners: so as the Parliament resolved to trust the Duke with what concern'd the Princes liberty.
And the Queen having told the King's people, that the Cardinal was gone without any hopes of returning, the decree was unanimously made against him, with order that it should be Printed, and sent to all the other Parlia|ments of the Kingdom, and that the Chambers should keep together till the arrival of the Princes. The Decree was, that within fifteen days he and all his Kindred and Forrain Domesticks, should be gone out of the Kingdom, and out of all other parts within the King's obedience: which time being expired, the disobedient should be extraordinarily proceed|ed against; and that it should be lawful for all men to fall upon them, and inhibiting all men to receive them.
This decree was approved by almost all the other Parliaments of France, who decreed the same. All this while the Baracadoes were kept up, and stricter guard than ever was kept about the Court, and every night Duke Beaufort went on one side, Count Tavanes on another, and Monsieur de Chambois on the third, with Troops of armed men to clear the Streets: in so much as on the ninth of February the Inhabitants of Rue St. Honore hear|ing the noise of Horses passing to and fro, came out, and finding some Sen|tinels advanced to the Croix de Tiroire they thought (according as it was cunningly given out) that there was a design to convey the King out of Paris, and the Duke of Orleans hearing it, sent Souches, the Captain of his guard presently to Court, where he found the Queen in Bed, and the King asleep, which appeased the tumult, whereupon the first President said the next day in Parliament, That it was an unsufferable thing that they should proceed with such licentiousness against their Majesties to whom they ought to bear respect and Reverence. But the news of the King's being gone, being dispers'd throughout all the City, many did believe it, and ran in such multitudes to the Palace-Royal, as the King was forc't to shew himself twice or thrice at the window, whereupon the people cryed, Long live the King, and a fig for Mazarine. After Dinner the Queen sent the guard de Seaux, and Marishal Villeroy, again to desire Orleans to come to Court; who (the Queen having given him all satisfaction by sending her Letters to deliver the Princes out of Prison) said he would come the next day; and that his wife should first go visit their Majesties. And that Evening the Queen sent for the Provost de Merchants, and the Sheriffs, and told them how unfortunate she was, that it should be thought she would carry the King out of Paris, to free them from the fear whereof, she was content that Guards of good Citizens should be set at the City gates; but notwithstanding all this, strange outrages were committed against the Duke of Espernoun, Count Harcourt, and many others of the Court party by the common people.
The next morning Monsieur Vrliere went to Haure de Grace, with Let|ters and expeditions for the delivery of the Princes, without any whatso|ever

condition: with him went Monsieur de Comminges to complement the Princes on the Queens behalf; the Duke of Rochfaucolt, and Monsieur Arnault to do the like on the behalf of the Duke and Dutchess of Orleans; President Viola in name of the Parliament, and Monsieur Champlastrux, as a servant and friend of Conde's, to the people great satisfaction.
Orleans, according to his word given to the Queen the day before, went to visit the Queen, with whom some usual complements being past, he staid not long. The Cardinal being come this mean while to Haure de Grace, was met two leagues on the way by Monsieur Lyon, by whom he was in|formed of what he had done before his entry, he sent the Horse that did accompany him to Harfleur, and he came in with only his Guard and fami|ly. He was welcomed with the going off of all the Guns, and by all the Inhabitants in their Arms from the gate to the Citadell, at the entrance whereof he was met by Marishal Grammont, and Monsieur Bar, who know|ing now that he could not detain the Princes any longer, resolved to be himself the first that should acquaint the Princes with their liberty. Then the Cardinal after some short consultation had with Grammont, Lyon, Goulas, and Bar, went into the Princes lodgings, and addressing himself with a chearful countenance to the Prince, said thus. I bring your Highness orders from the Queen for your own liberty, the liberty of your Brother, and Brother in law, freely without any condition; yet her Majesty desires you to love the State, the King, her, and also me: which being said, he bowed affectionately towards him, not forgetting his degree.
The Prince, with a gladsome, but Majestical countenance, answered, I am obliged to her Majesty for Justice, I will serve the King, the Queen, (and imbracing the Cardinal) and you also, said he. The Cardinal reply'd, The Gates are open, I beseech you go presently forth: The Prince of County, and Duke Longueville would have gone out immediately; But Conde seeming to be in no hast, call'd for Dinner, and so without any man|ner of Ceremony, the three Princes, the Cardinal, Grammont, Paluau, Lyon and Goulas set down at the Table, and did eat with the same Do|mestickness, s if they had always been good friends; Dinner being ended whilst order was taking for their departure, some discourse past apart be|tween the Prince and Cardinal, which what it was, is not known: from the Chamber they came into the Court-yard; where they got into Gram|mont's Coach, Lyon staying behind to receive orders from the Cardinal touching what the Queen was to do in his concernments; Conde was the last that stept into the Coach, whom when the Cardinal bad farewell, he not answering any thing, neither by action, nor word, bad the Coachman drive on. The Cardinal wondred much, not finding this answerable to the civilities he had received in the Chamber, and found what he was to trust to from him, who had shewed such inconstancy in so short a time; he was notwithstanding comforted to think, that if this mutability should continue, they might also alter their minds who were his Enemies, and might rely more upon him, as indeed many did, as shall in due time be said.
The Princes lay that night at Gromeny, four leagues from Haure, whither that very night came Rochfaucolt, Vrliere, Viola, and Arnault, who knew not as yet that they were delivered. They sup'd altogether; Code jested sometime with one, sometimes with another of them, very merrily, accord|ing to his custom, mingling mirth with seriousness in his discourse. He writ from thence to Monsieur Croisy, to assure the Duke of Orleans, that he was not entred into any Treaty with the Court, and that he ought all his obligation to him, desiring to know how he was to behave himself when he

should be at Paris, touching his presenting himself first to the Queen, or to the Duke, from whom he did acknowledg all his obligation. Croisy did as he was desired, and talked of the rest with the Coadjutor, who found as a medium, that Orleans should meet the Prince, and carry him to the Queen.
They went the next day from Gromeny to Roan, where they prest the Parliament to make the same decree against the Cardinal, as the Parliament of Paris had done, saying, That they were charged so to do by the Duke of Orleans. From Roan they came to Magny, and so to Pontoise, where they found many of the Court Coaches ready to receive them, and it be|ing divulged amongst the people, that Conde had bound himself to renew his friendship with the Cardinal, the opinion vanish't in a moment, when they heard from the Prince his own mouth, how small account he had made of him, and of the conditions which he had offered him.
As they came to St. Denis, Monsieur de Guiraut complemented them from the Queen, and from that Town to Paris the whole fields were covered with Coaches, Horses, and with a multitude of people, with extraordina|ry applause and Jubilee. Orleans, Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and all the other great ones met them at the Croix Penchant, where lighting out of their Coaches, they complemented them. The Prince at the entring of Fort St. Denis, caused his Coach to stay, and gave the Soldiers fifty Pistolets; from thence they went to the Palace-Royal, paid their respects to the King and Queen, thanked them for their liberty, and tarried with them about a quarter of an hour, discoursing of things indifferent. They then went to visit the Duke of Nemeurs, who was sick, and so went to L' Hostelle de Orleans, where they were expected at Supper; divers Princes and Cavaliers sat down with them, where in their Cups they forbare not to speak dispite|fully against the Cardinal, the Prince drunk the Duke of Orlean's health, and a fig for the Cardinal, they all pledg'd it in the same terms, except Grammont, and Arville, who drunk Orleans his health, but would not say those other words touching the Cardinal. After Supper Conde went to visit the Princess Palatine, professing much obligation to her, or what she had done for him; the next day, being the 17th. of February, they went to Parliament to witness their acknowledgments; where they were brought in by Orleans with great Retinue, and applause, professing their obligati|ons to their Majesties, to his Highness, and to the Parliament, professing also that they would always serve the King, and would be governed by the Parliament. The first President, after having declared how well the Par|liament was pleased with their liberty, spoke much in praise of the Prince, shewing what prejudice had been suffered by his detention; and here some desired that a declaration might be made of his innocency, and of all theirs that had adhered to him.
But to return to the affairs of Normandy, those who were of the Prince his party, were not a little troubled at the news that was given out, that the Cardinal was gone to Haure, to secure himself yet better, and that the Queen sought all means to be in safety out of Paris. And the Frondeurs growing still more wavering, being still bent to bring affairs to some ex|tremity, strove to raise sedition in the City, under colour whereof they might legtimate their pretence to remove the Queen from her Regency, chose a new Council for the King, and that they might take the Government of the Kingdom upon themselves; but were it either out of Gods good|ness, or the innate goodness of Orleans and Conde, who were against too violent Revolutions, all such attempts were still kept back, leaving the Go|vernment to the Queen, and continuing the Kings Council in their places, in peaceful manner.
The Cardinal went from Haure with about One hundred Horse, and with some of his friends, marching in long, cold, dark nights, till he came into Picardy, where he was received civilly by all, but by the Town of Abeville, where he was forced to pass over the Some in small Boats, which were there by chance; and being past over, he came to Dorlans, (a strong Town between Amiens, and Arras) accompanied by Bar, the Governour thereof, where he staid a while, considering how he might take his journey with most safety, for there was danger in passing those Frontiers without a pass, which made the Queen write to him, to be gone speedily out of the Kingdom.
The Parliament being assembled on the 20th. of February, the King's Declaration was brought unto them, which contained, that no Forreigners though naturalized, should hereafter be admitted into the Council of State: which being read, it was added, that no Forreigner, nor French Cardinal should be admitted into the Council, which was done not so much in re|spect of Cardinal Mazarine, as to exclude the Coadjutor, who disturb'd all things, that he might be made a Cardinal, and so become first Minister of State. Beaufort, was one of those that were the Authors of this Additi|on, being distasted with the Coadjutor, for having concealed from him the negotiations which he secretly held with other confederates. And the Princes friends insisting still to have them declared innocent; the Queen being willing to please them, was content that such a Declaration should be made, the contents whereof were; That the King growing apprehensive of the Princes their actions, by information had from several parts was forced for the good of his State to secure them, that time which matures all things, and brings the truth out at last, had made him know their innocence, and how the Crown was prejudiced by their imprison|ment; that therefore in an affair of such importance, and in respect of the Parliaments earnest supplications, and by the advice of his Unkle the Duke of Orleans, and others of his Council, he had resolved not only to give them their liberty, but to take away all pretences that might prove prejudicial to their Loyalties, he did declare the said Princes not only in|nocent of all jealousies which had wounded their Reputations; but that all Conde's actions in particular had never tended to any thing, but to the establishment, and increase of Regal Authority, and to the good of the Crown, whereof the King was fully satisfied annulling all Letters, and De|crees given out against the said Princes, and restoring them to their former places, honours, and dignities; this Declaration was verified in Parlia|ment on the 27th. Printed and disperst throughout all Europe: And there|in were also contained the Dutchess of Longueville, Marishal Turenne, and all the rest of that party. Six days after the Parliament met again, and the Decree made against Forreigners, though naturalized, was read, with the addition of excluding all French Cardinals from the King's Council. Orleans was the first who spoke, being wisht so to do by the Coadjutor; and said that after this Declaration the Clergy had made a Remonstrance upon it to the King, and that Archbishop Ambrune had told his Majesty, that of the three orders which are in France the Ecclesiastick was the first and noblest; that no such motion had at any time been made since France had been a Monarchy. That the Oath which Cardinals take unto the Pope, comes after that which they take to their King and Countrey; so as they were injured by being excluded the King's Council, and in being berest of serving the State; that this exclusion would not be well taken in Rome' that they had been Mazarinians that had insinuated this novelty into the mind of some body to revenge themselves of the Parliament, by

putting discord between it and the Clergy, that when this Declaration was made, he was present, and was against inserting that clause, foreseeing the mischief it might occasion, by causing division between the Clergy and Parliament.
The first President said, That the French Clergy were not any ways con|cern'd in this, for in the decree all French Archbishops, and Bishops were excepted; wherefore they had no reason to complain, and that the Archbi|shop Ambrune would be but little praised for his Remonstrance, it being well known, who it was had excited him to make it. Monsieur de Courtine, master of the requests, alledged two examples to shew that the Clergy ought to content themselves with their callings, and not meddle in Court affairs. The one of Antonio Perez, who being fled into France in the time of Henry the 4th. was one day asked by his Majesty, how he thought France might be best governed? he answered, by three things; by good Council, rich Finances, and by keeping great power in Rome; inferring that to be powerful in the Pope's Court, they must have many Cardinals there, and that therefore they were to be kept at Rome, as not being ne|cessary in France. The other was the example of the late Archbishop of Burdeaux, who going to take his leave of the Pope's Nuncio, when he went to command the King's Fleet, the Nuncio thunder'd these words into his ears; You shall not give an account of the men that shall be slain in the War which you go to make; but of those that shall dye in your Diocess during your absence, you shall be sure to give an account, inferring that a Pastor should have a care of his flock. Monsieur Barin, la Galissennieve, who was also master of the requests, spoke against the Cardinal, saying he was to be made to give an account of his Administration of Government. President Charton said that the Crown had suffered much by the Admini|stration of Cardinals, and that worse was to be expected, if they were continued in that imployment.
The Resolution was put off till the next day, when much dispute being had thereupon by the first President, it was at last decreed, that the Cardi|nals should assist in their Functions in Rome, and not meddle in State' affairs, and that her Majesty should be humbly desired to send a Declaration to the Parliament conformable to the Decree of the 9th. and of the 20th. of last February, as well against Forreigners, as against French Cardinals, that they might not be admitted into the King's Council; and Archbishop Ambrun's Remonstrance was much spoken against. But these discourses had no foun|dation, and were totally false; for who knew not, that France did never flourish more than when Governed by Richelieu, and Mazarine? These pro|posals were known to be mere invectives, and calumnies; so as though the Decree past, it was never executed; only a notable Decree succeeded there|upon (as you shall hear hereafter) against Mazarine, who by the delay of Pasports which were expected from Flanders, was forced to tarry in France; so as the Queen was forced, by reason of the noise that was made in Parli|ament, to send Billinghau, and Ravigny with new Letters to him to make hast out of the Kingdom.
The Cardinal's friends, and well-wishers were so incensed with this the Cardinals so unlooked for departure, and by his being so sorely persecuted, as many of them did readily offer him their best assistance to make head against his Enemies: amongst which Marishal de Hochencourt, Governour of Peroun; Count Navailes, Governour of Beaupames, and Count Broglia, Governour of la Bassea, did all of them offer him their strong holds and therewith their lives. And Monsieur de Bar, Governour of Dorlans, Monsieur Mondedieu, Governour of Rue, Monsieur de Faber Governour of

Sedam, Monsieur de Montigue, Governour of Rocroy; and Monsieur Rale, Governor of Retel; and others that were well affected to him, offered to raise 10000. fighting men, and by means of those chief Forts to defend him in despite of his Enemies; which might have been done, but not without much prejudice to all France, for all assistance might have been expected from Spain, as was already offered, the Spaniards profering the Cardinal 100000. Crowns a year, and to reimburse to him whatsoever he should lose in France in all his moveables, and Revenues: but the Cardi|nal did generously declare in publick, that he would rather be a wanderer in the world, than be at any time so much as in thought, occasion of any prejudice to that Crown to which he ought all his fortune; and knowing what danger their Majesties, and all his friends would run, if he tarried longer in France, he observed the orders exactly which he had received by these Gentlemen; and went presently from Dorlans to Peroun, and then went with his Nephews who were there, to la Fera, and from la Fera, to Retel; from whence he sent Count Angusshiola of Parma, to desire Major General Rosse, to come and conduct him on his way; but he excused it, and sent only 300. of his German Horse; from Rethel, the Cardinal intended to go to Bovillion, a neighbouring place, out of France, in the Countrey of Leige, belonging to the Elector of Collen.
But the Governor was not able to receive him without orders from his Master, he therefore went to Balduck, intending to go for Alsatia; and as he was going to Nancy, a Messenger came to him from the Elector with ample offers not only of Bovillion, but of his whole State; wherefore he altered his mind, and went to Cleremont, attended, and defrai'd by the Marishal Ferte Senetre, who being his faithful friend, met him upon the way. When he was at Cleremont, two of the Prince of Conde's Gentle|men came with order from the King to the Marishal to deliver up that place to them, to which he answered, that he very well knew that those Commissions were extorted by violence from his Majesty; wherefore he would not surrender the Fort, unless he were commanded by the Cardinal, who had given it him in custody. The Cardinal, who was present, wisht him to obey the Kings commands; which he did. From Cleremont he went to Sedam, where he would have staid, had he not received orders again from the Queen to be gon speedily out of the Kingdom, which he at last did.
Many thought it was not politickly done to send so chief a Minister of State, who was so well inform'd of all the affairs and secret interests of the Kingdom, out of France, and that the Crown might receive much pre|judice thereby. Wherefore the Queen indeavoured by the Princess Palatines means to acquaint the Princes with the importancy thereof; and that she would wish them to permit, that some safe place might be appointed to the Cardinal to live in, in some corner of the Kingdom, but they would not be perswaded thereunto.
The Cardinal being in Bovillion, and not able to pass any further with|out a Pasport from the Spaniards, he would not demand one from the Archduke, without the Queens leave, who willingly granted it; he therefore sent Monsieur Baiseman, Lieutenant of his Guard, to desire Count Fuenseldaglia, to procure him one from the Archduke, which being readily granted, and also another from the Duke of Lorrain; he was con|ducted by Don Antonio Pimontell, with a Regiment of Croats, from Bovil|lion, to Rochfort, a Castle held by the Lorrainers; from whence he went to Huy a City in Leige, and to Leige it self, where he was met by the Gover|nour, and by all the Inhabitants in Arms, with the going off of Guns, and

other demonstrations of respect. He lay that night in a Village two leagues off; and then went to Aquisgrave, where he was visited, and com|plemented by Seignior Chigi the Pope's Nuncio, and by the Lansgrave of Darmestate, who were both afterwards Cardinals, from Aquisgrave he went to Iuliers, where he was received with as much honour, as if he had been the Archduke, being thrice saluted with all the Guns. From Iuliers he went to Chempen, a place belonging to the Dutchess of Chevereux, where he staid and refreshed himself; and from Chempen he came to Brales, whi|ther the Prince Palatine sent Count Fustenberg to Treat him like a Cardi|nal; he was lodged in the Electoral Palace, well provided of all things; and two days after, the Elector came to Bona to visit him, as did all the chief men of Cullonia, and of the whole Country, and particularly Prince Francis of Lorrain, Bishop of Verdune, and Brother to Duke Charles. The Car|dinal went afterwards to Bona, to return the Electors visit, where he staid one night, and was sumptuously treated; he received Letters from all the Princes of Europe, with offers of all possible honours and conveniences. The Pope himself answered a Letter of his, with expressions of great esteem and affection.
Upon occasion of the Cardinals being accompanied in his journey by Pimantell, a very great confident of Count Fuesendaglia, he thought good to enter into some project of a general peace with him, which Pimantell accepting of, as if God had been the Author of this holy work, a treaty was by his means introduced between the Cardinal, and Count Fuensendag|lia, who received ample Authority from Spain to continue, and conclude the business; but a meeting being requisite to be had between them, for the agreeing of all things between the two Crowns, without other Media|tors; The Prince of Conde's sending of Marquess Sillerey into Flanders, to establish an Union with that Crown, did discompose all things; for the Court of Spain, building great hopes upon the troubles of France, and upon the Reputation which Conde had won in Arms. Fuenseldaglia's order was revoked, nay he was forbidden to hold any correspondency with the Cardinal, to avoid giving jealousie to Conde's party, which was well minded to joyn with the Spanish faction: but before the Cardinal went from Dorlans, after having received orders from the Queen by Belingau, and Ravigny, he writ a Letter to her Majesty of these contents.

Madame,
HAving seen the Letter which your Majesty was pleased to honour me with all, and heard what Monsieur Ravigny delivered me from your Maje|sty by word of mouth, touching what concerns your Majesties service, to wit, that together with my departure from Court, I be speedily gone out of the King|dom, I have willingly obey'd your pleasure, whose commands shall always be the only law and rule of my life. I have sent a Gentleman to find me out some Sanctuary, though I want all necessaries for a long journey; To morrow without all fail, I will go towards Sedam, and from thence to any place, I can get, for my abode. I am so much bound to observe your Majesties orders, as I will not give way to retard the willing obeying of them; yet Madame, there are many, who were they in my condition, and had they justice, and number of friends that I have, would find ways to defend themselves from the persecution which I un|dergo; and whereon I will not think, chosing rather to content mine Enemies, than do any thing that may prove prejudicial to the State, or displeasing to your Majesty; and though upon this occasion they have been able to keep his Royal

Highness, from seconding the motions of his innate goodness; they have not|withstanding witnessed unto him, (though contrary to their wills) the good opinion which he is forced to have of my intire obedience, as also of my zeal for the good of the State. For did they not know that I were not to be removed from this sense, they would not have been so unwise, as to reduce me to these ex|treams, without reflecting upon the knowledg that I have of the secret and most important affairs of the Kingdom, whereof I have by your Majesties favour, had the Government so long; and have served you faithfully, as is known to all the world. But Madame, I am too much obliged to your Majesties goodness, to dream of any thing contrary to your liking; and would the sacrificing of my life give you the least satisfaction, I would readily do it; and I do protest, that I am very well satisfied, when I shall know, that in this my misfortune your Majesty will be pleased to remember what service I have done the State, after the late King of glorious Memory, was pleased to honor me, and to trust me with directing all things, and did often before his death, desire your Majesty, to keep me in the same imployment: with what integrity, zeal, and unconcern|ment to my self I have discharged it, your Majesty knows; and (if I may be permitted to say so) with what good success: for the wisest, and even the Spani|ards themselves do confess, that they do less wonder at the conquests made by your Majesties Armies in the first five years of your Regency, than to see how you have been able for these three last years to manage affairs, and to save the Ship from Shipwrack, which hath been plaid upon from so many parts; and agitated by the storms of home divisions. I wish Madame, that I could conceal from strangers the ill dealing which I receive for fencing off the blame from a Nation, which I have always loved, and reverenced. But when they shall see me go to seek, whither I may retire to live in safety, with those that are nearest unto me, they will have too much reason to wonder to see a Cardinal so treated, who hath the honour to be the King's Godfather, and that two and twenty years of faith|full service have not been able to procure a safe place to retire unto in this King|dom, whose confines the world knows are much increased by his means. I be|seech God, Madame, that as what hath befaln me, shall never alter the passion which I shall preserve till death for the Grandezza of your Majesty, and for the flourishing of your State; it may also make all disorders cease, making it appear that those who have declared against me, have done it only against my per|son.

Having written this Letter, and being come to Bovillion, where he re|ceived new orders to go further from the confines of the Kingdom, he thought fit to write another Letter to Count Brien, the first Secretary of State, wherein many things being touched upon, which may give more light to what is here treated on, I hope it will not prove tedious to relate them.
I send you an answer to the Letters written unto me by her Majesty; I should have been some days ago upon the Rhine, had I been the only guilty party: but my nearest Relations being likewise involved in my faults, and sentenced to be sent out of the Kingdom; I could not possibly be more diligent, since I was to carry them with me; and to cross an Enemies Country full of Armed men, without a Pasport. I am very much perplext in performing the orders which are sent me; since I cannot imagine, that their Majesties intend that I should ex|pose my self to apparent danger of either being slain, or taken Prisoner, as I am told for certain, his intention is, who boasts amongst those of his party, to have framed the decrees against me, before they came into Parliament, and that he had sufficient means to make the Court acquiesce therein. For I may easily con|ceive,

what his intentions are touching the State and me, after his punctuality in seducing a Collegue of his to imbrangle the Parliament, Nobility, Clergy, and People, and to bring all to ruine, unless he were chosen Cardinal. And I very well see, how he labors incessantly to cause orders be given me, and at the same time to keep me from obeying them; that so he may have a pretence to raise a hubbub in Paris, and to compass his ends, by my utter ruine. If this could be any way advantagious or acceptable to the King or Queen, I would concur there|in with all my heart: But I must then have known it, for being given to their Majesties, I cannot dispose of my self otherwise, than as they shall command me; it was their pleasure that I should go from Court, and out of the Kingdom, toge|ther with all my nearest Relations, and Domesticks, and that at the same time I should be brought to the common Goal at Paris. Now that I am out of France, they will have me go yet further, and at the same time they lay traps and ambushes to hinder me. I desired to be conducted to Charleville, and Mesieres, but was denied. I must not go into the King of Spain's Dominions, and they have re|quested several Princes not to suffer me to come into their States. They leave nothing undone at Rome to incense the Pope against me. Seven of the Duke of Lorrain's Regiments are come within four leagues of this place, and lye up|on the way that I am to go for Germany. Marishal Turen sent some Horse out against me, when I went from Retel; and two days after he sent 100. Horse to sack a village, but one league from hence: who after having taken all things from me, and evilly intreated the Master of the Place, they dispersed abroad great store of Tickets, wherein was contained, that if Cardinal Mazarine should be received into any Towns in the Country of Leige, those Towns should be plundered, as you may see by one of the Tickets, which I herewith send you. I do very much wonder that one whom I have served so much, and whom I have so tenderly loved, and so highly esteemed, should so much insult over me in my present condition. I must believe my persecutors think me some body, since they leave nothing undone to ruine me; whilst they are so much troubled about me; but I promise you, if they saw how I bear all this, it would lessen their delight in persecuting me: for having always served the King well, and faithfully, as all men know, I am at peace within, my conscience not upbraiding me with any thing that I have done amiss. And could my desire of the good and welfare of the State be greater than it is, it should be so much the greater by how much grea|ter my troubles are: never was any man of my condition treated as I have been; But thereby they afford me matter of consolation, knowing that it is in|terest, and not justice that prevails with them: they have rob'd me of all, as well of what I had got in serving the late King, as of all the best and most curious things which I brought from Rome, which as all men know, I intended to bequeath to Paris, as I had bequeathed my self to France; Of all the favours I have received from his Majesty, they have left me nothing but the Cardinals Cap, which his Majesty procured me after twelve years service; wherein he hath experienced my Loyalty, and my zeal. I was the means of taking many places which are now under the Dominion of this Crown, and as the King hath said often, whilst he was alive; I contributed boldly to the glory won by his Armies in Italy, particularly at Casal, where without loss of one drop of blood they gave the Law; I ended the negotiation of Pinarolle; by my means, the Princes of Savoy Mauritius, and Thomaso, did the second time forgo the Catholick King's party, whereby many Towns in Piemont were gotten from the Spaniards, at which being highly distasted, they did always afterwards oppose my promotion, which I had deserved as well as any other, for my service done to the Holy Church. I was the cause that Sedam, and many other Towns fell into the King of France his hand, as is well kown to all the World.
I conjure you to desire their Majesties from me, that they will procure from

Rome, that the Cardinals Cardinals Cap may be taken from me, and that it may be bestowed upon some more deserving person, who may serve them better; and I shall be very well pleased, when after being berest of all, I shall in my heart bear more affection to their service than ever. I beg but one only favour of them, which is, that they will be just to me in the preservation of my honour: which they ought not suffer to be question'd by my Enemies, since it is apparent, that the preservation, and increase thereof hath been that which I have only aimed at during the course of my whole life. If any persecutors have reason to punish me, methinks they should do it by the usual course of Law, and not by unpractised violence: I hear of no accusers; and yet they have begun with me by a sentence; and have done by me as we hear in holy Scriptures, that God had wont to do (but with infallible wisdom) punish whole Families for the sins of their Forefathers. After they have punish'd me, no fault appearing: they have left nothing untried to make the meaner sort of people believe, there lives not a worse man than I; you know whether it was I that hindred the conclusion of the general peace; and with what sincerity the Duke of Longueville hath al|ways spoken therein, though he was not then bound to defend me, and how often after his return from Munster, he hath said in Council, that he could never find what it was the Spaniards would be at.
You know also, that the Plenipotentiaries did not extend their power so far as they might, to make peace; and that in their Letters they alledged reasons which diverted them from doing otherwise; amongst which one was, that the result of making peace, would be to manifest their own weakness, without doing any good. The Spanish-agents being bent to spin on the business with France, that they might draw on the conclusion of peace with Holland; believing that being free from War on that side, they might the more easily turn all their forces against France.
You may remember that when it was known the Holland-Agents had power to make peace with Spain, without France, they used all possible diligence, that it might be joyntly done, and therefore resolved to sweeten all points that the Spaniards stuck upon. You may also remember that it was then held fit, to have extraordinary Councils, which were held in L' Hostelle de Orleans, and some|times in my House by his Highness orders, wherein the dispatches of Munster were read, the points examined, and answers resolved upon, which being done, they were again read over in Council, to see whether there were any thing to be amended, added, or diminished: every one striving to do or say something which might contribute to the perfecting of so good a work: but all this dili|gence did nothing; and Pignoranda made known what his orders were: for when he had concluded with the Hollanders, he was never at quiet till he was retired from Munster, to avoid being prest by the Mediators, to accommodation with this Crown.
I had not only been persidious, but out of my wits, if I had not done what in me lay to make peace; for the Kingdom being thus quieted, I should not only have shared of the good which this peace would have produced; but should have purchased much glory, and thanks. Those who to render me odious to the people, labour'd to make it seem that it was I who did impede peace, know the contrary; and there needs no more to make their malice notorious to the whole world, than the knowledge of all the dispatches sent to Munster, the particular Letters writ|ten to the Duke of Longueville, Monsieur de Avaux and to Count Servient, and what answers they received.
These bad minded Criticks were apt to backbite, and to puzzle all that could be done in the Assembly: and much more if peace had been concluded, as they were then affraid it would be; for I remember they began already to give out, that too much was yielded unto, and that the Queen who was Sister to the Ca|tholick

Catholick King, and I a forreigner, would content the Spaniards at the loss of France. But whatsoever their intentions were therein, they should not have consented to the laying down of Arms then, when they were so successfully im|ploy'd against an Enemy, who whatsoever agreement should have been made, would never have been reconciled to this Kingdom, for getting free from the bad condition he was in, he would have so ordered his affairs, as to re-commence War, when he might do it upon best advantage.
Nor will it be doubted but that their malice extended further, if reflection be had upon what they said against the peace of Germany, though the Spaniards made it sufficiently appear by their being displeased therewith, how much they were prejudiced thereby, and left no stone unturn'd, but used all their power and industry at Vienna, and elsewhere, to hinder the conclusion thereof.
They valued not the acquisition of so goodly, large and opulent a Country as Alsatia, and of two so important places upon the Rhine, as Brisack, and Philispburg, nor the having re-united the three Bishopricks to the Crown, with all that belonged thereunto, which had been formerly the occasion of bloody Wars.
It may be seen by the instructions given to the Plenipotentiaries by Cardinal Richlieu, in the late King's time, whereof I have the original, if there were any pretention of getting any footing in Germany.
Finally, my Censurers, and those that do their worst, and make the greatest noise, have by their contentions diverted the Spaniards from applying them|selves to peace, and they will notwithstanding have me to be the occasion thereof. Let me tell you, that to confirm this unto you, and to let you know, that these are the same tricks used to the same ends, with the same pretence that they practised not long since against me, and against the State, as they did three years since. Briefly I make it manifest unto you, that they had prepared all things necessary to make me sure and to break my neck, whatsoever had insued on my last voyage to Champagnia, their design being to reduce me to nothing. After the Prince of Conde's imprisonment, it is evident what means they used to put that Prince into a place where they might dispose of him as they lifted.
Then descending to the particulars of the relief of Guise, when besieged by the Spaniards, to the recovery of Retell, and to the winning of the Battle against Turenne, he ended his Letter, and dated it the 24th. of Fe|bruaoy, 1651.
When this Letter was read in the Privy Council, there were few who were not sensible of so manifest an injury done unto him, who had never offended any, and who was naturally given to be civil, and courteous; but they durst not shew it outwardly, it being too dangerous to appear a friend to him; so as his Enemies might without any opposition, reduce things to what pass they pleased. And as the Parliament was forced to proceed reservedly, and finally to moderate the addition of the decree made for excluding French Cardinals from the Privy Council, by reason of the exceptions taken thereunto by the Coadjutor, and the Clergy, and backt by the Duke of Orleans; so the Cardinal being destitute of all sup|port, or assistance, and his friends turning with his fortune, remained a Butt to be shot at by all his enviers, and a new decree was made against him on the Eleventh of March, containing that the other decrees made against him on the seventh, ninth, and twentieth of February last, and of the se|cond of this present March, should be punctually put in execution: that himself, Allies, and Domesticks, should be immediately proceed against, as well for not having obey'd the aforesaid decrees, as for the reprisals, (which they said were made by his consent) of Forreign Vessels, the squandring away of the Finances, the conveying of moneys out of the Kingdom, the hindrance given to the conclusion of the general peace;

and for having given bad Council to the King. That therefore, all his goods, as well moveable, as immoveable, should be confiscated, that process should be made against all those who had followed, assisted, or received him, or that had held correspondency with him by Letters, or otherwise after the time prefixt by the aforesaid decrees; and besides the two Deputies who were chosen to make inquiry into his ways; who were the Counsellors Brussels, and Munieres, the Counsellors Birault, and Pithou, were also charged to proceed to the drawing up of the said Information; and they were to go to Dorlans, or whithersoever else it was requisite to make process: it was also ordered that all the Commonalty, and Officers of the Kingdom, should bring him to justice either alive or dead; and that whosoever should know, where any part of his Estate should be con|cealed, they should make it known upon pain of grievous punishment and this severe and unaccustomed decree, was not only Printed, and posted up upon all publick places; but was not without much scandal, approved of by all the Church-men of Paris; who instead of opposing it, in defence of Ecclesiastical indemnity, against Decrees unjustly made by Lay-men against a Cardinal of the holy Church, did not only suffer so important a prejudice to have its course, but did lend their helping hand unto it, permitting that the Official of the Archbishop of Paris should give out a writ of Excommunication, against all such who knowing where any of the Cardinals Goods were, should not bring them in to the Parliament Commissioners: and because their conscience struck them for being Au|thors of so detestable an act, they durst not name him in their Writ, but past it in the name of quidem homo: a thing which certainly deserved to be severely censured, if somewhat were not to be permitted to the misfor|tune of those times, which wrought such strange emergencies in all places, and especially in France. But nothing was effected either by this process, or by any of these Decrees; for whatsoever diligence was made, nothing was found: so as that Ship cannot be said to be a tall Ship, which hath not indured some great storm; so could not the Cardinal have purchased full glory, but by the oppositions and persecutions of his Enemies; nor could it be better evidenced how great a friend the Heavens are to Inno|cency and Piety, than by the dangers which the Queen ran, which accord|ing to humane capacity, were unevitable; whilst the Coadjutor laboring that the Regency might be taken away from her, (which peradventure might have been the best advice which could have been taken for the in|terest of that party) the Duke of Orleans, the Princes, and the Parlia|ment, opposed it; not thinking of what might happen; but contenting themselves with the bare superficies of present affairs; left if they should take the Government upon them, which could not be done without jea|lousies amongst themselves, and in the Parliament it self, which was desi|rous to inlarge its Authority, which being usurped, must needs have been to the prejudice of the Princes, whose Maxim it was to keep the Court weak, and flexible to their pretentions; but not to increase the power of Parliaments; which was the reason why they abstained from all violence, and meddled not with the Government: not forbearing notwithstanding to bereave the Queen, as much as in them lay, of her faithfullest servants, that they might place their friends and confidents about her; which though it were foreseen by her and her State-Officers, yet they suffered that cloud to discharge it self upon the Cardinal, and they instead of gi|ving themselves over to the contrary party; did stoutly maintain Regal greatness, so to find out means how to bring the Cardinal back; so the re|mainder of that year past on, as shall be by degrees related.
4The Spaniards in Flanders were this mean while intent upon what the issues of the Novelties which were budding forth in France would be: upon which other considerable consequences for them did depend. They sent to the Dutchess of Longueville, and to Marishal Turenne in Steney to mind them of the agreement made between them, never to separate till the Princes were set at liberty, and the peace between the two Crowns were concluded. They answered, that they would go to Paris, to co-operate therein as much as they could; and that if the Spaniards should not be content, and that their Mediation should do no good, they would return again to Steney, and make good their promise, where with all were fully satisfied; whereupon the Dutchess went from Steney, and sent Monsieur Sarasine Secretary to the Prince of County, to Brussels, to thank the Arch-Duke and Count Fuensaldaglia, to assure them that when they should be at Paris, they would indeavour the perfecting of the treaty by which the Princes after their disimprisonment had obliged themselves to continue the War, till such time as peace were concluded between the two Crowns.
The Dutchess came to Paris on the 15th. of March, with great applause of the People, and was met without the City by the Princes her Brothers, by her Husband, and by a great many Lords and Ladies; and this the rather, because her coming brought with it some appearance of a general peace, which the people did very much desire; so as if her departure from Paris were cause of great disorder, her return was no less noble and glori|ous.
The Gates of Paris were still guarded as before, with Armed Citizens; for they still suspected the Queen would carry away the King; and now the Court, nor L' Hostelle de Orleans were no more frequented with visits, but Conde's house, and Longuevilles, the famousest Warriers flocking to the one, and all the Ladies to the other: the Prince of Conde, and his Sister Longueville, might have then become Arbitrators of the Kingdom, if actu|ally keeping that inclination to peace, as they seemed by their words to do, they had made use of the favourable conjuncture of time; for they coveted nothing more than reality in proceeding of the Treaty of peace; nor was there any that doubted the truth of their desires, for the Dutchess of Longueville sent away Monsieur Croisy to Steney with power from the Court, to conclude peace, or a general Truce. This treaty was so carried on, as though neither the Spaniards, nor the Princes faction did really de|sire it, it afforded Turenne a fair pretence to withdraw from the Spaniards imployment, so as that Orleans (as shall be hereafter related) being after|wards offended by the innovations of Paris, for the permission given by the Council to the Marquess of Chasteauneuf; the Flanders Agents thought it now a fit time to listen to the proposals of peace, made by Croisy. For the whole negotiation was reduced to a particular conference between the Duke of Orleans, and the Archduke, without the intervening of Media|tors; and it being believed that the Queen would not trust the Duke of Orleans with such a negotiation, the Archduke made his good intentions towards peace appear unto the people, which if refused, would increase the troubles in France, for all the stops that should be met with therein, would be imputed to the Court; but it proved otherwise, for the Duke of Orleans being in some sort reconciled to the Queen; the Spanish Agents, though they gloried in this their desire, by sending Don Gabriel di Toledo to Paris, and by assenting to the particular conference, which was agreed should be held between Peroun and Cambrey (Croisy having declared that the Duke of Orleans, the Duke of Longueville, the first President, and Count Servient would be there) their little desire thereunto appeared,

when they said that they must first expect orders from Spain, and that though they knew it was the Catholick King's intention, that this treaty should be commenced, they could proceed no further therein, till they had received Commission from the Catholick Court; which was by the going of Marquess Sillery to Brussels, who by his proposal puzled the whole business; wherefore Turenne knowing that he had fully satisfied his pro|mise of procuring peace, took occasion to retire, and to fall totally off from the interest of Spain, and went likewise from Steney to Paris.
But Conde being intent upon making himself great, and professing much gratitude and affection to the Duke of Orleans, that he might come more vigorously with him, in withstanding the violences of the Court, and to bind themselves to a more faithful confederacy, concluded articles of mar|riage between the Princess of Alanson, and the Duke of Anguienne, Conde's eldest Son, which though peradventure it might not be pleasing at Court, by reason of the consequences which it drew after it; yet it behoved the Court to seem to like it for the prejudice which might have been other|wise received by the increase of popular tumults.
Conde's indeavour to break the Marriage between the Dutchess of Chevereux, and his Brother, was very prejudicial to him; for thereby he provoked a Ladies hatred who was apt to bring much trouble upon him; the success whereof by reason of what insued thereupon, being worthy to be known, I will briefly acquaint you with it.
The Dutchess of Chevereux was always no less noble than generous in her proceedings; wherefore the first time that the Prince of Conde visited her, after he was at liberty, she delivered up unto him the promise which her friends had gotten in writing for the marriage between his Brother and her Daughter, saying, that she had not desired that writing to oblige him thereunto, otherwise than to assure him by such an earnest, of her indea|vouring his liberty. This noble action was much talkt of at Court; whereat the Queen was much troubled, as if she did triumph over her misfortunes; so as not only for the Queens dislike thereof, but in respect of the interest of the Crown, these insuing marriages were held to be the forerunners of new troubles, for that the Alliance made between Subjects of so great birth, and spirit, might if they lifted keep the Kingdom still in dis|order, had not several interests interposed in breaking this Alliance; one whereof was the Dutchess of Longuevil's arrival at Paris, who as being a handsome young Lady, could not without envy tolerate this honour in Madamoselle Chevereux, who was not so old as she; who when she should be her Brothers wife, as Princess of the blood was to be her Superior, and because she could not brook coming beneath her; being infinitely belo|ved by her Brother the Prince of County, she indeavoured to divert him as much as she could from the Marriage; to this was added the opinion of the Prince of Conde, that his Brothers life might be shortned by this Mar|riage; he being in the opinion of Phisicians, but of a weak complexion, but much more, that he might not be bound to renounce for ever the great possessions, which belong'd unto him by Church-livings and that he might also give too great countenance to the faction of the Frondeurs; nor was the Court wanting in having an influence upon this, whose Agents, and particularly Count Serviente, and Monsieur de Lyons, had a great hand in the Government thereof; who being still thought to be good friends and faithful servants to the Prince, did according to what suited best with his interests, infuse into him what they knew was good for the King's ser|vice. The Queen likewise had a part therein, who being desired by the Prince so to do, wisht the Dutchess of Chevereux to proceed no further in

this Alliance, without the Courts consent; in short, the treaty vanisht, the very Princes failing in their Devoirs; whereat the house of Chevereux was highly scandalized; in so much as the Dutchess, who was very sensible of injuries, and of a manlike spirit, resolved by the Coadjutor's means, who was her great friend, to be revenged. Whilst this treaty was break|ing off, the Duke of Rochfaucolt to bring it on again, agreed with Madame de Rhodes, an intimate friend to the Dutchess, to her Daughter, and to the Coadjutor, that it behoved the Prince of Conde to have his Brothers Marriage take effect, and that it behoved the Frondeurs to make Conde Governour of Guienne; County Governour of Provence, and Lieutenant General of Guienne; and that this should be done at one and the same time on both sides. But the Frondeurs not being in a condition to make good what they offer'd unto the Prince, he thought himself also not bound to observe what he had promised concerning the Marriage. The Coadjutor, who was become an Enemy to the Dutchess of Longueville, and to Roch|faucolt, told the Prince that the Dutchess, and her friends were not troub|led at his proceedings in this affair, but that the Dutchess of Longueville did for her particular concernments go about to break this match, yea without the Prince his knowledg, and that therefore he acquainted him therewith, that he might be aware thereof: the Prince finding out the de|sign, was very angry; and told the Coadjutor in plain terms, that he was sure to expect little from him, and from the Dutchess of Chevereux, when the match should be concluded, since he sought to put division in his Fami|ly, and to put discord between him and his sister, allied unto him no less in love than in blood; and then he communicated the whole business to the Dutchess, and to the Duke of Rochfaucolt. The Prince by this visit found that his Brother was really in love with Chevereux, and that he had desired President Viola to draw up the Articles, that so all obstacles might be removed, and the business not retarded. That Monsieur de Leghe, a friend to Chevereux had discoursed long, and frequently with County; so as these things being added to the Advertisement of President Mortaro, who was a friend, and servant of Conde's, who told him that the Marriage was to be concluded secretly, without expecting dispensation, and without his participation; which made him resolve to take his Brother off from the thought thereof, awakening in him some jealousie which he had for|merly conceived, adding that he thought he might do well to renounce that contract, wherein his Sister Longueville did also labour, so as they joynt|ly agreed how to silence it for ever; and afterwards they agreed with Count Serviente, and with Monsieur de Lyon, that the Queen should forbid Chevereux, and County to proceed any further in these espousals, which was the cause of all the distasts, and disagreements which insued afterwards, and which did facilitate the Cardinals return to Court. Thus Conde losing the Dutchess of Chevereux, lost also the Coadjutor, who became his bitter Enemy, as well for this, as for that he found he either could not, or would not help him to be Cardinal. The Duke of Bullion and Marishal Turenne flew also from him, for his coolness in maintaining their interests in the business of Sedam, he likewise lost Grandpree, for not restoring him to his Government of Moson, in the acquisition whereof, he had so great a share, and which was yet held by the Spaniards; he likewise lost the Marquess Savebeuf, by reason of some certain pretentions which he had, and by his changeable nature: he lost the first President of Parliament Mole for having prefer'd President Viola to be Secretary of State, before Champetreux, who was his eldest Son; and with him he also lost many Counsellors of Parlia|ment, he likewise lost the Princess Palatine, for not using his Authority in

making Marquess Vieville superintendent of the Finances; as also in con|sideration of her own interest, and that she having assisted Conde so much, she had not as yet got any good thereby; she knew that to quench her thirst, she must go to the Fountain's head, and that persons of her conditi|on could receive favours only from the King; wherefore upon conference with the Dutchess of Longueville, they both agreed, that if they could get the Prince to give way that the Cardinal might return to Court, they might have what they would of the King; they communicated this their thought to him, who suspended his resolution therein, neither granting, nor denying it. Which they interpreting to the best sense, the Princess Palatine motioned it to the Queen, who listned attentively thereunto, and said she would procure excellent conditions for Conde, if he would do his duty: But he having divers respects, one contrary to another, was a while doubtful what answer he should make: but being told by his friends, that he could not handsomely treat thereof without the Duke of Orlean's con|sent who had dealt so cordially for him, and remembring with what ap|plause he was received in Paris, when after his imprisonment he came thi|ther, not so much in respect of himself, as for being held to be a bitter Enemy to the Cardinal, he resolved upon the denial: wherefore the Prin|cess Palatine having discover'd her thought unto him under the Seal of secrecy, and he resolving not to consent thereunto, he presently acquainted Orleans with it; so as the Princess being sensible how her service was neg|lected, thought she was no longer bound to back him.
Those who were gratified by him, were Count Marsine, who after the Prince his return from Haure de Grace was made Governour of Steney, Marquess Boutevile, who was made Governour of Belgarde; Monsieur Arnault, made Governour of the Castle of Dijeon: Marquess Persan, made Governour of Montrond: Count Melle, made Governour of Cleremont: Count Tavanes, destined to command the Princes Troops, and Regiments in Champagnia, and Burgundy; of all whose fidelities he did no ways doubt, beside some others to whom he gave several imployments.
The Princes, together with their liberties, were restored by order from the Queen, to all their Governments; the Duke of Longueville was resto|red toh is Government of Normandy: But he and his friends in that Pro|vince, and Count de Alets, with his adherents in Provence, severed their in|terests from those of the Prince, and left him to himself in affairs, which did occur: that which moved them chiefly thereunto, was, for that these Princes being of more mature years, and of a more setled nature, would not hazard themselves upon such misfortunes, and ruine, as wisely they foresaw: but as for the Duke of Nemeurs, and Rochfaucolt, though neither of them were fully pleased with the Prince, the first kept faithful to him by means of the Dutchess of Chastillion, and the other by the Dutchess of Longueville. His most considerable friends were the Duke of Orleans, by Beaufort's means, the Dutchess of Monbason, the Frondeurs, and part of the Parliament, who fearing the Queen and Cardinal, sided with him. The whole Clergy of France were already sufficiently wounded by the Decree of Parliament, and by the verification thereof, in excluding all Cardinals from the Kings Council; which made them by frequent meetings of Prelats seek remedies for this wound. Many Gentlemen also who were weary of the Wars, and grown poor, did frequently assemble, under pre|tence of proceeding to a Convocation of the States General, whereby to amend disorders of the Kingdom: many thought good to add the Clergies grievances to theirs, so to seek remedy for so many evils; wherefore some of the Nobles having had discourse with the Church-men, they all joyned,

in indeavouring the Convocation of the States General; to this purpose was Count Fiesco chosen, who was President of the Assembly, and more im|bittered than the rest. He, with the Secretary, and with twelve Gentle|men of the twelve Provinces of France, went on the seventh of February to the Covent of the Augustine Fryers; where Fiesco in a Hall where the Clergie was met, spoke as followeth:



Gentlemen!
The whole Nobility which is now in Paris, being brought toge|ther under the Protection of the Duke of Orleans, the King's Vnkle, and the States Lieutenant General, the first thing resolved upon was to desire you to joyn with them, which desire being so just, and grounded upon so many examples, they cannot doubt but you will readily imbrace it; the rather for that this as|sembly is no other than a continuation of that which was made the year 1649. by leave from the King, Queen Mother, and the Duke of Orleans, where you made the same Vnion with us which is now demanded. You may remember Gentlemen, that when we broke up, we were allowed to meet again, whensoever the things that were then promis'd us, were not observed, and when remedies should not be applyed to the violence used to Gentlemen contrary to the privi|ledges, and immunities of their birth. We should go less in our condition, and in what our predecessors have won for us by their blood lost for the aggrandi|sing of this Crown, if we should silently lose them, and not use all just and law|ful means to preserve them; our design being so justifiable, we beg of you to joyn with us, and co-operate with us, adding your Suffrages to ours, and second the Duke of Orleans his generous resolution in obtaining the liberty of the Princes of the blood-Royal, and in assisting his Highness to break the Cords of these unfortunate Princes, who have been declared innocent by Parliament, their detention being so prejudicial to the King's service and to the common good: Behold here Gentlemen our Commission, which we beseech you to approve of, for which our Assembly doth by us promise you their respect and service.



The Archbishop of Rheims first President of the Clergies Assembly answered, That the Nobility had always been gracious to the Clergy, and that the Assembly acknowledged the obligation;  so with specious words dismist the Nobilities Commissioners. They then presently fell to examine the Proposals which were made unto them, and resolved to represent to the Queen, and to the Duke of Orleans, that there had ever been an Union between these two bodies, insinuating their inclination to continue it. The chief thing desired by the Nobles, was the Princes their liberty, wherein the Assembly had formerly been supplicants to his Majesty, and would still continue to be so, and would desire the Duke of Orleans to use his power therein with the Queen: and because the Clergy had not as yet paid their respects to the King, and Queen, they sent to the Duke of Orleans to know, if he would be pleased that they should send Deputies to their Majesties, which he approving of, the Archbishop de Ambrune, with divers other principal Prelates went on the ninth of February for audience to the King, where they express'd the reasons of their Assembling, alledging the example of the year 1949. and the Duke of Orlean's Authority; and in fair words did supplicate their Majesties, for the Princes liberty. The Guard de Seaux answered them, That the Assembly of the Nobles was unlawful, that the Queen did disapprove thereof, and that she would not take it well, that they of the Clergy should joyn with them, that for what concerned the liberty of the Princes, it was that which her Majesty did desire, so as they that were of their party would lay down their Arms; and that she had sent Marishal Grammont to treat with them; then the same Deputies went

to the Duke of Orleans, and desired him to continue his noble inclinati|ons, and put an end to a business of such importance for the publick peace. The Duke thanked them, praised their indeavours, and said that as for their joyning with the Nobility, they might do it; that by all means he would have the Princes out of Prison, and that they needed say no more unto him: wherefore the Bishop of Cominges was sent by the Clergy the next day to the Assembly of the Nobles, accompanied by divers other Bishops, and Abbots; and acquainting them with what he had to say from the Assembly, he assured them of a constant confederacy. To which the Marquess of Lordis answering with like civility, an Union was agreed upon; but that the Duke of Orlean's assent in writing must be seen for the meet|ing of the Nobles; which they obtained from him in these words; We do consent, and approve that the Nobility do Assemble, to give in their grievances in writing, so asthey put them into our hands, and that they comprehend not any thing therein, which is not conformable to the orders, and decrees of the States General, and that when they shall have received satisfaction in their grie|vances, they dissolve when we shall bid them; Vpon these conditions we promise them our protection. This was written, and subscribed on the second of February, 1651. They then sent to the Prince of Conde, and to the other Princes to congratulate their liberty, and Marquess Lordis, Pre|sident of the Nobility, made an Encomiastical Oration to the Prince, the act of Union was subscribed on the 21th. of February; as it had been drawn up seventeen days before by all the Nobility of the Assembly, except the elder Marquess Vieville, who was won over to the Court, upon hope of being made superintendant of the Finances. The Princes were well satis|fied with the Assemblies complement; they then dispatched away Letters through all the Provinces to exhort all other Gentlemen to enter into their Union; and continued the Assembly that they might advance their de|signs. Count Fiesco did very much labour the Convocation of the States General, as the only means to come by the wisht for general peace;  strove to keep the Clergy firm to their first intentions; and accordingly Archbi|shop Ambrune, and Bishop Cominges spoke boldly for this Convocation, using examples, and places of Scripture to draw all men to the same opi|nion.
In this interim, the Parliament, which did not like the Convocation of the States General, as well for fear left their Authority might thereby be moderated, and that the Sale of places might peradventure be thereby suppressed and confer'd upon better deserving men; as also out of the innate jealousie which is commonly found between Parliaments and States; the latter pretending to be superior in Authority, and the other did maintaining that States can resolve nothing, unless it be by them verified; notwithstanding met. And here Monsieur de Coqueley brought a request, presented by the Procurator General, wherein he blamed the Assembly of the Nobility: for being met without the King's Authority, and insisted upon the inhibiting thereof: but whilst they were deliberating hereupon, and that the first President moved, that the first Authors thereof should be punished, reading the Letters sent by the Assembly to the several Provinces, wherein the Duke of Orleans was concerned, by whose permission the Assembly met; that Duke, and the Prince of Conde were intreated to come to the Parliament to deliberate upon this weighty affair; for the Assembly began to be in great vogue in the Provinces, and there was danger that by continuing the Assembly new disorders might arise. This mean while the Queen, by agreement with the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, sent on the 16th. of March, to the Marishal de L' Hospitalle to in|form

the aforesaid meeting, that it should break up, and that as for their desire of having the States General called, they should have it granted to meet on the first of October next, at Tours. The same was confirmed by the Duke of Orleans, and the Captain of his Guard past his word, that what had been said by the Marishal de L' Hospitalle in the name of the King, and Queen, should be punctually perform'd. The like did the Cavaliere de Vieville, by order from the Princes of Conde, and County; none of which were pleased with the calling of the States General, as things too prejudi|cial to Regal Authority, and to themselves in particular, and therefore they sought by such excuses, and promises, to carry things on, to the end that all might afterwards dissolve into nothing.
The Duke of Orleans, instigated by the Coadjutor, who partook of all his secret Councils, became Protector of the Assembly of the Nobility, the major part whereof depended upon him, as being his intimate friends. And the Coadjutor being very much troubled that even French Cardinals were by Decree of Parliament debar'd being of the Privy Council, where|by he was deprived of his hope of becoming the chief Minister of State, and of being Cardinal, made the Duke of Orleans incourage the Clergy to joyn with the Nobility, and to complain onto the Queen of the unjust proceedings of Parliament, whereat the Court was not at all displeased, seeing her adversaries at variance within themselves.
This Assembly of the Nobility was introduced when the King's Autho|rity began to totter by reason of the hatred conceived against the Cardi|nal, and it was begun by certain Bishops who were discontented at the Court proceedings, and by certain Nobles who were not therewith well pleased, only to make a noise, and to make themselves of some considera|tion; at first these Assemblies were held but by a few, and in private hou|ses. The chief Authors of those of the Clergy were the Archbishop of Sens, Brother to Marquess Termer, the Bishops of Orleans, Haghen, and the old Bishop of Albi, who were all three of the house of Bene, and come to France from Florence, the Bishop of Cominges, and others, the Marquess of Lourdis, and of Vieville, the Counts of Betumirs, Fiesco, Montresore, Vrse, Fourilles, Montignack, and others who were all without any charge, and but little considered at Court: they took their pretence from some ill usage of the Nobility in the Country of Vexin, by the King's Officers, about a suit touching some counterbar'd Salt brought in by the Soldiers, and hid amongst their baggage in the March, which the Army made, to|wards the Frontiers; some of them came to Paris to complain thereof, and finding men displeased at the imprisonment of the Princes, and laying hold of that pretence that Mazarine had told the Queen in full Council, that the Nobility of France hated the King, and that the Parliament would do as that of England had done, they bethought themselves of calling the Assemblies, by the Assent, and Authority of the Duke of Orleans, who was not altogether content with the Court. So as nothing but novelty was sought after, whereby to win credit, and get some Office, or place in the King's Council. The same whereof being spread over the whole King|dom, so numerous was the concourse of Prelates, and of Cavaliers, as they became formidable, not only to the Court, and Parliament, but even to the Princes who had first protected the Assembly, for they thought that the States General would moderate their power, by taking away their Go|vernments and places, and that peradventure they would take the boldness of England; for when the third Estate should concur, and the States Gene|ral should be met, the Arbitrement of affairs would almost depend upon these.

Afterwards private houses proving too little for these Assemblies, they were adjourned to the Covent of St. Francis, and St. Augustine, where in the great Halls thereof, affairs were disposed of in good order: But this being done without the King's permission, and State-affairs being therein treated of, the Queen forbad all that belonged to the King or Court to go thither; as did also the Duke of Orleans, and the Princes; but finally all ended in the aforesaid eager desire that the States General might be called, that by the Authority thereof the disorders of the Kingdom might be provided for, and it was prai'd that they might be held in Paris. But the Queen did withstand it as much as she could, and was seconded therein by the said Princes. After many contestations, not without heart-burnings on both sides, the said Convocation was by Letters from the King put off to be held on the first day of October at Tours, and was afterwards adjourned to the eight of the said month; on which day the King entring into his Ma|jority, the Court and Princes hoped to disanull it; since it was introduced by the discontent and interest of particular men, and not for the publick good, as was pretended; France never having been in a more flourishing condition then it was then, had it not been for these intestine alterations.
The Assembly finding that the Queens design was to spin on time till the King was of years, that he, as his Mother hoped, might make it vanish, those Gentlemen were much confused, and were in dispute whether they should obey the Kings orders or no; but the Parliament being met in the interim, to oppose these Assemblies, the Duke of Orleans declared that he had assented thereunto; First, to obtain the Princes liberty, Secondly, to Counterpoise the Cardinal, and to remove him fromabout the King; and lastly to preserve every mans interest; that notwithstanding that these three points were ended, the publick quiet could not be secured, whilst Count Servient, Tillier, Lyon, and Madame Navailes were about the Queen; all which being the Cardinals Creatures, he, although he were far off, did by their means govern the Court, disposing of all things as he had done formerly, and having disposed of three Abbies of late, of no small concernment, that he would therefore desire the Queen to remove these four from her, and would intreat the Execution of the Decrees. That lie and the Prince of Conde had indeavoured to separate the Nobility upon good pretence, and to that purpose the Queen had given way to the cal|ling of the States General on the first of October next. But that the No|bility having represented that this promise might prove null, since her Re|gency would then be at an end, the Queen had promis'd what she was not able to perform, unless the King should consent thereunto: that as the Queen had been desired to put off the meeting till the first of September next, so he desired the Assembly to retard all resolutions till the next Mon|day, in which time he hoped to end the business with satisfaction to all; that he was sufficiently informed that the Cardinal's friends had used all their indeavours that the Parliament might make a Decree against the said Assemblies, and that they had indeavoured to divide the Prince of Conde from him, since the Mazarinians could not subsist but amidst divisions, and disorders. The Prince of Conde spoke to the same Tune, and added, that it was not long since they had gone about to pluck him from his Royal Highness, but that they had gained nothing therein, for that he was con|stant in the Union agreed upon, for the King's service, and preservation of Regal Dignity.
After this the first President spoke against this Assembly, terming it un|lawful,  contrary to Regal Authority; that they ought to obey the orders brought them by the Marishal de L' Hospitalle,  not joyn with the Clergy,

was yet more to contemn the King's Dignity, and therefore was not to be tolerated by Parliament; that the end thereof was to confound Govern|ment, and to introduce civil War; so as to oppose it, and destroy it, was to serve the publick good. That the Duke of Orleans had promised by the Marishal de L' Hospitalle, to cause it to dissolve on last Wednesday, and that notwithstanding it still continued, that the Parliament was grieved to see the fractures of the Royal family, which was fomented by some trou|blesome spirits, who abusing his Royal Highness good nature, fed him with false representations, and adding one disorder to another did confound all: in so much as after the Cardinals expulsion, those who stood candidate for the same Dignity afforded matter of new Revolutions, the remedy whereof was no longer to be retarded. The Duke of Orleans answered, That he had not appointed Wednesday with the Marishal de L' Hospitalle; that he would resist, and not maintain any thing that was prejudicial to the King's service, and promised that on Monday next, the Assembly should be quietly dissolved. The first President replied, that he heard another As|sembly was held in the Covent of the Carmelites at the Palace Mobert, which took upon it the quality of the third Estate, and which tended to new se|dition; that therefore it was no longer time to neglect the King's service, and the States interest, the King's Authority being so far ingaged, and that the business was to be taken into consideration, according to yesterdays Decree.
The Duke answered, he did not think the Company would deny him three days, at the end whereof he promised to be present in Parliament, and to give his consent to all Decrees, if the Assembly were not first dissol|ved. The President of Mesmes asked him, whether or no he would disapprove the said Assembly, if it did not dissolve before Monday. And Marishal Grammont, to ease the Duke of replying, propounded, that if the Assembly should not dissolve before Monday, his Highness should promise to disapprove it, and to oppose it with all his Power and Authority; upon which promise the Resolution was put off till Monday. President Cognieux, Brussells, Thou, and Charton, spoke in favour of the Assembly, and Thou said there was of the best blood of France therein, to which the first Pre|sident answered, that there were men in France who were twenty times better than they, who had not subscribed it; whereof those of the As|sembly being advertised, they presently publish'd a declaration of their pretentions, shewing that they were met only for the publick good, and this was accompanied by a Letter sent upon the occasion of the Assemb|ling of the Nobility, which did contain a declaration against those who said their Assembling without the King's Authority was Criminal: they said that all that could be objected to it, was that it was done without the King's permission, for that the Laws forbid all publick meetings without his Majesties consent; that for any thing else what the Nobility did com|plain of, and whereof they could speak, was correlative to the Law, and what in justice could not be denied; that during the King's minority, his Authority was in the Regent, and in the Lieutenant General of the Crown, so as their Authority must be had to make a lawful Assembly: that the point lay in this, whether they were to have the Queens permission, or whether it was sufficient to have leave from the Lieutenant General; that the Nobility had Assembled for three reasons; for the liberty of the Prin|ces, for driving out the Cardinal, and for the maintaining of the Nobili|ties priviledges, which were lost by the bad Government of State Mini|sters. That nobody could doubt but that the two first points were con|trary to the Regents desire, since the Princes had been imprisoned by her;

that therefore it was unnecessary to ask leave for the Assembling of the Nobility, seeing it was contrary to her sense: wherefore not being able to address themselves to her Majesty, they had be taken themselves to the Lieutenant General; who having given them leave to meet the occasion of taxing them for having taken upon them an unjust power, ceased. That those who sided with the Cardinal, said, this was a Criminal fact, but that they could not shew any other way which was more innocent; that they were shut up between two great extreams, either to become guilty by complaining, or to be opprest by holding their peace, and to suffer, that without remedy, the honour of their Wives and Daughters, their Goods, their Houses, and all they had, should be exposed to the insolence and vio|lation of Soldiers, Marishals, Task-masters, and to the avarice of Officers; and that their liberties and immunities should be opprest through the jea|lousie of those who had neither birth nor worth, thatthe Kingdom of France was a free Kingdom, and that the most noble and freest part thereof ought not to be forbidden lamenting, and demanding justice against such excesses; and their conclusion was, that any thing might be done which was just and reasonable, at last the Clergie, and after them the Nobility did acquiesce upon the reiterated desires and perswasions of the Duke of Orleans, and of the Prince of Conde; and much the rather, for that they had not met with such correspondences as they looked for from the meet|ing of the third order, without which, and contrary to the King's power, the Clergy, and Nobility could of themselves do nothing. So all was husht up upon hopes of the next Assembling of the States General, which Orleans and Conde did under their hand assure them of.
The Cardinal being gone from the confines of France, Paris grew weary of keeping continual Guards at the gate, for which the Soldiers had no pay, wherefore those Guards were taken away; so as the Court being at liberty to go into the City and Country, the Princes party was thereby not a little weakned, who confided much in Armed men.
Conde began to apprehend a second imprisonment, which he feared, as himself said, more than death; wherefore he grew more circumspect than usual. The Court began to take courage, and to think how to uphold the King's Authority; and because the Cardinal at his departure counsel|led the Queen to recall Count Chavigny, who was Conde's friend, to keep him from thinking to return by some other means, he was sent for back: and the seals were taken away by the Queens direction from the Marquess of Chastauneuf, who was suspected to be become a friend to the contrary party; and were given to the first President Mole, which made it be belie|ved that the Queen did all by intelligence with the Prince, who was a friend to Chavigny, and Mole, and an Enemy to Chasteauneuf, the next day he took the wonted Oath, and the Queen used him with honour and esteem, whereat the Duke of Orleans was much amazed; in whose House the Prince of Conde, Duke Beaufort, the Dutchess of Chevereux, and of Mobason, met together with the Coadjutor, and other conspicuous per|sons of that party; and they discoursed long upon the Queens taking too much upon her, contrary to their pretentions; speaking openly that if the Duke of Orleans would suffer such shame, he would incourage his Ene|mies, who would grow the more haughty.
But, because the Council differ'd in their opinions, it will not be amiss to lay open the affections of the one, and of the other; because private interest is more minded in France, than in any other Court, or Nation, and is prefer'd before any publick consideration. The Duke of Orleans, his Daughter Madamoselle, Duke Beaufort, and the Dutchess of Monbason,

minded only their own greatness. The Prince of Conde and his adherents, cared not much for this mutation, as being adversaries to Chasteauneuf, and friends to the first President; the Dutchess of Chevereux, and the Coadju|tor, as friends to Chasteauneuf, were more incens'd against the Queen than all the rest; the rather for that they thought they had been upon good terms with her Majesty.
Orleans broke forth into sore complaints against the Queen for making such alterations without his knowledg, Duke Beaufort offer'd to make the people rise in his behalf when he should please. Count Montresore, a great friend to the Coadjutor, said, it was no longer time to dally; that the people must forthwith take up Arms; and force the first President to forgoe the Seals, and afterwards go with the like fury to the Queens Court, and do as occasion should serve; it was thought that this being a violent proposal, came from the Coadjutor, who was of the same opinion: but the Prince of Conde, who held private intelligence with the Court, declared he would not ingage himself in a War in the Streets of Paris, as not being accustomed to fight with stones, and that therefore he would leave the care thereof to others. That he would be ready to obey the Duke of Orleans, if he should so command him, in going presently into Burgundy to raise men, and make War wheresoever he should please. Upon these speeches of so renown'd a man, the diversity of opinions ceased: and the Marishal de Estampes, one that loved not troubles, said, it was now late, and that the business might be defer'd till the next morning, which was done.
The Coadjutor finding Conde to declare thus much, intreated the Duke of Orleans to give him leave to withdraw himself from the intrigues of the Court, and follow his study; and seemed to continue a while thus re|solved. The Queen was somewhat troubled at the taking the Seals from Chasteauneuf, and giving them to President Mole, by reason of Orlean's so highly resenting it, which the Frondeurs also did; so as fearing some ex|travagancy, though she did much protect the first President, she was at last forc'd to forsake him, and to take the Seals away from him, and to de|posite them in the Lord Chancellor's hands; with promise under hand to the said President by Marishal Grammont, that they should be restored unto him, when the King should be of years; yet was not he well pleased, since the Queen had made him accept that place against his will, not being able to protect him therein, but he was more offended with Conde, from whom for his past service he promis'd himself more fervent assistance; wherein the Prince failed him, to keep from breaking with the Duke of Orleans.
Before the Seals were taken away, upon fear that the Duke of Orleans might withdraw from Court, and seduce Conde along with him; the Queen being desirous to recompence the first President with as good a thing, or better, made many gracious offers to him: as to make a fifth Secretary of State, and give the place to his eldest Son, or to buy a Presidents place in Parliament for him, or to give him his own place after his life; but he not being content with any of these, she offered to make him Archbishop of Tolouse, and indow him with 6000 pound sterling a year. And it was further said, that she offered to make him a Cardinal, and his Son first President, so as he would willingly resign the Seals; all which he did scornfully refuse, and contrary to the wishes of all his friends, who told him that a Cardinal, and a first President were never known in France to be of one, and the same Family; which made it be believed, that either he thought very well of himself, or that he feared to be deluded, or that the place of Guard de Seaux, was to be prefer'd before all these.
A treaty of peace with Spain was this mean while introduced by the Dutchess of Longueville's, and Marishal Trenne's return to Paris; but Conde foreseeing, that if this were effected, he should be ruined, he resol|ved to send Marquess Sillery about the end of April to Flanders, under pretence of the same treaty of peace, but in effect to negotiate his own concernments, and to renew the treaty which was held at Steney with the Spaniards, by Monsieur Croisy, and this was the first correspondency which the Prince had with the Spaniards, and which yet continues, and was the cause why the Spanish Agents did not agree with France, touching the general peace.
The Duke of Espernoun desired as much as the Court did, that he might be permitted to quit the Government of Guien; so to shu the disorders which might insue by his remaining in a Province ill afeted to his name; the only difficulty lay in finding out another Government equivalent to that of Guienne. It was reported that the Prince of Conde, not being well pleased with those of Burgundy, for not having appeared in hs im|prisonment, cooled in the affection which he bore them before. Espeoun thought therefore that Conde would be easily perswaded to change Go|vernments with him; especially, being much obliged to the , for having made head against the King for his liberty, wherefore the Duke of Candlle sent Gourvill to propound this unto the Prince; whom he found willing to accept thereof upon some conditions, which were, that he would have Guiene with all the Towns therein, and that he should re|serve unto himself in Burgundy the Castle of Dijeon, and the Town of St. Iohn de Asne, no mention was made of Belgard, it being his own particular Patrimony; for that Burgundy yielded five or six thousand pounds sterling more than Guienne; but these things not being agreed upon, the business broke off. The Cardinal hearing of this negotiation, wish'd the Queen not to permit this change for many reasons, which shall be hereafter men|tioned. The Prince hearing this, began to desire that which formerly he had not cared for, saying, that he would have that change, with the afore|said retentions, and that if the Court were against it, he would cause new troubles; this business was often debated in the Privy Council, pro  con|tra. Some said, that Guienne was well cituated for receiving help from Spain, and England, in case of revolt. That the Prince of Conde held in|telligence with Spain already, which was the only cause why he desired that Government; that Guienne, and Poictou joyn'd one upon another, whereof the Duke of Rochefaucolt was then Governour, who was Conde's great friend; that the Duke of Rohan Chabot, in Anjou, was of the same party; that Brovages, both of them places of importance; and the Islands of Olleron and Ree were in Count Ognon's hand, who declared against the King, that Normandy was under the Duke of Longueville, Brother in law to Conde; and that Britany was in the Government of Marishal Millerey, who was about to ally himself to the said Prince, by marrying his Son to Madamoselle de Tremaglia. That by reason of so many Towns, Provinces and friends back'd by the Spaniards, and if need should be, by the English, France was exposed to apparent danger; it was therefore concluded, that this evident danger was not to be permitted in so many important Provin|ces; the rather for that the Prince keeping Belgard, St. Iohn de Asne and the Castle of Dijeon in his hands, should be still as good as Master of Bur|gundy.
These reasons were of themselves sufficient not to permit that Province to the Prince of Conde, had not Count Serviente, one of long experience in Court affairs, with strong reasons maintained the contrary, he said, that

in great storms experienced Mariners stood not upon casting part of their loading over-board to save the rest: that the King's Authority was in great danger; that it was therefore needful, not only to watch carefully, but even to spend whole nights in thinking how to fence it, if not in whole, yet in part from the assaults of ambitious people; that their Majesties were as Prisoners in their Palace; whilst the Frondeurs pretended to take the Regency from the Queen, and to take the Government of the whole Kingdom upon themselves. That the Assemblies of the Clergy, and of the Nobility prest the calling of the States General, pretending to keep off the King's majority till he were Eighteen years old, and in the mean time to chuse a Governour of the Kingdom. That that strong-wound-up Rope composed of the several threads of many friends, became strong, and not to be broken: that destruction was at hand, unless this knot were untied by the yielding of one, and abating of the other party; that he was of their opinion, who held that it was not good to grant Guienne to the Prince, so to make him greater; but that when he considered how great an acquisition it would be, to take off a Prince of such esteem from the Frondeurs, he was of another mind; for that the true means to break the knot of the Enemy, was to divide them, the Male-contents being then only to be pacified, when they see themselves abandoned by great ones; that it was true that Guienne was of importance for scituation, and for the peoples condition: but that it was as true that it could not prove so pre|judicial as was supposed. That it was well known that the greatest part of the Gascons were of the Prince his opinion, and that it was not to be doubt|ed, but that they would second his designs, as well if he were far off, as if he were their Governour; so as by giving him that Government, that was only given him, which was already at his disposal; and that by gain|ing Burgundy made him lose what he had. That the one of these two Provinces lay towards Spain, and England, the other seated amidst the Richest, and most noble Provinces of France: confining upon Flanders, and not far from Germany; that it was not to be imagined the first should be able to subsist, by the backing of Spain, and England; because it was not to be believed that the Prince of Conde, who by blood was so interes|sed in the Crown, would be so foolish as to dismember the Kingdom of so noble a Province, to throw it into the hands of the Spaniards, who were natural Enemies to France, or of the English who were proud foes: nor were things so easily done as designed; that it was not time for Spain to in|gage in new enterprizes; and that all the aid was in considerable which could come from England, which was not sure to establish her new state by her own Forces, much less to send them abroad to purchase new Enemies; that reason of State might require that the power of France might be di|vided, and weakned; but that the English could not desire, that by the lessning of this, the power of Spain should be increased, which as being apter to raise Naval Fleets, ought consequently to be by them more feared: that on the contrary Burgundy, the Prince of Conde's Government, confin|ing upon Germany, and joyning upon Flanders, which is the Magazine of the Arms of the Spanish Monarchy, would be more apt to foment the Male-contents in Paris, when that City, as there was now great likelihood, should declare for their party. And that the Princes passing over the Loire to Carita, and joyning with Berry, the Government of the same Prince, and from thence with Poictou, Limosin, and Anjou, all which Provin|ces were held by his friends, and afterwards with Guienne, it was to be fea|red that the Kingdom being cut through the very midst by such a knot, the said Princes might not only be able to maintain themselves in Guienne,

but make good their party in Paris, by the assistance of Neighboring Bur|gundy, and by the Forces of Flanders, and Spain reduce the King's Digni|ty to an inevitable precipice, it being insidiated by so many seditious male-contents, who by such an opportunity, might compass their pernitious Machinations.
That therefore his opinion was, that this change might be permitted, and that to moderate the great opinion which the Gascoigns have of Conde, they should be suffered to see him; for that men are apt to worship a great Warrier, more when they hear of his prowess in War, than when betaking himself to his quiet, he falls into those licentious courses, as are usual to the military profession, and oftentimes those Flowers which are most pleasing to the eye, do most nauseate the Nose.
And the mean while the King's power breaking out in his Majority, would like the Sun dissipate those clouds which do darken the luster of this Kingdom; and obfuscate the splendor which other Planets exhal'd from thence, and the Crown will re-assume that happy motion which hath hitherto accompanied it.
Wrought upon by these reasons, all of them did unanimously concur to the permutation of these two Governments; the which being obtained by the Prince, made him also pretend to change Champagnia; but the Go|vernment of Guienne not appearing so prejudicial for the aforesaid reasons, as that of Provence, it would not be listned to. The Cardinal (without whose allowance this change was made,) blamed the resolution, weighing that if it made not much for the Prince his interest, he would not have pur|sued it so hotly, writ that he thought it would prove too prejudicial, unless it were granted him for some more secret, and more important respects: and for what concern'd Provence, he exaggerated much against them, who would so much as hearken to it; and wish'd the Queen and Council to have a care of it, and not to place so much power in the Prince of Conde; for that the more power was given to him, the more was the King's Autho|rity lesned.
It had been much better for the Prince to have taken upon him the su|pream command of the Army, as well for the Grandezza of the Kingdom, as for his own glory and Reputation; but he did not value it, as well in respect of what hath already been touched upon, as that he did not too much trust the Queen, who was jealous of all his ways; and therefore considering that putting himself into an Army composed of Veteran Soldi|ers, who were all faithful to the King, who reverenced nothing but his Majesties orders, he imagined that he could have no other obedience from them, but what did merely concern the service of France; wherefore he refused that command which the Queen confer'd upon Marishal de Auniont. This Army being provided of Officers, who did all of them depend upon the Court, was considerable both for number, and valour; but did not much that Summer for want of monies, which was occasioned by the Kingdoms disorders, lying only upon the Frontiers of Flanders, as shall be said hereafter. Whereat the Parliament being moved, whose designs were to win upon the peoples affection, seeming to be their defenders, decreed on the 19th. of Iune, that the order made before for remedying the un|ruliness of the Militia should be put in execution; and nominated some Commissioners to that purpose, who were to go whither they listed; but all in vain, for they wanted power to make themselves be obeyd, the Sol|diers making themselves merry with all their resolves, which was not un|pleasing to the Court, whose concernments were Govern'd according to advice given ever and anon by the Cardinal, who though he were at

Brules in Germany, was informed of all that was done at Court, according to which the Councils were there regulated, and the King did continually assure him by his Letters, that he would by all means have him near his person, though it should be with hazard of his Crown; yet great secrecy was used in this correspondency, the Court being at Paris, for fear of be|ing again beset with the City Guards, if it should be known.
Amongst these irresolutions of the King's Council, the Cardinal's friends sought to win over the Prince of Conde, industriously imploying those therein who were known able to promote so slippery a business. The Princess Palatine was desired to interpose her self in this accommodation; but she being unwilling to break her word given to the Dutchess Chevereux touching the Marriage, and to the Coadjutor touching his being Cardinal, declared that she would be ready to do any thing that would not clash upon these two points, by retracting from whence, she might be taxed with breach of promise; but the affairs in the treaty of Guienne altering upon the breach of Madamoselle Chevereux marriage, opinions also altered, and hence began all things to change.
The Princess Palatine did notwithstanding say, by consent of the Dutchess of Longueville, that if the Queen would be gracious to the Prince, she would quit the Union whereunto she was now annext, and would cordially joyn with the King and her Majesties interest, and if oc|casion should require, declare her self against the Frondeurs. The Prin|cesses entred into the treaty; the Queen seemed ready to give them all reasonable satisfaction, the Prince inclined to agreement, but some of his friends, and particularly Chavignie whispering in his ear, that he ought not to forego his old friends for new ones, that the Court was full of subtilty, whereby he might be sure at last to be deluded; and he listning more to bad, than to good Counsel; he would not be fed with bare hope, nor con|fide in the Court. So as not being able by these means to reduce him, they tackt about, and resolved totally to ruine him; for he being supprest, lit|tle care was to be had of the rest, and to effect their intent, they resolved to secure themselves of all the Provinces of the Kingdom. And the Duke of Longueville, who was Governour of Normandy, and Brother in Law to the Prince, was sought to be won over by a secret treaty, which was effe|cted by friends on both sides: and whereunto Longueville listned, not for that he had any natural good inclinations, but because he was not well pleased with Conde, who dealt disdainfully with him, and fomented his Wife in Domestick differences that were between them; he ingaged his word, that he never would recede from what was agreed on with the Court: no not for any, whatsoever offer might be made him of bettering his condition. All the Officers of the Flanders Army were also treated with, who took a new Oath to serve his Majesty against all his Enemies within or out of the Kingdom, and declared that they did depend only upon the King. They summon'd in all the Troops which served under the name of the Prince to appear at a general Muster; and that they might be disposed of in several parts, they thought either to detain their pay, or to give them inconvenient quarters, or if need were, to disarm them; but the Prince suspecting this, wrought so as that they drew up towards Burgun|dy, Champagnia, and the Frontiers of Picardy; and that they should never come within three days march of the King's Army. They afterward in|deavoured to draw over from the faction of the Frondeurs as many of the Parliament, or of the chief Citizens as they could; among which Presi|dent Novion was one, deceiv'd in his hopes of being the Director of the Duke of Orlean's Council, Monsieur le Feure Provost of the Merchants;

and finally, all means were used to draw over the Princess Palatine, who af|terwards grew a great confident of the Queen, and Cardinal, by reason of her being but badly requited by Conde's Family, after her so much partia|lity and good service done to Conde; and they also won over the Dutchess of Chevereux and the Coadjutor, promising to call the Marquess of Cha|steauneuf to the Privy Council again, and to nominate the Coadjutor to be Cardinal when the King should be of age; the joyning together of the two last was of great importance in this business, out of their desire to re|venge themselves of the Prince, and as being partakers of the Duke of Orleans his most secret Council; all this was managed by the Court with their accustomed cunning; for the most wary were of opinion that the Queen could not confide neither in Chevereux, nor in the Coadjutor, in whom she was forc'd notwithstanding to seem to trust, and to believe things which were unlikely; and though it was thought that by Chasteau|neuf's return to Council, Chevereux might pretend to have a share in the Government of the Kingdom, and that the Coadjutor by being Cardinal, might one day prove Favourite; even they (allured by such hopes) la|bour'd to keep in favour with their Majesties, and to seem desirous of Mazarine's return; wherein Chasteauneuf being of all others most vigilant, fearing Conde's faction, and considering that the Cardinal would at last overcome all difficulties, since it was the King and Queens will; having with great wonder hard the question asked by Priolo in Conde's name, whe|ther or no, he would approve of the Cardinals return, he was desirous to sound the bottom of the business; wherefore he sent his confident Berret to Brules, with a Letter of credence, and with exhibition to imploy all his power in helping his return; when the Cardinal saw the Letter, he very warily made Berret write down the articles of instruction at the foot of the Letter; and that he might the better discover truth, treat the more securely, and know the true meaning of the Queen, he sent Abbot Vnde|dey to Paris incognito, in whom he trusted much; who coming thither with much danger of losing his life, he behaved himself so well, as he agreed with Chasteauneuf, that he should be made chief Minister of State when the King should be of years: he assured the first President that he should have the Seals restored to him, and Marquess Vieville that he should be made superintendent of the Finances.
Vndedey not having a Pasport from the Spaniards, was in his journy to Paris stopt by the Garrison of Charlemont, but was released at thirteen days end; for they considered that it made not for them, to detain one, who by his negotiation might renew jealousies, and afford new pretences to the Male-contents, he being imploy'd to revive the Cardinals Party, whose subsistance was judged necessary by the Spaniards, thereby to make Conde joyn more firmly with them, and holding that this was the only means to widen the wounds of France. The Princes were advertised of his detention, and of his being set free; and they laid snares for him by the way, but he fearing it, turned about by Mesieres, and past in disguise through the Princes Troops, and got safe to Paris; whereat the Queen was very glad. Vndedey staid Eleven days, not being discovered by what|soever the Princes could do: he negotiated all the business that he was come about, which was all put off till the King should be of years; but fearing afterwards to be found, he went to Peroun, and staid there incogni|to till the King was of years, and till the Prince retired from Court, after which being recalled by the Queen, he returned to Paris, to finish what he had begun.
The Parliament knowing that it was an unjust and odious thing to make

a man guilty without naming his fault; that they might the better justifie their proceedings against the Cardinal, sent two Counsellors of the Chamber into Normandy, and Picardy, and to all places through which he past, to inform themselves diligently of all his comportments: in order whereunto Cantarini, an Italian Bancker, was imprisoned, and had all his Writings taken from him, hoping to find notes of the sums of Money which he was said to have conveyed into Italy and Germany; and Brousell was appointed to make this inquisition, who was his chiefest Enemy; but after having spent much time in making diligent search, he returned with|out any thing worthy the Assemblies knowledg. Nothing was found in Canterini's writings which did aggravate him, and Broussels self said, that for all his diligent search, he had found nothing whereof to accuse him; but Counsellor Longueville, a man of a great reach, and very turbulent, said in the Assembly, that they were to make process against a man for par|ticular affairs, but that other proceedings were to be had in management of the State, and that mere shadows were to be made use of, and that it made for the publick good to give sentence as Caiphas did; inferring there|by, that to cloke their private intentions, who were it right or wrong, would rid their hands of him, they must make him cause of all the blame, palliating th injustice with zeal to the common good.
The Prince all this while forbare not to bind himself faster to Orleans, Beaufort, the Frondeurs and Parliament, telling them that his ruine was not aimed at by the Court, without drawing theirs after it; that he had al|ways served the King faithfully, and that those who sought to distroy him, made use of the fruits of his Victories. He afterwards forbad his Troops to joyn with those of the King, alledging the Authority, and consent of the Duke of Orleans, who being Lieutenant General of the Kingdom du|ring the King's Minority, might command this, as he pretended; but whilst these affairs depended thus, his friends thought he did much amiss in not putting on a ready resolution to fall by degrees from the King's Army, and go to Charite a great Town upon the Loire, half way between Paris, and
Lyons; where when he should be arrived, the Queen would never have left Paris and brought the King to wage War with him; but were it ei|ther for want of ready resolution, or that he would not be the first who should begin a breach, (which the Prince his Father left him for an unalte|rable Maxim,) or, as it is more likely, that he thought to send one of high esteem to command those Troops, he unfortunately let this opportu|nity slip. The Court beginning afterwards to take courage, fell at una|wares upon these Forces, which they did not defeat, because they were not all got together; but they forced them to retreat in great disorder towards Steney upon the Mose, and to go out of the Kingdom, with great loss of those that ran away; suspecting then some danger to his own per|son, he began to be very circumspectful of his ways in Paris, and quite for|bore the Court; and as it was apparent that his actions did not answer to what the Queen might expect from him, nor to the good intentions he pro|mised her Majesty when she granted him the Government of Guienne, but did rather daily covet more Offices, and Governments of Towns for his friends and those that did depend upon him;  that he took a course con|trary to what was expected from his gratitude, the Queen to counterpoise his power, was forced to listen to what was propounded by the Frondeurs; which was, that they would serve her, with all their faction, in case she were not satisfied with him: so as though the Privy Council were unwil|ling to come to an open breach with Conde, thinking it better to keep him fastned to the Royal Family, and because till then he had always refused to

mingle with the Frondeurs, with whom he was displeased for their having failed him in many things, and sought to make use of him rather for their own concernments, than for his sake; at last the Court, being forced by the Prince his too scornful comportments, and by his too high pretentions; Monsieur de Lyon, with whom the Coadjutor was desirous to speak, was permitted to see the Coadjutor in Count Montresor's house, as he did once or twice; the which being observed by one that dwelt over against Mon|tresor's house, he by means of Count Chavigny acquainted the Prince therewith, who was afterward better advertised thereof by the Duke of Orleans, to whom the Coadjutor had intrusted the business, the Prince be|gan to suspect that he was once more intrapped; so as to this terror infu|sed into him by Chavigny, another accident being added of certain Soldiers who were upon the Guard in the Fauburg of St. Germains, to bring in some Wine which were di contrabando, without paying the impost; he thought verily that those were the Regiments of Guard which were to enter his house; as he was falsly informed by his Domesticks Vieville, and Recuses. Wherefore getting on Horseback by night, on the sixth of Iuly he went out on the back side of L' Hostelle de Orleans, where his fear making him mistake certain Horses that were loaden with Victuals, for Troops of Horse which might wait for him, he went with the Prince of County to his house at St. Maure, to shun what he had suspected; and thither came the Dukes of Nemeurs, Rochefaucolt, Richelieu, and Bullion, Marishal de la Motte, and other of his friends, with as much wonder to the Court, as it was till then far from any such thought.
At his going out of Paris, the Prince sent Veneville to acquaint the Dutchess of Longueville, that she should also retire to St. Maure, least she might be staid in the City, and so all his designs discovered; who though she were sick of a Feaver, followed him. Her malady increased, and lasted above three weeks, which was the cause why the Princes her Brothers could not hold their Counsels, as they had wont to do, in her house, for fear of disturbing her who was troubled with increase of Paroxismes; when her malady decreased, which was six weeks before the declaring of War, she resolved to go from her Brother, before it was resolved what he should do; for being upon treaty of either agreeing, or totally falling off from the Court, she would not have a hand in any thing which, come what would come, she disliked; she considered that though peace seemed good, it was not certain; and if War should be thought necessary, her Family would be thereby much indangered.
She therefore desired the Prince to let her depart, and that since the Princess his Wife would be better in Montrond, than in St. Maure, where she might be an incombrance upon any occasion that should happen, he would give her leave to wait upon her, the rather for that such a retirement would make the Court jealous, it not being ill to keep it in fear of War, till it should indeavour to hinder it.
Conde consented thereunto, and the Princesses went away, not having any hand in what was afterwards resolved.
It appeared better at first, that the Dutchess of Longueville should go to Normandy, to her Husband, than to Montronde; least by following her Brother who was for War, and abandoning her Husband who loved peace, it might be believed that she was of a troublesome spirit; but two reasons moved her to the contrary. The first, because the Duke of Longueville having after his liberty, desired to have nothing to do with what concern'd his Brother in Law, but to wind himself out of the party, if the Dutchess who was much distrusted at Court, should go into Normandy, it would

have been suspected that she had kept intelligence between those Princes, and given the Court occasion to take the Government of that Province from her Husband, so as to keep from doing so, she was forced to keep far from him, and that she would rather seem discontent than otherwise, to the end that if the Prince should imbrace peace, she might presently be gone to Normandy. The second reason was, that the Dutchess governing the Prince of County at her pleasure, who was not upon over good terms with his Brother; were it either for his being young, which would not suffer him as yet to have full cognizance of weighty affairs; or were it by reason of his easie nature ready to alter upon any occasion, it was conse|quently requisite that the Dutchess should keep them joyned together; wherefore she went to Montrond on the 28th. of Iuly.
When the Prince was come to St. Maure, he sent Duke Rochefaucolt to desire the Duke of Orleans to assure the Queen from him, that he was not withdrawn out of any ill intention, but to free himself from danger which he apprehended; the Duke wondered at this his so sudden departure, and answered, that he would indeavour to put all things in good order, being sure that the Court had no ill opinion of him. The Queen sent Monsieur de Cominges to the Duke, to tell him, that she put the King's con|cernments into his hands, to the end that he might give sufficient caution to the Prince, whom she accused of being too apt to believe false and imaginary suggestions.
When Orleans spoke with her Majesty, they resolved to send Marishal Grammont, to discover the Prince his pleasure, and to offer him all security if he would return to Court. The Marishal acquainted the Prince with what the Queen and Duke of Orleans had given him in charge; the Prince grew to know his Error; but doubted least he might grow less in Reputa|tion if he should so easily acknowledg, he had put on a resolution for which he had no ground; wherefore to maintain what he had done, and to make it appear that he had done it not out of any causeless fear, he dryly answe|red, there could be no safety for him whilst the Cardinals creatures kept about the Queen; whereupon the Marishal desired to speak with him in private, but he would not consent thereunto; saying, that he was not to treat with him of any thing which was not to be discovered to all his friends; so dismissing him with very small satisfaction, the Marishal return|ed to acquaint the Queen with what had past. The Princess Palatine went also to acquaint the Prince into what a precipice he was about to throw himself upon vain suspicious, suggested into him by such as desired Novelty, and desire the ruine of the Royal Family. She told him he needed not doubt the Queens word; and that she having interposed her self in the first agreement, and promised in his name what was agreed up|on, these retractations seemed strange to her, which were grounded upon weak pretentions.
Marishal Villeroy, and Count Chavigny went to him also to the same end, but could do no good; the Prince said, he had been once deceived, and durst confide no longer, so long as Count Servient, Tillier, and Lyon, the Cardinals creatures kept in the posture they were in with the Queen. That the Cardinal would undoubtedly return; with whom continual commerce was held, notwithstanding the Parliaments prohibition; that pri|vate negotiations had been had in Sedam, and in Brisack, to bring the Cardinal into one of those strong holds; wherefore the Prince had thought fit to withdraw himself into a place of safety, and he sent after|wards a Letter by a Gentleman to the Parliament unto the same purpose.
The first President answered, that Conde had undertaken a dangerous

Resolution, whilst not many days before, the Queen had assured him by the Duke of Orleans, that there was no imaginable evil conceived against him, that he might go to the Parliament, and freely propound his sense, that he should find there the same security that County had, the Assembly was ad|journed till the next day, and County being this mean while returned from St. Maure, he acquainted his Brother with what had past; on Saturday he came to the Parliament, where those of the King's party appeared with a writing from his Majesty containing:
That the Queen did not believe the Prince of Conde would have continued his Iealousies, so as to withdraw from the Court, after that she had sufficiently assured him that she had never any thought which might make him mistrustful; that the Duke of Orleans knew the sincerity of her actions, and that he had ascertained the Prince of the Truth of what her Majesty had said unto him; that it was far from her to act any thing contrary to the liberty of his person; that Marishal Grammont had assured as much to the Prince, who might in|form the Assembly of what had past. That the King had impowered the Duke of Orleans to treat of an agreement, and that he would be very glad the Parliament would intercede therein, that if the Prince his Iealousies consisted only in his own safety, and in the Cardinals return, her Majesty declared from the very first her intentions of not recalling him. That she had past her word thereupon unto the Parliament, which she would religiously preserve, and that for what concern'd the negotiations of Sedam, and Brisack, she might justly think her self injur'd that the Lieutenant of that Government had without his Majestie's order thrust the King's Governour out: that for as much as concern'd those who were of the Privy Council, that they being the Queens Domestick servants, which she might at her pleasure chuse; it was answered that the first had served the late King with such fidelity, as the Prince had no reason to distrust them, that her Majesty could assure them that she had never had any occasion to suspect they had any intentions contrary to his Majesties service, and that none of them was ingaged in the Cardinals return. That if the Prince did not admit of what was offer'd him, but should still keep far from the King, it was to be suspected that there was somewhat else which kept him from waiting personally upon the King, which the Queen was infinitely troubled at, who desired nothing more than to see a perfect Vnion of the Royal Family, which was so requisite for the good of the State.
This writing being read, the first President began to discourse thereup|on; and turning to the Duke of Orleans, said, that it belonged unto him to undertake a business of such importance; since the Queen putting most confidence in him, and that the Prince was more joyn'd in interest with him than with any other, he might easily do good. He therefore desired him to use his wisdom to grub out those Roots which might bud forth into the unevitable ruine of France, wherein civil War would without speedy remedy be kindled. The Prince of County thinking that the first Presi|dent's words aimed at the taking the cognition of these affairs from the Parliament, stopt him at the word of Civil War, saying, he wondered that he should speak of Civil War, where the Prince his Brother meant nothing but safety to his own person; He wish'd him therefore to give over these speeches, which tended only to make the Prince his actions appear contumacious, and blameable, which were of themselves just, tending to the publick good, and to the keeping up of the Grandezza of France, which consisted in being govern'd by those of her own Nation, and not by Forrainers, who mind only the undoing of others, to enrich themselves. The first President repli'd, he wonder'd no less to be interrupted, it being

a thing not permitted to any one, and that in that place he was to speak any thing which tended to the King's service, and to the common good. County answer'd, that he had the honour to be a Prince of the blood, and that when he heard his Brother ill spoken of, he was bound to defend him, and that he thought it improper to speak of civil War, when a Prince was spoken of who had done so much for the service of the King and State. The first President replyed, that the Princes of the blood were in that place but mere Counsellors, that no notice was taken there of any Prince but the King, and that such speeches as these had been heard upon the like occasions in other times; but the contention was interrupted by the Duke of Orleans, and the Parliament was adjourned till the next day.
Affairs were kept this mean while on foot at Court; and touching giving satisfaction to the Prince, it was wholly put over to the Duke of Orleans, who holding good intelligence with the Prince, it was hoped that by his means some good agreement might be come unto; or if that he should further his designs, the Court might have just reason to make good her resolutions to the world of humbling the Family of Conde, which was grown too great for the King's Authority.
Orders were sent to all the Governours of Provinces, and Towns to stand upon their Guard, nor to own any commandement but from their Majesties: Marishall Grammont was sent to his Government of Berne, a Pro|vince bordering upon Spain to watch over whatsoever might be contrived on that side against the King's service; to which purpose the Queen used all means to bring the Cardinal back, who as a forreiner, and not depend|ing upon any faction, was known to be requisite for the good of the Go|vernment, and for the defence of his Master's Dignity: and because she found there were few of his friends who spoke freely for him, since the ve|ry imagination of not being against him was able to make any honest man hated, she caused the Abbate of Ondedey to return to Paris, who kept in|cognito as hath been said, at Peronne, to the end that by his dexterous fide|lity he might bring the wisht for indeavours to a good end.
The Parliament meeting again on Monday, another Gentleman appea|red from Conde with a Letter, wherein he discovered himself more fully touching his suspitions, and pretences: complaining that the Kingdom was governed by those that adhered to the Cardinal; saying, that Tillier was made Secretary of State merely by the Cardinals favour; that Mon|sieur de Lyon had the honour to be the Queens Secretary, only for having been in the same imployment formerly, for the Cardinals service: and that Count Serviente had added nothing to what had made him deserve being deprived of the Office wherewith he was honoured by the late King, more than hindering the conclusion of the general Peace; that if these three were removed from the Court, he would forthwith return un|to the King.
These Letters were perused, and presently sent by the King's party to the Queen; by whom the Duke of Orleans was again desired to interpose in appeasing the Prince, and to free him of his conceived jealousies; to which purpose the Duke went to Rambulliere, not far from St. Antoine, where he spoke with the Prince, but to as little purpose as formerly; for he persisted that he would see the aforenamed three persons removed, whom he held to be his chiefest enemies; to this he was egg'd on by the Counsellors Croisy, St. Germain, Count Fiesco, with the privity of Chasteau|neuf, and the Coadjutor, who contributed to the business, though under|hand, to avoid the making Conde more jealous, who held no good corres|pondence with them.
About the midst of Iuly the Duke of Orleans spoke again with Conde at Rene, two leagues from Paris; which though it appeared to be for this agreement, yet the truth was, that instead of reducing the Treaty to some fair issue, and reciprocal satisfaction, as was thought might be done, if Orleans had dealt really, they agreed to expell the three forenamed Men, to the end that the Queen being deprived of their assistance, and others who depended upon them being put into their places, they might predo|minate in the Council, and obtain their desires. They therefore prest the Parliament as much as possibly they could to interest them against the aforesaid three, to which the Parliament would not consent, Monsieur Tillier the mean while, knowing that the whole Caball was against him alone; (for as for Servient and Lyon he did not think them to be so far out with the Prince, as that he should seek their ruine;) he told the Queen; that though his being Secretary of State might dispense with him for not condesending to the Prince his demands, and for keeping the Parliament from interesting themselves therein, that notwithstanding, having no other end but the King's service, and the quiet of the State, he would willing|ly yield, so to put an end to all pretentions, and to obviate new distur|bances. The other two followed his example, so they all got leave to retire from the Court, and went to their Country houses: wherefore the Prince adding still to his pretences, and growing still more haughty, came to Paris on the 21. of Iuly, accompanied by Duke Rochefaucolt, Marishal de la Motte, and other friends of his; and going to Parliament with the Duke of Orleans, he thanked them for their protection, and went from thence to visit the King and Queen: and because he seemed still to doubt new Imprisonment, many men were placed about the Palace Royal. And the Duke of Orleans, who upon his word had brought him to the Court, shew'd him a Dagger as he went out of the house, which hung by his side, saying, that he would with that kill the first man that should offer to stop him. The King was willing to see him; but the Queen appeared some|what cool, and avoiding any discourse of interest, talked only of what did presently occur, whereat the Prince was not much satisfied; and as it is usual for men that are apprehensive to interpret all things to the worst, he declared his distaste, by saying, he would return no more thither.
But keeping his negotiations on foot, as well in Flanders, as in France, to the end that he might effect his designs abroad, if he should not effect them at home, he with large offers, and fair allegations invited the Duke of Longueville to enter into his party. But Longueville, who was wise, and loved his quiet, though he seemed to joyn in his interest, yet keeping his agreement made with the Queen, did not accept the invitation, saying, that though the beginnings of all civil Wars seem specious, yet their mid|dle and their end prove fatal to those who undertook them, and that there|fore as a true friend and allye, he exhorted him to agree, and peacefully to injoy his Governments, well foreseeing what the contrary might pro|duce, as being fomented by ambitious people, and who for their particu|lar concernment desire to put the Kingdom into troubles.
Yet these the Princes ways tended not to the precipice of War, though they seemed to do so; for by what happened afterwards, it was known he pretended rather to make an advantagious agreement, than to enter into an uncertain and dangerous War. At this time the Prince received a Let|ter from Marquess Bouteville, Governour of Belgarde, wherein he adverti|sed him, that Monsieur de Isole was come thither, sent by the Emperour, who desired to speak with him, and to let him know that if he would de|clare

himself, he would invest him in Brisack, and would cause all the rights of the house of Austria therein to be given unto him; That moreover he would give him 4000 Soldiers, which he would add to the Garrison of Franchendelle, which the Spaniards should abandon; so as together with his own Soldiers, which at that time were 5000, he might make an Army of Ten or Twelve thousand men.
The French Army lay this mean while, about the River Liss, but was not able to make any considerable assault upon that Frontier, for want of Corn and Artillery, and much more for want of Money, the rather for that the Enemies Towns were all well fortified; whereat the Queen was not displeased in these present disorders, that so she might have her Forces disingaged, and free to send against the Prince upon any emergency Not|withstanding Marishall de Aumont incampt at Arleaux, not far from. Doway with 10000 foot, and 6000 horse, and sent Duke Chaunes to fall upon two redoubts which were sheltered by the River Scarpe, making 600 Mus|quetiers ford over the River at the same time, conducted by the Count de Espagne, and Chevalliere Chaunes; so as the Spaniards having had two Squadrons of Croats routed, forsook the redoubts; by the taking whereof whilst it was thought the French would approach Doway, they went away without doing any thing else; and went to Inchy, a Town three leagues off, and quarter'd in the Abbey of Vauxelles.
On the other side Marishall Fertesenetre, Governour of Lorain, went with some Troops gathered up in the Neighbouring Provinces, to take Charte upon the Mosell, the Castle whereof though it were but small, was well fortified, and of no little consideration, in respect of the Neighbor|hood of Lorrain; and he took it, though it were by the Garrison stoutly defended, to the great advantage of the King's Forces, who were thereby likewise unincumberd on that side.
Whilst things were in this condition, Duke Mercure, who staid in Paris after the Cardinal was gone, met every night with the Queen, when all others were withdrawn, maturing such expedients as stuck most with them; and seeing himself much prest in his own particular affairs, for the ill satisfaction which was conceived against his Family, by reason of his in|terest with the Cardinal, he beg'd the Government of Auvergne. Her Majesty before she would gratifie him therein, ask'd the opinion of one of her confidents; who told her that if the Duke should get what he de|sired, he might find some means to avoid marrying Madamoselle Mancini: and that therefore he thought fit to defer it, and make advantage of time; which advice being approved of by the Queen, made Mercure (who was aware of the cunning delay) to protest seriously that he intended the marriage, and that there was not the least reason to doubt his word, shew|ing all possible readiness to accomplish what was agreed upon: notice was given of this to the Cardinal, who though he went not from what was agreed, yet knowing that this alliance would afford matter to his Enemies to make the troubles greater, would howsoever prefer the King's service before his own concernments. He therefore answered Advocate Bluet, that he did not approve the Duke should go from Paris, as well for his shunning the bad accidents which might befall him by such a voyage, through the alterations which upon this pretence might arise in Paris, as for that there was none with the Queen but himself, and Marishall Plessis Prali,

with whom her Majesty might freely discourse, and trust without suspition.
But the Duke not admitting of this denyal, held himself bound in ho|nour, and thought that the exposing of himself in so turbulent times, and in the greatest heat of persecution to a dangerous voyage, would give the clearer testimony of his faith, and the more oblige the Cardinal to assist him in his marriage. So as having often acquainted her Majesty with his firm resolution he brought her at last to give way thereunto, and she gave him moreover 1000 pounds for his journey; this being therefore resolved with all secrecy, to shun the treachery which might be laid for him in his journey, he sent his Gentlemen into the Vandomase, seeming as if he would take that journey, and he feigning himself to be servant to Monsieur de Siron, one of the Cardinals Domesticks, went from the Queens Cabinet on the beginning of Iuly, and went post with the same Siron to Peronne, and from thence to Brules, where on the twelfth of the same month the marriage was solemnized by the Archbishop of Colen, which being done, he returned with like speed to Paris.
At this news great rumors were had in Paris, arguing thereby, that assu|redly the Cardinals return was indeavoured; but because by their Maje|sties Declaration, and by the Decrees of Parliament, not only the Cardi|nal, but all his kindred were sentenced, they were of opinion that the marriage must prove null; since (as they said) a Prince of France was not to marry without the King's leave, and much less with one that was banish'd, and an enemy to the State. Being come in great pomp to the Parliament at Paris, sent for as Duke and Peer, he was much prest to de|clare the truth of the business. He answered, that he was not bound to say any thing, save only that he had done nothing contrary to their De|crees; and did publickly affirm, that the Duke of Orleans and Conde had ingaged him in the said marriage; that if afterwards they had for their own concernments alter'd their opinion, he knew what belonged to a Gen|tleman that was born a Prince, touching the keeping of his word; not|withstanding all this, his father the Duke of Vandosme was sent for to ap|pear in Parliament, and being asked whether or no he had given his consent, he could not deny it, saying, that he had been therein assisted by the Duke of Orleans in the beginning, but that after the Cardinal was gone, he spoke no more to him therein, there being no occasion for it; so as the business remained thus without more ado.
Paris being in great commotions by reason of these Controversies, all mens eyes were upon the proceedings of the Court, and Princes: and the curiosity of inquiring into these affairs grew to such a degree, as when the Parliament met to treat of publick affairs, and of the Cardinal, many of the Commonalty, and of the Nobles, ran armed to the Palace, some to assist the one, some the other party; wherefore the danger growing daily greater, by reason of the several interests, the Parliament made a Decree, that all men should withdraw upon pain of life; and the King's Officers were charged to see the decree executed.
The Duke of Orleans was desired to interpose in making the agreement: but the greatest part were for Conde's party, whereof Orleans was one; wherefore the Prince, incouraged by so great a party in Paris, resolved to tarry in his Palace, which was well guarded by those who lay therein, and in the neighbouring houses; nor went he ever to the Court, alledg|ing that it was only out of fear of his life, or liberty: but he forbare not to pass freely through the Streets of Paris; and being once in a fair Coach in the Course, together with the Prince of County, and the Dukes of Nemeurs, and Rochefaucolt, he unexpectedly met with the King, as he came

from bathing himself: whereupon causing his Coach to stay, as others did, he made a low reverence to his Majesty; but this incounter was not well interpreted neither by the King nor Council; and the King was well nigh to have made him been unhandsomely treated by his Guard, had not his fear of displeasing the Queen his Mother (as he told her afterwards) di|verted him. Wherefore Conde gave out that he would go to his Govern|ment of Guienne; which he would have done, had not his partakers, fearing least the Cardinal might return in his absence, keep him from do|ing so;
This mean while the Queen having sent a Letter to the Parliament, to send Commissioners to her, which were soon sent, she told them that the Declaration against the Cardinal was not yet issued forth, because those Commissioners who were to agree thereupon with the Chancellor, had not as yet appeared; that howsoever her Majesty would not teach them what to do, knowing the zeal and fidelity which they bore to his Majesties ser|vice. The Chancellor made a long speech afterwards, in praise of the Prince; extolling his deserts, in regard whereof, as also to satisfie his Highness, the Queen had turn'd away three Officers, who had served her well; whom she had not only no mind to recall, but did declare that they should return no more to Court, which she was content might be Regi|stred in Parliament; that howsoever she could not forbear saying, that the Prince was ill advised, since he had no way to excuse his now proceedings, being bound to keep about the King whom he was to serve with all due respect and obsequiousness, he added that nothing but seditious and scandalous Papers were thrown about the City, of which he desired them to inform themselves, and to punish the Authors; though some were not pleased that the mouth of the common People should be stopt, for to take notice of what they say, was to make what they said better reputed, and was an occasion to make them renew their railing with more petulan|cy, the chat of the rabble rout, being like a fire of straw, which the more you strive to quench, the more it smokes.
The Queen did at this time desire the Duke of Orleans, That he would joyn with her in choosing a Council to assist the King: who answered, that he would speak therein with the Prince of Conde. The Queen reply'd, that was not to be done, for that he had declared himself to be an enemy of hers, and blamed the Prince for indeavouring to incite tumults a|mongst the people in his own behalf; and that as the King went over the new bridge to the Iesuits, the people being set on by him, cry'd out, may the King live, may the Princes live, and away with Mazarine.
The next day the Parliament met, and and fell to discourse of Duke Mercure's Marriage, who was charged that within three days he should de|liver up unto the Secretary of the Parliament the circumstances of his marriage, that all might be made known to his Father the Duke of Van|dosme; it was also ordered that all the Decrees against the Cardinal, his Domesticks, and Kindred should be renewed; and particularly against Madomoselle Mauzeni, whom they did by name forbid coming into France, and commanded that if she should come, she should go from thence with|in Eight days. The Declaration which the King was to make against the Cardinal was also read, and Orleans caused the damage to be added there|unto, which had insued by his hindring the general peace; as also by his undertaking the War of Burdeaux without his consent: and Conde caused it also to be inserted, that his imprisonment was occasioned only for his not consenting to the marrige of the Cardinals two Nephews with the Dukes of Mercure, and Candalle.
The Queen who had still an eye to Conde's actions, being told that his Troops would not only not come to the King's Army, but march towards Champagnia, and being also advertised that the Prince caused divers Towns to be fortified, she made the Duke of Orleans tell him, that he should give her a precise account of those his actions, and that chiefly he should command all his Troops to joyn with the King's Army: and that otherwise she would give order to have him treated as an Enemy, and to be imprisoned. But Conde attributing the reasons thereof to his aforesaid jealousies, which made him provide for his safety, left the Court in the same perplexity. Who thinking they had good reason to proceed against him as guilty, sent a Letter to the Parliament who were meeting to treat of the aforesaid marriage, charging them to come to the Palace Royal, and did the same to the Sovereign Companies of the Chambers of ac|count, aids, and to the Magistrate of the Commonalty of Paris, who go|ing all thither, they were brought before their Majesties, in the presence of the Duke of Orleans, the Prince of County, and of many other Dukes, Peers, and Marishalls of France, and of other chief Officers of the Crown. The King told them by his own mouth, that he had sent for them to ac|quaint them with his intentions for the publick good, as also to let them know the proceedings of the Prince of Conde, with which he hoped to take good order speedily; referring himself for what was more to Count Brienne, the first Secretary of State; who presently read a writing, dated the 17th. of August, containing
That his Majesty with much sorrow found, that after so many Declarations made formerly against the Cardinal, the Enemies of the publick good did still make use of the same pretence, to foment the dissentions which were already kindled in the State: which had made his Majesty to send for them to him, to declare again that he intended to exclude the Cardinal for ever, not only out of his Council, but out of his Kingdom, inhibiting all his Subjects to hold any correspondency with him, and declaring that whosoever should countervene this his Royal will, should incur the penalties specified in the antient orders of his Predecessors, and by the late decrees of his Sovereign Courts, to which purpose he commanded that all necessary courses should be taken.
That after having given this assurance to all his Subjects, his Majesty could no longer conceal without prejudice to his Authority, what was done. Here he mentioned all the favours and graces which the house of Conde, and this Prince in particular had received from the late King, and the now Regent; that his Majesty after having consented at the intreaties of the Queen his Mother, and of his Vnckle the Duke of Orleans, and of the Parliament, to grant him his liberty, he had restored him to the same place as formerly in his Councils: had returned unto him the Government of the so many Provinces and Towns, which he and his adherents held in the Kingdom; so as it was easie to be belie|ved that he rather chose to be feared than loved. That after having confirm'd the Forces raised by him, which were sufficient to make an Army, that after having given way to the change of his Government of Burgundy for that of Guienne, he had moreover permitted him to keep the Towns which he held in Provence: whereby he had granted him more than had ever been granted to any. That he had caused the immense sums to be paid unto him, which he said was due to him for arrears of Pensions, for the pay of his Soldiers and Garri|sons, which were such, as to content him, he was forced to alter the monies which were design'd for the maintaining of his Majesties houshold, and of his Fleets; and that finally, he had left nothing undone which might give him in|tire satisfaction, and make him imploy those good qualities wherewith God had indued him, as he had done formerly to his Majesties service; that his Majesty

having expected this, found much to his dislike (by the actions so contrary to the solemn protestations made unto him by the Parliament) that he was much deceived; for that as soon as he was free from imprisonment, his solicitations had induced his Majesty, to make the alteration which they all saw in his Coun|cil, and that having thrived in this his first attempt, he grew so bold as to com|plain of the conduct of the three Officers, and of the Queen his Mother, who commanded them to withdraw not only from the Court, but from Paris; so to take all pretence of complaint from the Prince, and to appease the revolts which he was about to raise. That when by all these graces it was hoped he would com|ply with his Majesty in some things, or at least forbear his evil courses, he then did the clean contrary, to what his Majesties goodness towards him had strove to withdraw him. That after the Duke of Orleans, had past his word to him in his Majesties name, and had offer'd unto him all he desired, and pretended unto. He kept many days from resolving to see his Majesty; notwithstanding, that he met him once in passing by: that at last being desired by the said Duke, and by the Parliament to pay his Majesty his due respects, he saw his Majesty but once, and was then received by both their Majesties with all demonstration of love, sufficient to wean him from all sinister opinion; that his Majesty was obliged to declare what was come to his knowledg as well within as out of the Kingdom. And that to begin with publick affairs, that after two months he had absented himself from the Council, speaking ill of the Parliament, and saying, that he could not trust his Majesty nor those that were about him. The Prince had written to the Parliament, and to many chief Cities, to imprint sinister opini|ons in them of his Majesty: ingaging many in every Province, to take up arms when they should be desired to do so by him, and by the City of Paris, which gives motion to all other places. That he had given out an ill report of his Maje|sties good intentions; that he had re-inforced the places intrusted to his Go|vernment; that he had fortified them with all things necessary, and done this then without any order from the King; imploying his Majesties Subjects therein, and making them forego gathering in their Harvest. That he had taken his Wife and Sister into the strong hold of Montronde. That he had got toge|ther a considerable sum of Mony; that he had practised all things which might make it be believed that he held intelligence with the Enemies of the Crown, particularly at Brussels, with the Archduke, and Count of Fuenseldaglia, causing their Messengers to be guided to Cambrey, by Horse drawn out of his Troops; that the Prince had done these things without his Majesties knowledge or leave, that therefore his correspondency was not to be doubted with those with whom the King had declared War. That he would not make the Spaniards go out of Stenay, as he was obliged to do; which was the only condition that was required from him when he had his liberty given him. That he had afforded means to Don Stephano di Gamara to come with his Army to the Mose, that he had munition'd Moson, and kept the passage of Dun, whereby part of Cham|pagnia was put to contribution, thereby to make the Spaniards more able to undertake things against the Kingdom, and to divert the proceedings of the King's Forces, which being greater than theirs, might be made greater in the low Countreys by an enterprise never known in France. That notwithstand|ing all express orders given, those that commanded his Forces, would never obey the orders given them, to joyn with the body of the King's Army; which occasioned the confounding of all designs, as well in respect of the differences which the King had had with the Prince, as for having given time to the Enemy to know themselves, and to put themselves in a condition to oppose his Majesties Forces; moreover that he had made them more resolute by the hopes, or rather assurance given them of some comotion in the Kingdom. That he must not forbear to mind them of the dissolutions committed by the Soldiers under

Conde's command in Champagnia, and Picardy, which ended in the ruine of those Provinces, instead of carrying the War into the Enemies Country. That the liberty taken by those Forces, to plunder his Majesties Subjects, had caused many Soldiers to go from his Majesties Camp, and to go into the other which did what they would; that he had thought fit to acquaint them with all these things (though the most of them were already sufficiently known) believing that these publick proceedings of the Prince, would prove that his secret designs could be no less dangerous, nor could be no longer dissembled without abando|ning the rudder of the State, which God had put into his Majesties hands; and which he was constantly resolved to maintain. That without speedy remedying disorders, the Enemies of France would never apply themselves to the so much desired general peace, nor reform the abuses of the Kingdom without stopping the course thereof, which his Majesty was resolved to do.
This writing being read, the Prince of County, who was present, told the Queen that the Prince his Brother had done nothing but what he was able to justifie, and that these were the impostures of his Enemies, whilst things continued in this disorder, Conde continued to visit the Counsellors, to assure himself of their favours, and indeavour'd to keep his friends well dispos'd to him in all parts, and upon all occurrences. The Queen on the contrary, advising continually with her friends, and making particularly use of Abbate Vndedey, who did all he could for the service of the Queen, and Cardinal, found it was necessary to chuse new Counsellors to supply the places of those that were put out. And the Duke of Orleans being of the same mind, who was therein advised by the Dutchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutor; it was resolved that assoon as the King should be of years the Marquess of Chasteauneuf should be made chief Minister of State; that Marquess Vieville should be made superintendent of the Fi|nances, and that the first President should be confirmed Guarde de Seaux; the first, because he promised to use all his power in getting the Cardinal re|called, though he failed therein afterwards, as shall be said. Vieville, because President Maison, who was superintendent of the Finances, was thought to be too much concern'd in Conde; but the Prince declaring that all this was prejudicial to the decrees of Parliament, and to the King, and destructive to the Princes of the Realm; promised he would never con|sent to Chasteauneuf's return, who would prove worse than the Cardinal: saying, that those that favor'd him, were his implacable Enemies. That the Dutchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutor were the chief Plotters; saying, that they and the three Barboni, were Authors of the writing which was pretended against him; he therefore desired his Royal High|ness to maintain his interests, as he would do his till death. For what re|main'd, he absolutely declared that rather than to see the King put into the hands of his Enemies, he would throw himself into the hands of the Spaniards; and after so much freedome of words, he bewail'd the un|happiness which threatned France, and all good men; wherefore the Co|adjutor thinking that the Prince his words might work something with the Duke of Orleans, he strove to keep the Duke in his former opinion.
A treaty was this mean while begun between Chasteauneuf, Villeroy, and Chavigny, by the means of Counsellor Croisy, and Monsieur de St. Romain, whereby they had almost brought the Prince to consent to the establish|ment of the aforesaid Council, provided that the Queen would speak to him therein. But these Lords not daring to move the Queen to do so, least she might suspect they held some intelligence with the Prince; the Dutchess of Aiguillona, and Count Brien, were imploy'd to desire the ueen, that she would suspend the business for a few days; but she fearing

that this was a new trick of Conde's, to keep her from performing her word, proceeded in the establishment, which afforded afterward cause of new complaints.
This writing was followed by divers other pressings, that the Prince his actions might be known to be such as did not become his duty, and which were condemned for such, when the Parliament met, the Prince appeared, waited upon by some of his followers; but Orleans came not thither that day; wherefore Conde intreated the Assembly to adjourn the handling of what was communicated to them at the Palace Royal, as also the read|ing of the King's writing; to the end that the Duke might be present at the reading of them; pretending to justifie his actions, wherein the Par|liament was pleased to gratifie him, and sent to invite Orleans to come thither, but it was thought he would not come, having heard that what was done against the Prince at Court, was thought to have been done by his knowledg, for that it was imagined the Queen would not have attemp|ted it without holding intelligence with him: but foreseeing that unless he were protected by Orleans, his adversaries might undo him by what was alledged in that writing, he again desired his presence in Parliament, that he might not want such a prop in a business of such importance. The Duke having excused himself for several reasons the second time, the Prince desired him that at least he would give him a Declaration of what had past between his Highness and him: the Duke could notwithstand the violence of these pressures, which were seconded by President Viola, but yielded thereunto, rather inforced than willingly. So as sending immediately for the Secretary, without giving the Duke leave to repent, he caused it to be written the 18th. of August, the contents thereof being as follow|eth:
His Royal Highness declared, that till after Seven a clock at night on Wed|nesday last, Count Brien had not acquainted him, with the Queens resoluti|on, of calling the Sovereign Assemblies together, and those of the City, to tell them that her Majesty had no intention to recall the Cardinal, and that she would issue out all necessary Declarations to that effect, and that she might say, that the Prince had not been at the Palace Royal, since he the Duke had brought him thither. That the next day the Queen made him come into her Oratory, and caused the aforesaid writing to be read unto him, whereof he had had no knowledg; wherein there were many things which might be gain-said, and par|ticularly touching his intelligence with Spain, which he judged not fit to be read; but that the Queen would absolutely have it done; saying, that it was necessary for her discharge, the King being to be of years within Twenty days. He moreover declared that the Prince had propounded unto the Queen and Council, after Marquess Sillerey was sent to Brussels, that there were two ways whereby to make the Spaniards go out of Stenay: the one by a treaty, the Spanish Agents having offered the said Sillerey, so as a suspension of Arms might be had between them, and the Towns of Luxemburg, during that Campagne; the which being by the Queen denied, the Prince had told the Queen that he could not drive 500 Soldiers who were in the Town, out with 200 in the Citadel, those of the Town being at all times to be re-inforced by the Enemy; wherefore if her Majesty would send him 2000 men, he would do his utmost to expell them; he moreover witnessed that he did not think it fit that the Princes, or Dukes Forces which were design'd for the Army of Picardy, should be commanded by the Marishal Ferte Senetre, who being too true to the Cardinal, had guided him in his journey, and received him into his Towns after the Decrees of Parliament made against him; that moreover he had desired

him as Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, to send some that depended upon him, to command them, promising that he~ would willingly obey him; and that to that purpose he had named Monsieur de Vallon for that imployment, who be|ing ready to go, he received orders to the contrary, whereby the said Forces were willed to tarry there, and expect Monsieur de Vallon, who was to command them. He declared also, that the Iealousies which were taken were not causless, as he had formerly declared in Parliament; knowing that something had been done to his prejudice; and that after having brought him to the Palace where he was not too well received, he had not desired him to return any more thither, he also affirmed that otherwise he did not believe that the Prince had at any time had any ill intention against the King's service, or the good of the Com|monwealth.
The Prince having obtained this writing, thought he had gotten all he could desire from the Duke of Orleans, and doubtless this Declaration, though a weak one, made for him; but the Duke being troubled that he had so easily granted this writing, acquainted the Queen therewith, say|ing, that he had protested to Conde, that he would please him only that one time: and that for the future he would never do so again, nor that he did any ways intend to nourish civil dissentions, to the King's prejudice; yet this was ill taken at Court, though covertly, not to increase ill will.
The Parliament meeting afterwards, and the King's Declaration being read, the aforesaid Declaration was read by a Secretary of the said Dukes, containing Conde's justification; which being read the Prince added many other things tending to his own discharge, and added that all proceeded from the actions of his Enemies, whose designs were known to be perniti|ous to the State, alledging for example the violent proposal made by the Coadjutor the preceeding winter in L' Hostelle d' Orleans, to go and take the Seal by force from the first President, and go from thence to the Court.
The Coadjutor rising up at these words, said boldly, that what he had said was altered; that he could justifie all his actions, and Counsels, and that he would never cry peccavi for any thing he had ever spoken. High and bitter speeches past on both sides. The Counsellors began to speak their opinions not being displeas'd with the present differences, whereby they became Arbitrators, and almost judges of the Royal Family, many things were said: many would have the Queen produce proofs for what she had said against the Prince, others that the Duke of Orleans should be intreated to intercede in a business of such importance, and to beseech the Queen that she would out of her goodness extinguish this fire in its be|ginning. In fine that all things should be refer'd to her Majesty, to whom they sent the writing which was given in by his Highness, in excuse of the Prince, that she might order all things by her supream Authority, as she should think would stand best with justice, but the time being short nothing was concluded, and the Assembly was adjourned till Monday. The Prince went forth, followed by many of the meaner sort; the Coad|jutor did the like, being also well accompanied. The Sabbath day being spent on both sides in getting Votes; the Duke of Orleans had private conference the same day with the Queen; but what it was, is not known. On Monday the Parliament met, where the Prince appeared, attended by many; the Coadjutor did the like, accompanied amongst others, by the Duke of Brisack, by Monsieur Montresore, and other Courtiers, and with many Citizens who were of his party, Armed with Swords, and Pistols. And the yard  great Hall which are by the Parliament house, were filled

with people of both factions. The house being set, and Conde being told how the Coadjutor had been attended thither, he said he thought it strange, there should be any in that Assembly who should vye with him for Magnificency, and as it were contend in the Streets with a Prince of the Blood, and that he believed the Parliament would take order with such audaciousness. The Coadjutor finding himself concern'd herein, said that he wondred much at such complaints, all men knowing what respect and value was to be put upon a Prince of his condition and merit; and that if he were aimed at therein, he profest all honour and respect unto him. But that obedience was due to none but the King; who left the way open for all men. To this the Prince answered with some Acrimony; and as the Coadjutor was ready to reply, a murmuring arose in the house, which silenced them both. Many Counsellors said, this was not a way of Parlia|mentary proceeding; the rather for that the Palace yard was full of armed men, who were assembled there, little to the safety of the Counsel|lors, and less to the freedome of their suffrages. The first President se|conding this, said unto the Prince, that he being the most eminent person, was to give the first example, wherefore he desired him to dismiss his re|tinue, and then turning to the Coadjutor, said as much, alledging what inconvenience might else insue.
The Prince gave order to the Duke of Rochefaucolt, to dismiss those who were come along with him; the Coadjutor said he would go do the like, but in a bold, and scornful manner, in somuch as walking faster then Rochefaucolt, he got thither before him, and as he walked Per la Perquet, or in the ante-Chamber, he came into the Hall, at whose appearance all his party drew their Swords, and those belonging to the Prince did the like. The Duke thinking that the Coadjutor, who was in the midst of the Prince his people, would hardly escape, thought how to make use of the present opportunity: but the Coadjutor being aware of the danger, return'd presently to the Parquet, or Ante-Chamber. Rochefaucolt, who stood at the gate and saw him coming, shut his head between the two leaves of the gate door, where he held him fast, affording time to those of the Princes party to have kild him if they had would; for Rochefaucolt would not kill him himself, least Montresore, and others of the Coadjutors party might have drawn their Swords, wherefore he left it to the Prince his fol|lowers, amongst which were the Count of Duraz, and Signan, Marquess Rogefer, Monsieur de Picaces, and others; whilst the Coadjutor was in this condition, likelier to dye than live, Monsieur Champeltrux, Son to the first President came to the door, indeavouring to open it, which Rochefaucolt seeing, he left the door to him, and returned to his place in Parliament. Not long after the Coadjutor came thither also, complaining of the vio|lence which was used to him, and that Rochefaucolt had shut the door upon him, that he might be slain. Rochefaucolt answered, that he shut the gate to keep the Coadjutors followers from falling upon the Prince, who was to be preserved against the bad intentions of all wicked men. The Co|adjutor not at all disturb'd with the danger he had past, said boldly Cava|liere la Franchezza. Rochefaucolt told him, he was a wicked man, that if he had been served rightly his head should have been broken. Here Duke Brisack took the Coadjutors part, and they fell to foul words, but the Duke of Orleans quieted them.
The Prince going out of the Assembly, next to the President as he was wont to do, when he came into the Hall, wondered that he saw none of his followers, who when they heard him speak, strove to get in; but he went into the yard, where meeting with his friends, he got into his Coach,

and returned to his house attended by many. The Coadjutor came also to the same yard, attended by those of his party, and many of the Nobles, and getting into his Coach was followed to his house by all the aforesaid Gentlemen on foot, with their Swords drawn; and it is to be noted that the hundred men who came last into the Hall, were Soldiers of the Kings Guard, conducted by a wise and valiant Officer. This business being di|vulg'd through the City, all men thought that somewhat of ill would happen the next day, unless some remedy were taken: the Duke of Orle|ans sent therefore to the Prince, desiring him to avoid the danger of such disorder, and that he would come to Parliament only with his usual atten|dance, and that the Coadjutor would do the like; the Prince answered, he cared not for what the Coadjutor would do, but that he knew what respect was due to his Highness, and that he would obey him. The Duke did the like to the Coadjutor, assuring him that the Prince would come attended only by his own Servants; he answered, he had no mind to con|cur with Conde, and that it was not in his power to keep his friends from favouring him; but that rather than displease him, he would forbear coming to Parliament, and acknowledging that he ought his life to Mon|sieur Champeltrux, he went to pay his thanks to his Father, the first Presi|dent; whereupon their former distasts were reconciled. Madame de Chevereux, and others of the Coadjutors party, went likewise to comple|ment the first President, and it was thought that this made them all joyn in concurring against the Prince his interest.
The distasts between the Coadjutor and the first President, arose from the Presidents disliking the Coadjutors demeanures, who would have his hand in all things. And next from a difference between the Bishop of Bayeux, Son to the first President, (who was provided with the Treasury of St. Chappels) and the Coadjutor; for Bayeux having means thereby to appear in Paris in a Pontifical habit, and to give benediction to the People; the Coadjutor was not pleased therewith, but complained thereof to his Father the first President; who said, if my Son have not power to do it, he would be the first who should forbid it him; but that if it were a pri|viledg grounded upon the Pope's Bull upon the King beneficency, and upon antient custome, he would never tollerate that those priviledges should grow less in his Sons hands; and again because the Coadjutor was thought to have a hand in the Treachery which was plotted against this first President, and the Princes, the 11th. of November, 1649. which ap|pearing upon deposition of witnesses, the first President was refused to be Judg by Duke Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and by Brussels, who made him descend from the Tribunal.
The Parliament sate again on Tuesday, whither the Prince came, accom|panied by the Lords of his party, and with many others, who did not en|ter into the Palace, the gates whereof were shut and guarded; the Coad|jutor was not there, being in a procession which went to Nostre Dame, and was to pass by the Palace, where he appeared in a Pontifical manner, with his Miter and Crosiers Staff.
Much was said in Parliament upon the present occurrences, and they resolved to carry the Prince his justification to their Majesties, together with the Duke of Orleans his writing, and humbly to desire them, that they might proceed therein according to their wonted justice. The Duke of Orleans was also desired to interpose with their Majesties, to ad|just a business of so great weight, whilst the Parliament sate. All the Prince his followers, who were kept out of the Palace, staid without in the Streets, where thousands of People being gathered together it was maliti|ously

noised abroad, that the Prince was imprisoned there within, which caused great commotion in those that were without; who when the Pa|lace gate was opened, with their weapons in their hands withstood all those that came forth, not suffering any one to come out till they might see the Prince; who accompanied by above 2000 persons, went towards his house in the Fanburg of St. Germans, the new bridge, Palace Dauphine, and other Streets which led to his house were so full of People, as his Coach could not pass without hurting some body, he then drove along the River towards St. Austine, where meeting with divers companies of the Guards, the People would have faln upon them, but the Prince hindred them; passing on with the like concourse of people through two Streets more, he met the Coadjutor as he was going in Procession, the Prince caused his Coach to stay; the Coadjutor seeing him and the Duke of Rochefaucolt bow'd low unto him, and blessed him, and continued on his way, which the people observing called him Mazarine, and gave him other injurious speeches, in so much as the Prince was forc'd to make those who were in his Coach go out and hinder the people from falling upon him, and cutting him in pieces, which might have happened, had it not been for the re|spect they bore to his Pontifical Habit, and to the hindrance made by the Prince.
After Dinner the Assembly met in Madamoselle de Orlean's house; whi|ther the Marishals de L' Hospitalle, and Scomberg came for the Courts party, Duke Rochefaucolt, and President Viola for the Prince, and other indiffe|rent Counsellors and Gentlemen; where discourse being had of the pre|sent occurrences, nothing was concluded, but all was put off till two days after, wherein also nothing was done.
The Prince being much troubled hereat, and being resolved howsoever to make his cause good, he presented a writing in form of a Declaration to the Parliament; wherein after the Preamble, he answered all the im|putations that were laid unto him, and for what was objected, that he made use of the Cardinals name to foment the divisions of the State, he said he had nothing to do in any thing that had been said or done against him, before his disimprisonment, and that if he had afterwards joyn'd with the sense of all the Parliaments of the Kingdom, and with the Votes of all the people, it was only to maintain the quiet which might be di|sturb'd by his return; and that if the Kings Council had been so diligent as they ought to have been in taking away the jealousies occasioned by so many sendings to Colen, the Parliament should not have needed to be troubled at his return, nor to desire a Declaration in confirmation of the Decrees which had been made, which it seems was indeavoured to be de|luded by that writing, which wanting the usual form, ought to be of no consideration.
That though this were enough to say, That he had no need to answer, that notwithstanding, since it had been said in the presence of that As|sembly, and in the rest of the body of the City, and which had moreover been Printed; he thought it fit to convince all men of the calumnies which were laid upon him; for what concern'd the favours conferred up|on his Family by the King, he said he had deserved them by the service he had done the Crown. That Sfenay and Claremont had been given him in recompence for the place of Admeralty, and for the settlement of his Brother in Law, the late Duke of Bresse, which by his death was lost. That the Governments had been justly confirm'd upon him, having been held by the Prince his Father; that he held his liberty from the favour of their Majesties at the desire of the Duke of Orleans, and Parliament that he

thought he should be faulty in gratitude, if he should partly alledge ju|stice for this obligation, and that the Declaration made by her Majesty of his innocency, was a sufficient proof of the violence which he had suf|fered under; that he thought it strange, that after Thirteen months im|prisonment, without any known cause, his liberty must be acknowledged as an act of Grace; and that he did no less wonder, that it should be said he was restored to the Kings Council, since that place having been given to the Prince his Father by the late King, and since the time of Regency, he could not attribute that to favour, which did of right belong unto him, as Prince of the blood; and whereof he could be no more be justly depri|ved without apparent injustice, than of his Towns and Governments. That it was ridiculous that the Cardinals new confidents, (who as it was likely had dictated that writing) should give out that he strove rather to make himself be feared than loved by reason of thenumber of Towns which he past, (though he had no more besides Stenay, and Claremont, than those that had formerly been in his Family) no complaint having ever been made of any violence by those that commanded; and that he was not troubled to defend himself against any thing that was upbraided un|to him, had he not in some sort sacrificed his interest, and glory, to the obedience which he ought unto the King: whereof his Enemies made use of now, to discredite him, and that he refer'd himself to the judgment of the Parliament, whether or no these intrigues of the Cardinal were enough to upbraid him with the number of his Governments; since the Cardinal and his Domesticks, possest Pinarole in Italy; Salse, Perpignone, and Roses in Rosiglion; Dunkirk, Mardike, Bergue, Dorlans, Bapumes, la Bassea, Ypre, Cotra in Flanders: besides Portalongone and Piombino, which he had suffer'd to be lost: not reckoning an infinity of other places, the Governours whereof did wholly depend upon him; which was sufficient to denote, that more than words were requisite to secure the Kingdom of the absence of one, who had so many gates to enter by; and when it was experimentally known too fatall to France, that his policy was always to make himself formidable to all men. That for what was said that the Forces which the King had given him might make a whole Army, it was well known to all France, that the advantages which his Majesty had got|ten over his Enemies, were partly got by them, that his having changed the Government of Burgundy, for Guienne, was occasioned by the Queens desire, merely for the peace of that Province which could no longer tol|lerate the Duke of Espernoun; that he had preserved the Towns which he held in Burgundy, because none were given him in Guiene; and that having bought them, it was not just they should be taken from him, with|out having some others given him in charge, or at least without having the monies repaid that his Father had given the Duke of Bellegrade. That he had not received above 5000 pounds for all that had been assigned to him, as well for maintaining the King's Kitchin, as for the maintenance of his Troops; and all this because the monies were otherwise diverted by the Cardinal and his friends, as he could prove unto the Parliament; that his having solicited the sending of Count Servient, Lyon, and Tillier from the Court, could not be termed an undertaking against the Regal Autho|rity, since the Parliament justified him therein, by their Demonstrances; and for that he had seen their Majesties but once, it was by reason of their new ordering the Council, putting in persons newly ingaged in the Car|dinals interest, without his knowledg, or consent; it being most certain that none were admitted into the Council, but such as did depend upon; and were partial to Mazarie; wherefore he could not hazard himself any

more in their hands, who were swaid by ambition, and who consequently had given him just occasion to apprehend their Counsels; and to declare that whilst they were without his advice of the Council, he could have no safety there. That for these reasons he had forborn coming to Council, not having any other considerations than those which he had declared to the Duke of Orleans in his last Declaration. That his having written to the Parliaments of the Kingdom, and to several Cities, was done to give them an account of his actions, and to make them lose the opinion which was given out, that he would introduce civil wars into France, in conse|quence of the Letters which the King writ to all the Provinces after his retreat to St. Maure, with the faults therein imputed unto him; it being false that he had written to raise any men more than usual; as also that he had re-inforced the Garrisons in his Governments, and fortified them of late, forcing the people of the neighbouring Towns to work, which had he done ought rather to be commended in him than blamed; and that it were to be wish'd that all Governours of Frontier Towns would do the like. That the retreating of his Wife, and of his Sister the Dutchess of Longueville, was upon the consideration, that they were to preserve his Family, which after so many jealousies were not in wisdom to be trusted in any one place; that none but those that desired his ruine, could be of|fended thereat, and that if these had been less circumstantial and better advised, since they knew that his Sister was in the Monastery of Carmelites at Burges, and his wife assign'd to a house of his, in the time of his impri|sonment, they would not have raised jealousies of a thing which was not only permitted, but also very indifferent, nor yet badly interpret the ex|hibition made by him of his Revenues, for the payment of his Debts, and keeping of his House in the time of his imprisonment.
That no condition was drawn from him touching Stenay, where|in it was easie to judg, he could not oblige himself in any thing, since it was not in his power, the Duke of Orleans having made it sufficiently known that he had not failed in any thing that became his duty to the King, nor to his Birth; since conformable to what was witnessed by his Royal Highness, after the return made by Marquess Sillerey, who went to Brussels by order from the King, he had offer'd to make the Spaniards go out by way of treaty, so as promise might be given that no Hostility might pass between the Towns of Stenay and Luxemburg; or that if they would give him 2000 men, he would force them to withdraw from thence, which not being granted him by the Queen, he was not to be blamed, that the Garrison which consisted not of above 200 men, did not drive out the Town Garrison wherein were 500, and which might at all times be recrui|ted by the Archduke; for what concern'd the pass of Dun, it was so incon|siderable as 300 men might have driven out the Enemy, which was unable to preserve it, that concerning his Forces abiding upon the Frontiers, he could not be therein better justified than by the Duke of Orleans; who declared that he had done nothing therein but by his direction, and to hinder the dissipation of the Forces, which might be very serviceable to the King, and wherein their ruine, and that of the whole Army would have been unfallible, which was commanded by Generals and Officers totally depending upon the Cardinal; it being well known that the rumour spread abroad, that the Forces abiding in France was but a trick to exclaim against him; since nothing was said of the Forces of Turenne Vandosme, who were quartered in the neighbouring Towns of Schale, and Netencourt, and which were never drawn out into the Field, that the licentiousness imputed to his men, was an epidemical, and no particular malady, against

the which the Parliament having provided, he had already declared, and would still protest, that he would take order that those who should have failed therein in his Troops should be punished according to Law. To what was said that he held intelligence with the Spaniards, he with much vehemence protested it was totally false, and merely the Calumnies of his Enemies; for which he required reparation from the Parliament, as of the greatest outrage which could be committed against one of his quality, and to the dignity of a Prince of the blood, and he desired the Assembly to interpose their Authority, in desiring their Majesties to nominate the Authors of those Calumnies, and to demand memorials, and advertise|ments of the said imputed intelligence; wherein he would submit himself to their judgments, if they should find that he had done any thing contra|ry to the duty of his birth.
By the news which was had of this writing, and by the indeavours hotly pursued by Conde, and his friends, the Queen, after many passages in Parliament, was at last inforced by the same necessity, which made her do many things in that present conjuncture of times, even contrary to her will, to make the King publish another writing, clean contrary to the former, in discharging the Prince of the former accusations, which she sent to the Parliament, which argued great weakness in the Court, and gave occasion of blaming the first indeavour as a thing unusual.
The Parliament did this mean while declare, That all this was done to render him universally odious, and to make him despair, that according to the Courts designs, he might be the first that should take up Arms; and from the 22th. of August, till the 7th. of September, it was much debated by those of the faction of the Princes, whether or no Conde could with safety be present at the Ceremony of the King's Majority, but fearing, or seeming to be afraid, he went two days before from Paris, pretending to visit the Duke of Longueville at Trie in Normandy, and writ a Letter to the King before he went, which was given his Majesty by the Prince of County the same morning that his Majesty made his entry on Horseback, and went afterwards he and the Duke Rochefaucolt waiting for him in their place in Parliament, to assist at the Celebration of his Majestie's Majority; This Letter said, that not for want of good will, but merely out of fear of danger to his own person, he forbare being present at the Ceremony.
The Prince being gone, accompanied by the Marquess of Iersey, and Monsieur de Monpasson of the house of Gondrine, went by Pointois, to Trie, at the same time that Longueville came thither, with whom he com|plained much against the Court proceedings; and particularly that Servi|ent, Tillier, and Lyon, being banish'd from the Court; Chasteauneuf, Mole, and Vieville were put into their places. The first, chief of the Council, the second, keeper of the Seals, and the third, superintendent of the Fi|nances; all which he thought were worse than the former three, he then desired him to declare for him, and to follow his fortune, assuring him of assistance from the Spaniards, both in men, and money; but the Duke keeping firm to the Court, would not put himself into these troubles, up|on uncertain hopes, and so giving him fair words, kept firm to what he thought was best for his own interest.
After this meeting, the Duke return'd to Normandy, and the Prince ha|ving heard that the Dutchess of Aiguilon had offer'd the Queen by Count Harcourt, that she would bring him to her either dead or alive, with bare 200 men, which the King had given her, (the which was absolutely denied by his Majesty) instead of returning to Pontoise, went to Chantelly, where

the Dukes of Nemeurs, and Rochefaucolt went to meet him, to know what resolution they were to take.
But to return to the affairs of Catalonia, the Spaniards after the taking of Tortoise, kept quiet there in their winter quarters; providing for War, that they might carry on their Forces in due time to such enterprises, as the time should invite them; whereof the Catholick Court making use by reason of the civil discords of France, which happened so opportunely for Spain, the Spaniards failed not to weigh wisely what might make most for their advantage: but their chief hopes were to take Barcellona by the re-inforcements which they expected from Italy, England, and Germany; being thereunto invited not only by the weakness of France, but also by the miserable condition of that City, which was grievously visited with the Plague, which after having destroy'd 35000 persons, had left the rest in so miserable a condition as there were scarce 400 Citizens who were fit to manage Arms, to which was added, that the people were wearied by the violence, and extortions of the French. And were inclined to sub|mit themselves under their first masters; remembring that in time of peace they were better dealt with, than what they now experimented under the Government of the French, being too late aware that the change of ma|sters happens seldom without the ruine of the Country. This resolution being put on then in the Council of Spain, fitting orders were sent to the Governour of Millian, to the Viceroys of Naples, and Sicily, and to all other parts, from whence Men, Victuals, or mony might be expected; and from Naples, besides Forces, Count Ognate sent three Vessels loaded with Corn thitherward, whereof there was then great scarcity in Spain, to main|tain the Army, which had much ado to subsist in a Country totally impove|rish'd, and desolate. But these three Ships were taken by Cavaliere Polk, who roved upon those Seas, which retarded the design for three months. Finally, all things necessary being prepared, and about 6000 foot, and 2500 horse being raised in the parts about Lerida by Marquess Mortara who was General, together with Baron Sabac, Captain Camp-master Ge|neral, Count de Aro, Son to the Constable of Castile, General of the horse, Fra. Giovanni de Marchesi Pallevicini, a noble Genuese General of the Ar|tillery, Baron de Bontiere a Burgundian Commissary General, and other va|liant and experienced Captains and Officers, they went with sixteen field pieces, and four pieces of Battery taken out of Lerida, towards Cervera on the 8th. of Iuly, and feigning as if they would fall upon Bellaguer, they tarried two days before that Town, wherein was much Victuals, Ammunition of War, and fifteen pieces of Artillery, which served the Prince of Conde at the Siege of Lerida, but the Queens,  Anjou's Brigades being brought thither by Marquess Marcelly, they rose from thence on the 10th. of Iuly (for that was not their design) and went to Vaglies.
But because after Duke Mercure's departure, Catalognia was without a Viceroy, and for that by reason of the Spaniards preparations it behoved them to have another speedily, it was much prest for to the Court of France. So as in April Marishal de Oquincourt had that imployment given him, and was sent for from his Government of Peronne to Paris; where whilst it was discust how they might send him well provided of men and monies to keep the field in that Province, Conde being bent upon other designs, used means to keep him from going upon that imployment, who was faithful to the King, and a friend to the Cardinal. Indeavouring that in his stead Count Marsine should be sent thither, who was his inward friend, that (as it was noised) he might by holding intelligence with him,

dispose of that Principality as he should please. So as Count de Iglias, Don Giuseppe Fontenella, and Don Giuseppe de Pinosa, all of them prime Cata|lonians, being then at Paris, Conde treated with them, and wrought so with them, as they managed the business at Court; and got Marsine to be chosen Captain General of those Forces; with order to be speedily gone, for that the Spaniards were already ready to march into the field, and to enter Caterlonia, many Catalonians having turn'd over to their party; but Conde's intention being to win upon Marsine's affection, who was a wise and valiant Warrier, he procured Madamoselle de Cleremont to him, for his Wife, with whom he had some little relation in blood: wherefore instead of making hast to his charge, he kept a month longer about the Court, upon pretence of that Marriage, and fifteen days longer at Fonten|blean, where the opinion of the Court was, that he treated with an Envoy from Don Gabriel de Tolledo, who was then at Paris, about a General peace, and that they had already agreed privately how to plot all the Prince his designs, who was already confederated with the Spaniards. And Conde as also the three aforesaid Catalonians,  desiring that Marsine might have the Title of Viceroy, they used means by counterfeit Letters (as was disco|vered) from Giuseppe Payssa, fifth Counsellor of Barcellona, a great friend of the said Fontenella, which were written to the King, wherein the King was perswaded to grant that Deputation, whereunto the King gave way, giving him hopes to make him Marishal of France upon the first occasion, it was notwithstanding thought preposterous by many, to send Marsine back again to that imployment, from whence he had been wrongfully re|moved, as well not to afford him means how to revenge himself, as also to shun the dislikes which might arise between the said Marsine, and those that had arrested him, it being probable that there might be jealousies all|ways between them: but the unhappy conjunctures of that Court, made those resolves unfortunate.
Marsine being at last come upon the 14th. of Iuly to Rastello in Barcellona he spoke therewith Don Giusippe Margherite, with the Consuls of Barcello|na, and with the Deputies of Catalonia; and having discoursed with them upon the affairs of the War, and upon the designs of the Enemies, he went to find out the Forces, and tarried at Piera, where he ordered Don Giusippe de Ardena, who was returned a little before from France to Cata|lonia, with title of Lieutenant General, to return with his men to where they had been a little before; and were staid until the Spaniards, after having received a recruit of three Brigades of Italian foot, and four of the Irish, should march without Artillery, which they sent by the way of Villafranca to Taragona, towards Barcellona, wherein there being but few men, and less Victuals, Don Giuseppe Margherite, and the Consuls, were very diligent in causing those who were return'd into the City, from the neigh|bouring Villages which were visited with the Plague, to bring in Corn, and other Victuals; in so much as for eight days, so many Carts and Mules were seen to enter by the three only gates which were left open, as enabled the Town to hold out fifteen months longer.
It being in this interim known that the Spaniards marched from Vagliez, towards the hill Sodoner, Marsine retreated to St. Andrea upon Lobegrate, where he haulted till the Spaniards began to descend the hill Lodonner, he neither withstood their march, which he might easily have done, they be|ing to pass down the steep hill for the space of a Catalonian league, nor did he oppose their coming into the plain of Lobegrate, though he knew that the Van began to fall down on the last of Iuly, the Rear was not yet come thither, the French Army being then above 1700 horse, and 6000

foot. But retreating from St. Andrea, left only Ardena with his Catalonian Regiment, and some other Commanders to Skirmish a while till all his other men got to L' Hospedeletto, one league distant from Barcellona, where on the 4th. of August he retreated to the Covent of Valdonsella, not far from the Walls, and incamped his men about the Ditches of Barcellona, making two quarters, one in the same place, the other in the Covent of the Angeli Veuki.
The Spaniards being this mean while faln down without any opposition, from the hill into the plain of Lobegrate within sight of the City, they in|camped themselves along the River, and having taken a Tower upon the head of the same River on the 8th. of August, they landed their Artillery which came from Taragona, and 2500 Germans, and on the 12th. day ac|costed the City, incamping from Sans to Saria, and the next day they in|larged themselves towards St Martino, a mile distant on the East from Bar|cellona; with the aforesaid six Ships, and with three others afterwards, and six Gallies, they came within sight of the City, and here the French com|mitted a second error, in suffering the Spaniards to march from Maria to St. Martine without assaulting them, as they might have done, which in|fused such jealousies into the Catalonians, as made them march out after three in the afternoon to fall upon them with all their Foot, and part of their Horse; but the Rear which was already come up to the body of the Battle, finding the design staid; so as Marsine finding his design discovered; return'd to his quarters, from whence he was not advanced as far as a Mus|quet might shoot.
On the 15th. day the Spaniards began to make their Trenches on St. Martine's quarters, and advanced with them towards Masquinardo, and at the same time made three little Forts upon the tops of those Mountains seated between the said Masguinardo, and the Covent of Madonna delle Gratia, where not long after they made another quarter, in which things they spent many days without any considerable success, for though the French sallied out with 300 Horse, and fell upon some of the Spanish Forces who went for forage, no great harm was done, the Spaniards be|ing succor'd by a great body of Horse, which drove the French back into their quarters; and thus went affairs without any great novelty till the 20th. of September. Where after Marsine by the means of Marquess Monpullion who went, as the Catalonians said, to treat with the Spaniards, where Letters past between him and Conde, the business being agreed up|on, Marsine went presently away, pretending to go upon some enterprise towards Taragona, and then turning his march towards Ponts, and Vrgil went into Guienne to the Prince of Conde, he was accompanied by Mar|quess Monpullion, by Monsieur Luzzan Marishal of the Battle, by Espencee who commanded his Regiment, and with about 400 Horse, and some car|riages of Baggage and Munition. He would have carried more people away with him, but was hindred by Don Giuseppe Marquerite, and Marquess Marcelly, who discoursed of the vvay of stopping him, (for they had ap|prehensions of him) vvhereunto Barcellona vvould easily have agreed, for that City mistrusted him: all the Catalonians vvho sided vvith him, vvere much suspected by those vvho vvere more faithful, and began to observe either vvays, vvhich vvas alvvays aftervvards prejudicial to France.
A great sense vvas had in Barcellona of this flight of a General vvho could not know well how to better his condition. Don Giuseppe Marghe|rite, by consent of all the Citizens and Council of Barcellona, took the Government of all things upon him, and sent Monsieur de Roy who com|manded the Queens Regiment to the Court, to acquaint their Majesties

with all that was past, and to solicite them to send another Viceroy speedi|ly; Don Giuseppe de Ardena, and Count de Alets, who were at this time gone out with about 800 Horse were sent for back into Barcellona, they being in the parts of Gravoile, as also the Deputies of Catalonia, who were at Mandrise ten Leagues from Barcellona, making new leavies of men, and providing things fitting to relieve the City, fearing least after Marsine's flight the Spaniard would have stormed the City.
For defence of this Town, there were before Marsine went away 3000 French foot, 1200 Switzers, 1700 French Horse; besides these that re|ceived pay, there were 3000 Armed Citizens, and 85 pieces of Artil|lery.
For what concerns the Province of Catalonia, the best, and strongest Towns were in the Spaniard's hands as Taragona, Lerida, Flix, Mirevet, Tortoja, Fragra Monson, and others; and none held for the Catalonians but Barcellona, Bellaguer upon the River Segra, Arbecca, Cervera, Camerassa, Vrgell, Trem, the Castle of Valenza, Sauroca, Alose, Roses, and Palamose.
The Baron della Fera, a French man commanded in Bellaguer, with 400 foot; in Arbecca Monsieur Marie, with 40 or 50 men, in Arger, Cavaliere Austrea with 200 foot; in Camer assa an Officer of the Garrison of Bellaguer with 30 Soldiers; in Trem, Don Giame Dearill, a Catalonian with 200 foot; in Sauroca Monsieur Durnareda with 40 Soldiers: in Alose Sieur Rochfertier, with 300 men: in Roses the Marquess Della Fara, elder Brother to the Baron, with 300 Soldiers; in Palamose Sieur de Chastenure with 50 men: all which places were capable of greater Garrisons: but were guarded by so few for want of men; for most of the Governours were so avaricious, caring little for any thing but how to fill their own purses, made false musters, that they might pocket up dead pays, to the ruine of the publick and of their own private honours.
The affairs of Catalonia going thus, and the Siege of Barcellona, before which the Spaniards fortified themselves still more, and ingrossed their Ar|my with divers Troops which came from several places, they hoped to put a good end to that War. Marquess Mortara who apply'd himself wholly to this end, failed not to provide what was necessary, and knowing that it was fit to make a line of Circumvallation before the French could be able to bring succor, after he had minded the perfecting of the head quarter at St. Martino from the 13th. of August to the 3d. of October, Marquess Pala|nesine who came that very day, went to Sans with part of his men, to make another quarter there, forcing some Catalonians who were fortified in the Church-yard to yield; and then they fell upon the Tower of Losiere, guarded by Captain Brodas with 40 foot, about which the Catalonians came, where about 100 of them were slain, and taken Prisoners, which Mostares brought to relieve it: and the same time they took the Mo|nastery of St. Matrona by night, seated in the midst of Mongenick, which commanding the whole City, they placed 7 pieces of Canon upon it, and began to play upon the Houses, but did not much harm. During these prosperous successes, Don Iohn of Austria appears, the 19th. of October, with Nine Gallies, and one Ship on the Strand over against the said quar|ters of St. Martine, where casting anchor he landed about 700 foot; so as the Fleet which consisted only of eight Ships, and fourteen Gallies, was hereby increased, as it was afterwards by the remainder of the Gallies, brought by Duke de Alburcheque who landed some foot, wherewith the Castillian Camp was ever and anon furnish'd, as well by Sea as Land, some 2500 Soldiers, what foot, what horse being arrived at once, and two pie|ces of Canon, conducted by Don Pietro Vancella, on the last of December

Governour of that Town to the great joy of all the Army; so as being assured to be assaulted, the besieged battered their Guards, and began chiefly to have an eye to those who were held to adhere to Marsine, and Spain; wherefore Don Giuseppe de Ardena, who as hath been said, was sent for back to Barcellona, march'd down the Mountain with 350 foot on the side of Valuedriera, and by the Covent of Madonna delle Gratie, and en|tred the Town on the 25th. of November. The Spaniards this mean while acosted the City with their Gallies, and Ships, and October and November were spent in making little Forts upon the neighbouring Mountains, which were the Fort Masguinardo upon the hill Portello del Pino, and ano|ther near the Covent of Madonna delle Gratie; whereof nothing succeed|ed of note but a deluge of Rain which drowned divers Soldiers. Where|fore failing of Victuals which were daily brought from Taragona, the Army was well nigh forced to rise, there being no Corn, nor any thing whereupon to sustain themselves in those desolate parts, yet that Nation injoying the great prerogative of sobriety, and sufferance, they at last won the day.
The Court of France, though involved in intestine troubles, was not wanting in doing what the bad conjuncture of time would suffer them to do: and now that the season would not permit the use of Arms in Piemont, the King writ in November to Marquess St. Andrea Monbrun, to make hast back over the Mountains, leaving only Scoope's Regiment of foot to guard the Towns upon the Frontiers; that most of the foot, together with Camilla's, and Terme's Regiments of Horse, the Gens de armes, Prince Thomaso's Guard, and le Compagnie Franche of Villa, Monte, and Vaosi, should go into Burgundy, and that the rest of the Horse, together with the Foot Regiments of Normandy and Britanny should march into Guienne; which Andrea doing, not without some delay, by reason of the opposition made by the Dutchess of Savoy, who was loath to be abandoned by those Forces; but the Horse not being able to pass over the Bridge St. Esprite, by reason of the abundance of Rain that fell, which caused Rhodanus to swell, they were forced de ingolfare le truppe in Dolpheny, and to inlarge them in the Towns of that Province, and the Forces consisting of 37 Companies of Horse, and 60 Foot Companies, did much oppress that Country; Wherefore the Nobles sent Commissioners to complain thereof to the Marquess; who willing to content them, could take no other ex|pedient than to make his men march over the Bridge of Avignion which was not usual, and which was not to be done without the Pope's permissi|on, who is Lord of that place: yet the Vice Legate Seignior Corci gave him leave, for which the King himself did afterwards vvrite thanks unto him. But because there was greater need of help in Catalonia, than in Guienne, he was no sooner come to Nimes, but that he received Letters sent from Marishal della Motta, who was declared Viceroy of Catalonia by the King; wherein he was ordered to go and releive Barcellona, telling him that the only sight of his men would suffice to free the City, and pro|mising him that he should return within one month after he had entred that Province; in Conformity whereunto the Marishal wrote unto him like|wise from the Court, that those Forces not being to stay above a month in Catalonia, Sopra di cio dovea prender le sue misure, he was accordingly to take his measures. The Marquess who found his men wearied with their long march, writ to la Motta, that he might have leave to refresh his men one month in Languedock; which la Motta refusing, wish'd him to go into Catalonia and raise men, saying, he must not look to hear any more from him, upon consideration that the journey was short, and that he needed

not carry along any Baggage for the more hast, to the end that relief might come before any succor could come from Spain.
This years Campagne ended in Piemonte, without any affair of Conse|quence; for though the Spaniards advanced as far as Montcalliere, not far from Turenne, seeming to have some design upon Pivaralle; their end was only to ease the State of Millan, and to refresh their Army with plundring Piemonte, which was already wasted very much; whereby the Spaniards hoped to bring the Dutchess of Savoy, (since she had but little hopes of succor from France, by reason of the intestine troubles) to some reasona|ble agreement. But Marquess St. Andrea Monbrune mustering the French Forces, traced the Enemy so luckily; as by frequent Allarms, and Skir|mishes he made them forego part of their booty, and at last overtaking them in a Village called Boutelliere, two of their Squadrons of Horse, were stoutly driven back by the French to the body of their Foot, which guarded the Baricado at the entrance into the same Village; which gave so hot an Alarm to the Enemy, as Marquess Caracena hasting to take Horse put his foot out of joint. The next morning, knowing that St. Andrea was a narrow passage between two mountains, where he might might fight them upon advantage, he ordered Padaglian to fall upon the Spanish Army on the Rear, with three Regiments of Horse, with Vxelles his Brigade of Foot, and with 900 Foot of the Country Militia, whilst he should assault them on the Front. Affairs being thus ordered, Pardaglian march'd spee|dily after the Spaniards, and after three hours march upon the going down of the Sun he overtook them in the Vally of Montison; but not having order to fall upon them, till after St. Andrea had begun on his part, whereof he heard no noise, he haulted upon the banks of a little River within sight of the Enemy, with whom he Skirmish'd all the night with his Horse. But Caracena being removed at Sun-rising, Pardallian did the like, taking to the left hand; and being come to the Castle of Courten|dome, a mile distant from the Enemies Army, he there heard that St. Andrea could not assault them according to agreement; for that the Spaniards were gotten by intelligence into the aforesaid Castle; yet that he might not return without doing any thing, he came once more up to the Spanish Rear, and finding that the Enemy withdrew their Foot, leaving three Squadrons of Horse to guard them, he presently charged them with his forwardest Horse, hoping to ingage the Foot; but the Horse betaking themselves to their heels, he in the head of his Troops chased them even to the grosse of their Rear, ordering the rest to hault at the Village above the aforesaid Castle, that he might make use of them, if he should be forced to retreat. The Spanish Captains coming in as their Soldiers ran away, rallied them so, as the French were forced to retreat to their reserve, where the Foot behaved themselves so well, as having disordered the Spanish Horse by a furious volly of Musquet shot, Pardalian had opportunity to fall upon them with his reserve, and to discompose them, killing many, and taking many Prisoners; The rest of the day was spent in defials and slight Skirmishes on both sides, and they lay that night in the fields, which retarded the march of the Spanish Army one day, and made the Spaniards hazard the loss of their Rear, if Pardallian had had more men, or had the Piemontese Militia done as they ought to have done. Thus without make|ing any more attempts, they all retreated to their former quarters, and where they staid till they were forced to remove by mere accidents as, small be said in the insuing books. The remainder of this year, and the begin|ning of the next were spent in treaties between the Governour of Millan, and the Dutchess of Savoy, to whom the Spaniards made great offers,

perswading her to make use of the present conjunctures of time, when little assistance being to be expected from France, by all reason she ought to agree with Spain, and shun the ruine which Piemonte was likely to run into, for want of necessary defence; but the Dutchess, though she seemed not to be distasted with such a treaty, yet entred she thereinto only to feed the Spaniards with hopes, till times might prove better.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The SEVENTH BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The King's Majority, after which divers expeditions are made. Marquess Chasteauneus is sent for back into the Court, and made Minister of State. The seals are given again to the first President Mole. The Coadjutor Gondi, is named by the King, to be Cardinal. The Prince of Conde retires to Berry, and from thence to Burdeaux. The King goes with his Court to Berry, and from thence towards Guienne. Divers accidents of War hap|pen. Cardinal Mazarine is sent for back by the King; who raiseth men to enter France. War begins again in Guienne, with several successes which are advantagious for the King. Count Marsine abandons the King's service, and goes from Catalonia to France, to Conde's party. The Duke of Nemeurs raiseth men in Flanders, and falls in with the party of the Male-contents. The Cardinal parts from Sedam, and comes with about 6000 Soldiers to Poictiers, to serve the King, the Duke of Bullion, and General Turenne are received in favour to the Court. Turenne is declared Gene|ral of the King's Army. Angiers is taken. The King marcheth to Blois. Nemeurs enters France with the Army which he raised in Flanders. Diffe|rences arise between him and Duke Beaufort, who differ in managing the War. Count Paluan besiegeth Montrond. Madamoselle comes to Orleans, and keeps that City from declaring for the King. The King's Army advan|ceth to Guienne. Conde comes incognito from Guienne to Nemeurs and Beaufort's Army. Several accidents of War happen. The Spaniards con|tinue the seige of Barcellona.

ON the 7th. of September, the day destined for the Ceremony of the King's Majority, all things were prepared which were fit|ting to Celebrate such an action, the King, Queen, Princes, and great ones of the Court, go to the Hall of Parliament; where the King being seated in his Chair of Justice, the Queen sate on his right hand, together with the Dukes of Anjou, and Orleans, Prince of County; the Dukes and Peers of France who were there, viz. the Dukes of Vsses, Mercure, Beaufort, Luines, Brisack, Rochefaucolt, and Candalle; who were followed by the Marishals of France, viz. D' Estree, de L'Hospitalle, Ville|roy, Oquincourt, la Motta, Plessis Pralin, de Estampes, the Son of Millerey,

great Master of the Artillery; and on the left hand sate the Lord de Au|maule, Archbishop of Rheimes, Cohorse Bishop of Beauvois, Vialarde Bishop of Chalouns, Barada Bishop of Noyoune, the four Ecclesiastical Dukes and Peers, all these sate on high: and lower on the right hand sate the Arch|bishop of Paris, the Bishops of Saulis, and Tarbes; at the Kings foot sate Duke Chamberlain Ioyeuse, the chief Provost of Paris, the Counts Charost, Tremes, Gesure, and Villaquiere, who were Captains of the King's Guard. Count Brienne, Messieurs della Vrliere, Plesses Guinagaude, and Tillier, who were four Secretaries of State upon a Bench over against the King's feet. At the Queens feet sate Monsieur Guitand, Captain of her Guard, Coninges her Lieutenant, Count Harcourt with the Crowns Sword in a violet velvet sheath studded with Golden Flower-de-luces. The Chancellor in his usual place in a velvet Gown; upon another seat behind the Counsellors of State, sate the six Masters of Requests, and President Montaro; upon ano|ther Bench sate the Princess of Carrignano, and her Daughter Princess Luise, and then the Queens maids with their Mother, in the high Lantern sate the Queen of England, the Dutchess of Orleans, Dutchess of Espernoun, the Marquess of Gesures, and Cominges; in the Lantern on the side of Noda|ri, the Pope's Nuntio, the Embassadors of Venice, and Holland; in the Tribunal upon their knees, four Heralds at Arms, two before, and two behind, one bearing the hand of Justice, another the Scepter, and the other two Truncheon of violet Velvet, studded with small Golden Flower-de-luces, the Dukes of Crequi, and Mortman chief Gentlemen of the Kings Bed-Chamber, and Marquess Sourches grand Provost of France, and on seats below, all the Counsellors, Officers, and others of the Court and Parliament.
Being thus stately inthroned, the King spoke thus; I am come to the Parliament, to tell you, that according to the Laws of the Kingdom I intend to take upon my self the Government of the State, and hope through God's goodness to do it with piety, and justice. The Chancellor will tell you the rest; who standing up and bowing low unto the King, made a neat discourse up|on that action; which when he had done he return'd to his place.
Then the Queen rising a little from her seat spoke thus unto the King. Sir, this is the 9th. year, that by the will of the late King, my ever honour'd Lord and Husband, I have taken upon me the care of your Education, and the Government of the State. God of his goodness hath blessed my indeavours, and preserved your person, which is so dear to me, and pretious to your Subjects, Now that the laws of your Kingdom call you to take upon you the Government of this Monarchy, I with much satisfaction surrender the Authority that was given me of Governing it; hoping that God will assist you with his spirit of strength and wisdom, whereby to make your Kingdom fortunate. Then the King turning towards her with a chearful countenance, said, He thanked her for the care she had taken of his Education, and of the Government of the Kingdom; that he desired her to continue counselling him, and that she would be his chief adviser. The Queen bowed, and in sign of Homage would have kist his hand, but the King embraced her and kist her with much ten|der affection.
The Duke of Anjou being next him, kneel'd at his Majesties feet, and kist his feet, swearing fealty unto him. The King with a smiling countenance embraced him. The Duke of Orleans, and County did the like; the Dukes, and Peers, and Marishals of France, stir'd not from their places.
Then the first President, as chief of the Parliament, making a low Re|verence, said, that in a day of so August memory, and of the applause of all the orders of the Kingdom, he could not forbare telling his Majesty

what obligations they all had to that great Queen, the second Deity on earth, by whose wise Counsels her Regency had so happily terminated, and with such like eloquent expressions concluded those affectionate fide|lities which are due from Subjects to their Sovereign.
This being ended, the King, Queen, all the Dukes, Peers, and Marishals of France, humbly bowing themselves in order, and the whole Parliament standing up, his Majesty descended from his Throne, and went to the Chappel of the Palace, where after having powred forth some prayers to God, went down, and returned in his Coach to the Palace-Royal, attend|ed by the Princes, Nobles, and Lords on Horseback, and as he past over the Pont Neufe, was cryed up with that infinite affection which the French bear their King.
This Ceremony being over, Marquess Chasteauneuf was sent for back to the Privy Council, and the Seals were again taken from the Chancellor, and given to the first President, as the Queen had promised him. This Establishment of the first President, as also of Chasteauneuf, and Vieville, who were called the three Barboni, or great Beards, was suddenly done, without any delay, because Chasteauneuf being in his heart an Enemy to the house of Conde, and the first President, and Marquess Vieville not very acceptable to the Frondeurs, it was not thought fit to defer it any longer, least they might meet with such hinderances which might be interposed by factious people.
After Chasteauneuf had been banish'd, and had had the Seals taken from him, he did all he could to reunite himself to the Cardinal, for that on the one side he was an Enemy to the Prince, and on the other side, found that he had not the credit with the Duke of Orleans which formerly he had, because it was counterpoised by the Coadjutor, whom he knew to be of a turbulent spirit, and who rather would have suffered Mazarine in the administration of State, than him. Moreover he perswaded himself that in time he might regain the credit which he formerly had had with the Queen, for which he had been persecuted by Richelein. Mazarine was well contented with his re-establishment in affairs, for he thought him true to the King's service, and for that he was not only well thought of, but was allied to the chief Families: But when these three Lords were setled in their places, they did not very well agree together; for Chasteauneuf did not much esteem Vieville, though he had formerly been his friend. He was likewise jealous of the guard de Seaux, finding that the Queen placed all her confidence in him, the guard de Seaux despised both of them, saying, that all affairs depended upon him, though Chasteauneuf was therein better experienced than he; so as upon these differences divers accidents happe|ned, which caused Chasteauneuf at last to withdraw himself.
For all this the Chancellor was not displeased with the Queen; for he knew that those blows proceeded not from any demerits of his; but from the mere necessity of the present conjunctures, which forced the Queen to do things which were far from her desire, to evade a greater mischief, he went no more notwithstanding to Council, but did withdraw himself of his own accord. And Monsieur Guinegaude, when he took the Seals from him, told him that their Majesties were very well pleased with his service: and the Queen made him be told by another, that in case any other change should at any time be made, she would prefer him before all others, and would assist him and his Family by her protection upon all oc|currences. Chasteauneuf also in the beginning of these troubles when the Seals were the second time taken from him, offer'd him to keep them for him, and to restore them unto him, if he would yield up the first place in

Council to him, as was done to the Cardinals, who were first Ministers; whereunto the Chancellor answered, that his private interest should never derogate from the Dignity of his place; for he was a private man, and the Cardinals were Princes of the holy Church.
Affairs beginning now to be treated of, bare faced in Court, Marishal de Aumount's Forces were sent against those of Conde, which were within three days journey of the King's Army; but they fled, and dispersed them|selves without any fighting, and some of them got safe to Stenay, some to other Towns belonging to the Prince, who returned no more to Paris, but went to Eusone, and from thence to Argeville, a house of President Perauts, where he tarried one day, expecting to hear from the Duke of Orleans, whether the Court did not remit somewhat of their austerity, in the treaty of agreement which was again re-assumed by the same Orleans, when the indeavours of the Princes Palatine proved vain, whereby the Prince would have easily condescended to the Cardinals return; for he could not well tollerate that Chasteauneuf should have that charge. But Count Chavigny, who would very unwillingly have seen the Cardinal re|turn, cunningly perverted the Prince his good disposition, frightning him with a new imprisonment, and minding him that if he should condescend to any thing which might contradict what he had formerly promised the Duke of Orleans, and the Frondeurs, he would totally lose their adherence, and deprive himself of all other refuge, and give himself over to the pleasure of the Court, which he was always to suspect, having had too great proofs thereof, to which was added the Coadjutor's secret dealings, and the like of some others to break this agreement, as shall be said after|wards. Orleans being willing to endeavour the Prince his satisfaction, and to quiet all private discords, chose Croisy as a friend to the Prince and Cha|steauneuf to go unto him, and to wish him from the Duke to be at Eusonne between Argueville and Simouns, whither Orleans was gone; but a whole day being spent in making these expeditions, the Duke sent one of his Gentlemen to intreat the Prince to tarry for Croisy at Argueville. The Gentleman mistaking the place whither he was to go, (were it either by misfortune or fate) instead of going whither he was sent, went to another place which was also called Argueville in Beaux, far from the other Argue|ville. So as the Prince having attended one day with impatience, and in|terpreting delay, to be dis-respect; parted the next morning disconten|tedly towards Burges a chief City in Berry, which had declared for the Prince; here Croisy met him, and proposed unto him a meeting with Orle|ans, which Conde refusing, he offer'd that if he would keep quietly in his own Governments till the calling of the States General, he should have good quarters assigned him for his Forces, to the end that during the As|sembly of the said States he might be in a condition of being considered; and he further promised him in the name of the Duke, and of Chasteauneuf, that the States should be kept in an unsuspected place, and that if they could get the Queens good will, they should be kept in St. Denise, where by the neighbourhood of Paris he might have intire liberty. The Prince considered the advantage of these propositions, whereby he might pre|serve his Troops, and fortifie them during the winter, an unfit reason for War, foreseeing that he should hardly withstand the King's Forces, with his new men; and he knew that if the Cardinal should be re-called whilst he was in his Government, that finding him Armed, and stuck unto by so many friends, all that he could desire either for himself or his friends must necessarily be granted him; and that if the Cardinal should return with|out his consent, all the Provinces, and Parliaments that were the Cardinals

Enemies, would declare for him. And that if the Cardinal should keep away (which he could hardly believe) all France would acknowledg this satisfaction from him, and would be obliged to him for it. When he had well weighed these proposals, and was willing to accept them, he cal|led the Prince of County unto him, and the Dukes of Nemeurs and Roche|faucolt, and acquainted them therewith; but these believing that when Arms should be taken up, the Court would grant all that he could pretend unto, told him that these were but tricks to weaken him, and his faction. They wish'd him to consider that Burdeaux was ready to declare, and that Spain did with impatience expect this resolution; that if he should lose this occasion, he should lose all the succour and assistance that he could ex|pect from thence, and that he would lose all his chief friends; in this di|versity of opinion, the Prince would put on no resolution, till he went to Montronde, to debate every particular with his Sister Longueville, and willed Croisy to follow him. He held divers consultations in Montronde, and freely made it known, that he was inclin'd to an agreement: but being contradicted by all the rest, it may be said he was forced to a resolution contrary to his will; and as he was walking in his Park, he said aloud, that since they were absolutely for his taking up Arms, not to oppose them, he agreed thereunto: but bad them remember that he was the last who as inforced thereunto took his Sword in hand, but that he would be the last who should sheath it; soon after he called for Croisy, and charged him to present his respects to the Duke of Orleans, and to desire him not to slacken his indeavours, and authority in finding out some way of accommodation, for he would be ready to accept of peace, when he knew he might safely do it. But his friends and kindred were so desirous of a breach, as left he might agree, whereunto they found him willing enough; the Prince of County, Dutchess of Longueville, Dukes of Nemeurs, and Rochefaucolt, President Viola, and divers others agreed privately amongst themselves, promising never to separate, but to joyn even against the Prince himself, if he should agree with the Court, without obtaining such-satisfaction for them as they pretended to; and this they did to make themselves conside|rable, and not totally dependant upon the Prince. So as first Chavigny, and then the rest, were the impulsive reasons of the Prince his precipice, and of all the troubles that befell France afterwards; for all things would have been sweetned, and the Prince re-assuming the Military imployments of the Crown, would have triumphed over his Enemies, he not being really corrupted in his will, but by the inticement of others; so as it may be said that from hence arose the civil dissentions.
The Prince leaving his Wife and Son in the Castle at Montronde, toge|ther with the Duke of Nemeurs who followed him, and Prince County, and Dutchess Longueville, staying in Burges: went on the 16th. of September towards Vertuile, where he found many of Rochefaucolt's friends, whose house that was, to whom he gave Monies and Commissions to raise men; he from thence continued his journey without any interruption, and ar|rived at Burdeaux, where he was received with extraordinary applause, and upon his coming thither made the first President be told that he should not come before him, and that as being partial to the Queen, he should go out of the City; whereunto he was incited by the Frondeurs, and by Blanck, the second President; but the Prince assured him of his friend|ship, if during these commotions he would keep neuter in his Castle at Rilandraut.
When Conde came to Burdeaux, he sent his trusty servant Lenet into Spain, to treat with Spain, which treaties were concluded as soon as be|gun,

for the Spaniards thought it was not now time to slight a Prince of France furnish'd with friends, and one so famous in War; the treaty was agreed upon between his Catholick Majesty, and him, and his adherents, with these expressions. First, that the treaty of Stenay, between the Archduke, the Dutchess of Longueville, and General Turenne, should be confirm'd in all parts. That the Prince should be bound never to treat of peace without the King of Spains consent, who also promised never to make peace with France, without comprehending the Prince, upon such terms as should satisfie him. His Catholick Majesty obliged himself to pay 500000 Crowns to raise men, and to keep a fleet in the River of Bur|deaux, which might be able to secure that City, and to keep commerce open with Biscay. That he should absolutely command all the Armies of Spain, and that all the Towns which should be taken in France, should re|main in his hands, save one Haven, which should be allowed the King of Spain for the security of his Fleets at Sea, and of the Towns which had been taken from the Spaniards in the present War. That the King of Spain should send about 8000 to the Prince his Soldiers who were in Campagnia, which should be independantly under the sole command of the Prince, or of him that he should send. The King promised to pay yearly 600000 Crowns, for maintenance of the Forces; and the Prince having given hopes, upon such ends as hath been formerly touched upon, that the Duke of Longueville should enter into the same concernment, the King promised that in such a case he would assist him with Arms, Money, Men, and Ship|ping, that he might wage War in Normandy.
In prosecution of which treaty Conde did what he could to make Marishal Turenne take upon him the command of his Army in Campagnia; and he was so confident of his valour, and so doubtful to meet with hard|ship if he should oppose him, as he offer'd to give him Stenay; and to that purpose gave order to Monsieur Chammegli who commanded there, to re|ceive his Troops, and totally to obey him, in which hopes the Prince con|tinued for above four moneths, not sending any other to command there which was the chief occasion of the dissipation of those Troops. But Turenne did generously refuse all his offers, and those that came to him as well from Flanders, as Spain, joyning on the contrary with the King his Master, as shall be said. Whilst the Prince staid in Burdeaux he gave out Monies, and Commissions to as many as would serve him; and thinking it fitting to secure himself of the upper Guienne, and of Perigneaux, he made a journey accompanied by few, more than Prince Marsilliack, Son to Duke Rochefaucolt.
But to return to what the Coadjutor did, when he knew that the Prin|cess Palatine indeavoured to reconcile the Prince to the Court, he to di|sturb it, sent one to the Cardinal, to offer him his service, and to go out of the Kingdom upon any Embassy, or imployment, to avoid all jealousies; and promised him that he would make the King go to Rheimes, and would reconcile him with the Duke of Orleans; and that resuming his posture with satisfaction to his Royal Highness he should return to Germany to end the treaty of the general peace, which was commenced by the said Car|dinal, as shall be said. Moreover Marquess Noirmonstore, who was firm to the Coadjutors concernment, not only out of friendship, but because he was allied to the Dutchess Chevereux, and that he hoped to be made Duke and Peer, and to get some Government, offer'd a confident of the Cardi|nals to deposite into his hands the Brief for nomination of a Cardinal, and Warrant for a Duke and Peer of France, till such time as they should

bring him back to the administration of Government, and that then, and not till then they would receive the said Brief and Warrant.
But the Princess Palatine, having brought Bertet, who was the man that came too and fro from the Cardinal, to the Coadjutor, who was willing to go himself to Brules, was obliged by strong arguments to perswade the Cardinal that the Coadjutor was generously minded, that it behoved him to prevent him by being beneficial to him; and that his thoughts being generous and full of gratitude, he would use more hearty indeavours upon these motives than any other.
This being a proposal of reciprocal advantage, it was to be believed that it was sincerely meant. He therefore accepted the offer, and gave the business in charge to Abbate Vndedei, who at last brought the Queen against her will, to give way to the naming of the Coadjutor to be Car|dinal, at the next Election. The Coadjutor seemed to be very well con|tent, and acknowledged himself highly obliged; but not being able to use deceit without too much ingratitude, he went very warily about to take it out of his hands; for considering that his name was not acceptable to the Pope, it might so fall out that it would not so satisfie him who was the promoter of this favour, and so that he might refuse it, at least make it more difficult, as had befaln Abbate Riviere. The Cardinal to oblige him the more, refer'd the said nomination to the Queen, who out of the same respects having assigned it over to the Duke of Orleans, the Coadju|tor began to study how he might obtain his ends, and delude the Cardinal in what he had promised him; wherefore finding that treaties with Conde grew desperate, and his desire being to see both Conde and the Cardinal ruined, so as he might have the absolute Government of affairs, he with|drew himself dextrously from what he had promised upon frivolous ex|cuses, and sought by monies, and the means of his Kinsman Cavaliere Gondi, who was a chief Officer of the great Dukes to make sure the Court of Rome, whither he sent his confident Abbate Charie, with much expence and presents, whereof he was not sparing, to sollicite his so much desired promotion, and to get it effected before more novelties should arise in France, which might revoke the said nomination, fearing least the Cardinal might do as he had done by Abbate Riviere, whom he had undone by de|lays. This touched the Cardinal to the quick, for he was acquainted with the Coadjutors designs: so as fitter medicines being applyed to a known mallady, he knew so well how to apply such Antidotes, as at last (as shall be seen in the progress of this History) he salved all wounds miraculously, and triumphed more than ever over his Enemies, and over persecution and envy.
But as report doth usually aggrandize things, which not being visible men do with curiosity desire to know: the Princes his provisions being given out at Paris, to be greater than they were, the rumor grew so great, as people grew to be severally minded; some thought that the Prince made War merely out of ambition to aggrandize himself; others that he inten|ded to raise himself to what was equal to his prepotency, and experience in managing Arms; and the Court was not only full of these conceptions, but even many good Citizens of Paris, who being stir'd up as well by fear of a civil war, as hoodwinck'd by ignorance of the Arcana, fancied that the Cardinal being out of the Kingdom, it was not known what the Prince did drive at, for the first overture of breach was grounded upon his desire of having the Cardinal banish'd, which when it should be obtained the cause being removed, the effect would cease: by these whisperings the Prince fell somewhat from that general affection which he had gotten

amongst the Parisians after his being set at liberty; others thought that he prepared for defensive War, rather out of fear of the Court, than out of any other design.
But the Court nourishing the opinion, that they were the effects of in|satiable ambition; that they might have a lawful pretence to apply pow|erful remedies to the evils that threatned the State, gave out that upon the present occurrances it was requisite that the King should go in person to Berry to withstand the first commotions, but two more important and concealed reasons moved thereunto. The first, to secure it self by going out of Paris from the people, and Frondeurs who so insolently had block'd them up in the Palace, which they might do again upon any new rumour that might arise. The second, out of a desire that the Cardinal might return which could not be done if the Court should tarry in Paris, by reason of the Predominion of the Frondeurs, and seditious Male-contents. Chasteauneuf adhered to the first reason as well to shew himself willing to please their Majesties, as out of a belief, that if the Court should be fur|ther off the Cardinal would find more difficulty to return, being to make a long and dangerous journey, of which opinion were many others. On the contrary the first President, Plessis Pralin, and Vieville said, that it was fear, and not ambition which made the Prince do as he did; that it was best to leave him quiet in his Governments, and not put him into despair, forcing him to take up Arms in his own defence. That if Conde should begin the War, that then the Court, and King's Army might go thither, whereby he might be overthrown; but this opinion differing from their private intentions, who could not advantage themselves but by War, was laid aside, and under pretence that no parties should be tollerated in the Kingdom, save such as were obedient to the King. Their Majesties and the Duke of Anjou went on the 24th. of Sebtember from Paris, to Fonten|bleau, together with the rest of the Court; which stands upon the way to Charite, whither some of the Princes Forces were come, to guard that im|portant pass over the Loire, which enters into Berry, where was Prince County, and the Dutchess of Longueville, incouraging the Inhabitants of Burges, by the great Towers which serve there for a Castle, and which was garrison'd by their men, to joyn with them, whereby they intended to make head against the King, in case he should assault them; but Conde staid too long in Burdeaux, whose own person was requisite for such a design.
This departure of the Kings from Paris, caused much murmuring amongst the seditious people, who said, that the Queen and Council meant not to return to the City without the Cardinal, who by his directions did in his absence govern all things; and the hearts of most men were so poysoned by the pravity of some seditious people, as all things seemed to tend to open War; wherefore the Spaniards, who wearily observed the conjunctures, and indeavoured to counterprise the ballance justly, to the end that the pretentions on both sides keeping upon a streight beam, that discord might be kept alive in France, which was most adequate for their affairs. And least the too much fomenting the Princes faction might ne|cessitate the King to give way to their pretentions, and agree with them; or that by the Spaniards great preparations they might make the French aware of the danger which over-hung them, and to make them lay aside all spleen, and joyn together in the common defence; they fed the Princes more with hopes than effects, and went so reservedly in their proceedings with them, as that in due time they might reap the fruit of their collegati|on. They therefore contented themselves with taking some of those

places which might facilitate the recovery of Dunkirk, when they might with safety turn upon that important place. And therefore on the 10th. of August went to besiege Fournes, which was assaulted by Marquess Sfom|drato with the Flanders Army, and was taken within six days; for want|ing fit provision wherewith to hold out, and having no hopes of relief, Monsieur Bosquet, the Governour thereof was forced to surrender it on the 16th. of the said month; which did afterwards facilitate the enterprise of Burges St. Venoz, which not long after was faln upon by the same Sfomdrato, and Count Fuenseldagnia, who went thither with new Forces; but though it were better scituated and fortified then Fournes, yet Mari|shal de Aumont (who to that purpose was advanced with the French Army) not being in a condition to force the line, nor yet to come near the Ene|my, for want of men and other provisions, after the Garrison had valiant|ly defended the Town for 24 days, being incouraged by their Governour Belloy, it was at last forc'd to yield upon honourable conditions on the 29th. of September. So the Spaniards were also masters of this place, seated within a league of Dunkirk upon the River Colme, whereby it com|municates with the Sea. Thus they made way for falling upon Dunkirk, Graveline, and Mardike, and freed many Towns in Flanders from contri|bution, extorted by the Garrison of Dunkirk, which was inclosed by these two Forts.
Signior de Estrades, then Governour of Dunkirk, a valiant and well experienced Gentleman, had from the beginning of Iuly so eseen the Spaniards design upon Fournes, and had desired 2000 Foot, and 1000 Horse from the Court, wherewith he promised not only to preserve those Towns, but to fight the Enemy, who could not hold communication be|tween one quarter, and another: but the King having need of men against the Prince of Conde, and not being able in this confusion to raise other Forces, the Spaniards without any disturbance might obtain their intent. Estrades forbare not notwithstanding to provide for Bergues, Dunkirk, and Mardike, which were under his Government; he sent divers Barques to be loaded with Corn, Arms, and Ammunition in some neighbouring Towns wherein he had so good luck, as they were no sooner entred Dun|kirk, but the Spanish Fleet appeared, and cast Anchor in the mouth there|of, and block'd it up whilst the Spaniards had faln upon Fournes, and placed a great quarter of Horse within a league of Dunkirk, the Gover|nour put 500 Foot into Burgues, whereby it was defended longer than Fournes. During these Sieges the Garrison of Dunkirk scowred the Coun|trey, broke divers of the Enemies Convoys, and took many Prisoners.
Linch, Hanvin, and Burbury, were taken after Burgues, and Fournes, so as Dunkirk was soon besieged by Sea, and Land, being berest of receiving any commodities from those parts. And that they might block it up the straiter, they built three Forts, at the entrance of three Rivers which come to the Town, one at Hauscote, the other two at Slen, and Miltrech; where|by Estrades not being able to send parties further into the Countrey, he caused 12 flat bottom'd Boats to be built, every one of which carried two small Guns in their prow; and imbarquing 300 Foot in them, he on the 10th. of December assaulted the Fort of Hanscote, and took it, as he did also the other two, which were immediatly demolish'd, and burnt; wherefore he made several inrodes that winter, took many Prisoners, and a great many Cattle, which being powdred, were of good use to the Gar|rison of that Town.
Whilst the Court of France was at Fontianbleau, well pleased with being out of Paris, where the seditious Male-contents predominating, the King's

Authority was highly prejudiced, the Prince of Conde's business was wari|ly disputed, but not without great jealousies; and it was given out that County, and the Dutchess of Longueville, fortified themselves with friends in Berry: a Province which at that time was of great importance, defend|ing the way to Guienne, and keeping the neighbouring Towns favourable to the Princes; whereat the Court was much troubled. None durst pro|pound going further then Fountainbleau: for the King not having men enough for the enterprise of Burges, it was not thought fit to fall upon it, unless they might hope to take it, least it might more lessen the King's parties Reputation, and increase that of the contumacious, as would have happened if they should have been unfortunate at the first. Yet the French being extraordinarily devoted to their King, the Inhabitants of Burges by the means of Chasteauneuf, who was much beloved in that Pro|vince, wherein much of his estate lay, sent a Citizen of theirs speedily away to Fountainbleau, to invite the King to their City, where he should be lovingly received, and faithfully served. Divers discourses were had hereupon before their Majesties. Chasteauneuf was for their going thi|ther out of three reasons, wherein his own interest was concern'd the first, for that being no friend to the Prince, he sought to bring him lower; the second, because by such advancement he got esteem amongst the people, and thereby made himself necessary for the administration of Govern|ment. The third, for that the further the Court should go from Paris, he thought the Cardinals return would be the more difficult as well by the Parliaments animosity, as by the bad season, wherein he was to pass over fourteen Rivers; and by keeping him away, he put the Duke of Orleans in Authority, which was his chief end: the Guard de Seaux opposed this, saying, that it behoved not to hazard the King's Authority, by under|taking what was not sure to succeed well, and that the foundation was to be grounded upon his own strength, not upon the uncertainty of the peo|ples favour which was always wavering.
This design of Chasteauneuf's being seen into by the Cardinals confi|dents, whereof there were but few in the Council, though they all ap|peared to be much his friends, they concluded there was no better expedi|ent for the service of their Majesties and of the Cardinal, than to make use of their own Forces, and to get that thereby, which they could not do by reason, nor fair means; wherefore by orders from the King, who by reiterated Letters had sent for the Cardinal back, Abbate Vndedey went to Brules, to acquaint him with the necessity of this expedient, and to ac|quaint him truly with all that had past; assuring him of their Majesties excellent intentions towards him. For whose service it was requisite that he should return, and take upon him the Government of affairs, they be|ing now sensible that none could do it better, nor with better affection. The Cardinal listened diligently to the Abbate, as confiding much in him, yet was he doubtful what to resolve upon, but at last the reasons alledged by Vndedey prevailing, he resolved to raise with his own monies an Army of about 5000 fighting men, whom he committed to the charge of the Marishals of Oquincourt, and of Ferte Senetre, the Count Navailes, and Broglia, who took upon them the imployment, and diligently apply'd themselves thereunto. This being thus resolved, The Cardinal desired a pasport from the Spaniards to return to Bullion, which they procrastinated, foreseeing how prejudicial his return to Court might prove; wherefore he went unexpectedly from Brules, and instead of going to Iuliers, went towards Duren, a City belonging to the Duke of Newburg, and from thence to Aquisgrave, Siege, Hy, and then to Dinan, whither the aforesaid Counts

of Novailes, and Broglia came to agree about their leavies, for which they there received monies, and in forty days which they staid in that Town, they raised their men.
But because the Male-contents might not in the King's absence, plot things prejudicial to the Court, the Guard Seaux, Guinegaude Secretary of State, Marishal Vievelle, and the Marishal de L' Hospitalle were left there, to whom joyntly the King gave all Authority, being assisted by the Duke of Orleans, who remained there as Viceroy; which was because the Guard Seaux being the first President in Parliament, might prevail much by his Authority; that Guinegaude might make the dispatches of State, Vieville who was the master of the Finances, might find monies, and the Marishal de L' Hospitalle, as being Governour of Paris, and much esteem'd in the City by those who loved the Court. But the Duke of Orleans, who was not well pleased with the Kings going against the Prince, as well for the union between them, as for fear the Cardinal should return, com|ply'd artificially, and palliated his affection as well as he could with the Duke of Arville, and with others who were sent unto him by the King to be assistant to him. Yet the Dutchess of Chevereux, and the Coadjutor, who desired the downfall both of the Prince and Cardinal, watched the Duke of Orleans narrowly, and making use of the credit they had with him, indeavoured to stave him off from them both, and would have wrought their ends upon him, had not Count Chavigny, and Monsieur Gaucourt, who were the Prince his friends, counterpois'd their designs, being fomented by Beaufort, and the Frondeurs, who desired to uphold the Prince, that they might keep the Cardinal from Court. But Beaufort on the other side considering what need there was of a Commander of the Forces in Guienne, who might vye for valour with the Prince, wrought it so as the King gave that imployment to Count Harcourt, a Prince full of courage, and of great esteem in Arms, and who was well disposed to the Kings service, and a sincere friend to the Cardinal; whereupon, he went to Fountenbleau (after he had received the Patent in Paris, the same day that the King went from thence) to kiss their Majesties hands, and so to go towards his charge.
The King had with him 4000 of his French Guard, and Switzers, and for their General the Marishal de Estre, whose Lieutenant General was Count Paluau, both of them particular friends to the Cardinal, and 4000 more were taken out of the Army of Picardy, under the Marquess of Castelneau, who was also Lieutenant General, together with other Troops, which were raised in other parts. Marquess St. Luke, Lieutenant General of Guienne, was ordered to take what care he could of that Province, and that he should keep in Cohors, and Montaubank, to keep those Towns in the King's obedience, which he did.
This going of the King to Berry did infuse much fear into all the Prince his friends, in so much as they sever'd themselves, and withdrew some to Montrond, some elsewhere; the Prince of County, and Dutchess of Longue|ville forsook even Burges in great confusion, when they knew the agree|ment made between the Inhabitants of that place, and the Court; but the Dutchess of Nemeurs, as not accustomed to the rumor of War, went to Vandosme, that she might keep quiet there.
The Court being gone from Paris, the tumults which were almost ceased in Paris, grew greater than ever, as well amongst the people, as in the Parliament, to impede the Kings journey; and keep the Cardinal from returning. Wherefore the Dukes of Orleans, and Beaufort, the Frondeurs, Parliament, and part of the people, return'd to their former commotions,

not with Arms, but by decrees of Parliament, and Remonstrances to the Court; but Chasteauneuf, who still indeavoured to keep the Cardinal away, and to make the Court prevent the resolutions of Parliament, used this precaution, as when he found that any decrees were to issue out from thence, contrary to the private ends of the King's Council, he anticipated them by Letters from the King, commanding the same things which he thought the Parliamet would ordain; and did studiously apply himself thereunto upon these emergencies, with intention to save thereby the King's reputation, seeming as if he were the Authour of those decrees, changing the aspects of those decrees, which tended much to the preju|dice of his supream Authority, but the Parliament finding out these arti|fices, made no more account of the King's Letters, thinking that the Court did not therein desire what it seemed to do, and that all was but tricks to make vain their designs. And the Queen suspecting not without reason before the Prince departed, that Marsine, General of the Catalonian Forces was turn'd to be of his party, as being much affected to him, and that by his concurring with Conde he might much prejudice the King's ser|vice, she thought she might make him lay aside all sinister opinions by putting some esteem, and honour upon him, and to keep him loyal out of mere gratitude; as he had been till then, much to his glory; and this was by sending him Letters Patents to be Viceroy of Catalonia; but the Mes|senger who carried them, came too late, for he had already abandoned the King's service, and betook himself to serve the Prince, as hath been said, and shall be said hereafter.
Count de Ales was at this time in Paris, his Father the Duke of Ango|lesme being dead, who was Governour of the Province, where those that sided with him, Maugre Vandosme kept the City of Tolon, a famous haven in that Province, where he was particular Governour; and having out of a desire of returning thither, consented that Conde's friends should attempt some novelty there; The Baron of St. Marke, a Gentleman of Aix, and friend to the Prince, was sent thither, with others that related to him, in|tending to raise a party for Angolesme, and to interest the Prince therein, but after some rather Chimera, than undertakings, it turn'd all to nothing, by the vigilancy of the King's Commanders, who diverted all their plots, and the City remained as before in obedience to the King: wherefore the divisions failing in that Province, whereby the Prince had thought to bring Forces into several parts of the Kingdom, and to divert the punish|ment wherewith Guienne was threatned, the Male-contents were mightily affrighted, and confused. The Prince of County, Dutchess of Longueville, the Duke of Nemeurs, and others who were in the Castle of Montrond, fearing least they might be therein shut up, went out by night with 200 Horse, leaving Marquess Persan there with a good Garrison of Foot, and Horse; afterwards the Town was besieged by Count Paluau with about 3000 men at a distance, commanded by Cavaliere Barada and others, the besieged were constant in the defence thereof, as well against Famine, as against the assailants. County, with his Sister Longueville, and Duke Nemeurs went to Burdeaux, losing some of their baggage, for the Marquess of Sauntbeuf with many Gentlemen of those Provinces was continually upon their backs. The King came to Burges, to the great content of those people, whom he permitted to demolish the Tower, which belonging to Conde's Government, was interpreted the beginning of a breach, and it was known that they were to think of War, rather than of Peace; which being resolved upon, they were treated with to raise men: the Towns of Dordognia were secured by Conde,  he put Garisons into Bergerack, St. Foy,

Libourn and Perigreu, good Towns which commanded a great tract of Country. All the Towns upon the Garomne till you come to Agen were secured by Conde; who treated with Count de Ognone, Governour of Rochel, Brouages, and the Isles of Oleron and Ree; and with much ado having drawn the Count over to his party, he provided diligently for all emergencies. Ognone joyn'd with the Prince, hoping to be made Duke and Peer of France, by the Prince his means, which he had indeavoured to do by the Court, but could not: at this novelty, not only the Kings party was much troubled, but all others who wished well to the State. It was therefore resolved that the King should go into Poictou, to secure that im|portant Province, which is esteemed one of the best of all France; and to provide against the eminent dangers of Rochel; Count de Ognone was second Brother to Marquess St. Germain Beaupre, and as one who had been Page to Cardinal Richelieu, had contracted a particular friendship with Marishal de Bresse, chief of the Navigation; he was imploy'd in the Fleet, and after made Lieutenant in the Government of Brouage, which belonged to the said Bresse; and in Rochel, Oleron, and the Isle of Ree which be|longed to the Queen, after the said Bresses death it was not hard for him to get to be wholly master thereof, though he were not well beloved by the people. He entred into Conde's party by the Princess her mediation, who was Sister to the said Bresse. The King wrote to the Duke of Orleans be|fore he went from Burges, that out of the great desire he had of his Sub|jects quiet, he did again refer Conde's business totally to him, and desired him to speak with him, and to know the reason of his discontent, wishing him, to take along with him, the Marishal de L' Hospitalle, Messieurs de Alegre, Marguiri, Mesmes, Menardeau, Champre and Chaumont, assuring him that he would do what he could to serve him. In pursuit hereof the Duke sent Monsieur de Serre, Son to Marishal de Aubettere to desire the Prince, that he would give him a meeting in Richelieu; Conde sent la Serre back with answer, that he should hear from him in this particular within three days.
Soon after the Prince was come to Burdeaux, Gurville went thither, and told him from the Duke of Bullion, that if he would listen to reason the Duke would mediate for him, and indeavour his satisfaction; and how the Cardinal did much fear, that if civil Wars should arise in France, they would not be well able to maintain War abroad; wherefore he studied how to divert it; and that he had declared, that he would procure the Government of Blay for him, and all fitting satisfaction for his Friends. Gourville made this proposal to him; but the Prince having then sent to treat with Bullion, and Marquess Turenne, would not listen to the proposi|tion; but said, That if he would put the treaty in hand, he must first de|clare in his behalf, and that his Brother Turenne must go to head his Forces which were gone into Flanders, and that when this should be done, he would give ear to what had been proposed. The Prince spoke high, be|cause he thought that Turenne would not refuse the command of his Army; and that when he should have so famous a Commander on his side, whom he only feared, it would make much for him in treaties of peace, or in making War. And being that very day assured of Count de Ognons joyn|ing with him, as also of the Messieurs della Forza, except the Marquess who was in Normandy, and intended to do as Bullion and Turenne should do; he sent Gurville back to Paris the same night, that together with Gaucourt, who attended the Duke of Orleans on his behalf, they might tell Orleans, that he could not upon any terms accept of the conference desired in Richelieu. For that having disbursed much money in raising men, and be|ing

ready to declare, this might suspend their resolution, and make his Officers retard the levies which were already begun, intending to make use of the monies which they had received, in case of agreement: more|over his conditions with the Spaniards would be broken, and he should be much puzled, not being able to rely upon the Dukes constancy, who ad|hered to the Coadjutor, his declared Enemy. The Duke accepted of the Prince his justification; and though he did effectually follow the Co|adjutors advice, yet he always declared for the Prince against all men, except the King's person. But Conde, and those of his party, finding that the Coadjutor did still cross him in all things, and that he would ingage with the Court, out of the hopes of being made Cardinal; and fearing also that if he should close, Orleans might by the Coadjutors means fail him; he bethought himself with his trustiest friends, how he might rid himself of the Coadjutor, whom he apprehendedmuch, for that he was very bold, revengful, had many abettors, and infinitely ingenious. Some were for killing him presently, but the Prince who was of a more generous mind, would not give way unto it, declaring his hatred to all Treachery; but he resolved to remove him from Paris, and to imprison him somewhere else, which being resolved upon, Gurville, a man of a ready wit, and live|ly spirit, had the imployment given him; who taking it upon him, au|thorized under the Prince his hand, who made him plenipotentiary, he sent for some of his friends, and kindred to Paris, and causing Monsieur della Roche to come from Danvilliers, with others that depended upon him, and in whom he durst boldly trust: feigning afterwards to go from Paris, and to go for Germany to take the Elector of Brandenburg's Forces into pay, which being to be cashiered by reason of the peace made with the Duke of Newburg, he kept concealed in the City, and calling his men together, he told them that he had orders from the Prince to make a great man Prisoner, and not telling them who it was, save only two in whom he thought he might safely confide, and who always followed the Coadjutor, who telling him one night that he was in the Dutchess Chevereux house, he placed his confidents between the Gates du Conference, and le Guichet, commanding them not to stir from thence. He moreover placed 15 Foot over against the Louvre, and he himself stood near Chevereux her house to observe his coming out, hoping that if he went not along the River, he might advance his men to the new Bridge, and to the Ponte de nostre dame, if his Coach should go by the Re St. Honore but the Coadjutor went out in a Coach with Ladies, and his own Coach followed without Torches, which made them believe he was not yet gone.
The next day the Coadjutor was not very well, and kept his house. But Gurville being told that he was the next day in a house at Marets, where he used to entertain himself at night, he diligently assembled his men, but not so many as were sufficient to have all things in readiness before he came out. So as Gurville failed in his design; Gurville had always a Coach with him, to put the Coadjutor into. The design was to carry him to Danvilliers with 15 or 20 Horse, which was not hard to do; but the Heavenly influences having power over mortals actions, we must be|lieve that they seconded not these designs; for though the Coadjutor sus|pected not these plots, yet being wish'd by his friends to be circumspect, he withdrew himself to his house early, and went not out by night, not so much out of any apprehension of the Prince, as of the Cardinal, least he should have indeavoured his death, and lay the fault upon the Prince, who was his more discovered Enemy. So as Gurville perceiving that in many days the Coadjutor returned home late but once, and then well accompa|nied,

he feared that he was discovered, and therefore fearing some disaster might befall himself, he resolved to return, and to put off the business till a more favourable conjuncture of time; he therefore sent his men away secretly, and he withdrew himself cautiously from all publick Company. Monsieur de la Roche went from Gurenne, with Monsieur de Fay, Lieutenant of the Prince of Countie's Guard, as he came from Brussels; but he was stopt at Chastres, it being thought that he brought the Princes treaty with Spain along with him; wherefore he was imprisoned, together with a ser|vant of his who being interrogated upon pain of death, what company his master had kept since he went from Danvilliers, said, that he met with many as he came along the River, and that he feared Gurville had a design to make somebody Prisoner: which was interpreted to be the Coadjutor, who did all he could to come by the certainty thereof; but though he could have no certain proofs thereof, he was perswaded that Gurville would have detain'd him, wherefore he also indeavoured to take Gurville, in his return, but without success.
Count Tavanes, who (as hath been said) was gotten to Stenay, and to the neighbouring places, with the Prince his Troops; knowing that he could not subsist in those parts, sought how to get with his men into Guienne, where the Prince wanted old Soldiers. But finding the chief passes pos|sessed by the King's Soldiers, he sent to Flanders to negotiate with the Spaniards, and being promised to be received by them, he past with his Troops over the Mause, and retreated towards Charlemont: where being eyed by the King's Forces under the Command of Marishal Ferte Senetre, he with much danger past over part of Luxemburg, and going over the River Semoy near Sedam, and then by Liege, he repast over the Mause at the Bridge of Gives, and entred safely into Hamault; and so having with these few Forces escaped the King's Soldiers, they were received, and quartered in the Spanish Towns, whereby France was freed of their con|tinual inroads. And the Spaniards intentions being to let all other things alone, and foment civil war in France, they furnished the said Tavanes with monies, as well to satisfie his Soldiers, who for want thereof lessened daily, some running away, some dying for want, as to make them fit to go through with their design; in pursuit whereof the Spaniards failed not to increase the jealousies, and distasts, which the Parliament of England pretended to have received from France, as well for the welcome which the King of great Britain and his followers received there, and for their inciting the Scots to go against this new Commonwealth; as for Piracies committed by the French upon divers of their Merchants Ships, in the Mediterranean Sea, and out of the natural emulation between those two Nations, for it was easie for them to get a great many Irish Foot from the English for their King's service in Spain, which were willingly granted them, as well to weaken that Island by taking away many of their Soldiers which were al|most all Catholicks: as also thereby to ballance the power of France, whereof England was very jealous. And to back the Prince of Conde in Guienne; after they had confederated with him, they sent Baron Batteville with 13 Frigats, and 6 fire Ships, from St. Sebastian to Burdeaux, carrying with them 1500 Foot, monies, and other warlike provisions; who coming upon the Coast of St. Onge, was there complemented in the Prince his name by Marquess Lusignan, and on the 25th. of October, a Spanish Brigan|tine entred Burdeaux with some men, and monies, who in the name of the King of Spain negotiated a good intelligence with the Burdelois, to make them keep firm to Conde. The Spaniards were first received into Talmont, a Town upon Garomne, and then into Bury, to the number of 1200 com|manded

by Iuseppe Oxorio, who was made Governour, and fortified the Towns; this was given as a cautionary Town to the Spaniards. The King of Spain did also command Archduke Leopald in Flanders, to foment the Princes in France as much as he could, and to give over all other pro|ceedings, rather than to let slip so fair an opportunity of nourishing civil War in these two chief parts of France, to wit, Guienne and Champagnia. The Queen was much troubled at these preparations, knowing how pre|judicial it would be to the Crown, if the Spaniards and Rebell French should make a nest there, whereby revolts might daily be made in the Kingdom; she therefore wisely applyed all means to destroy it: and since all the rest of the Kingdom was quiet, and that only Burdeaux and some other few Towns in that Province stood for Conde, without Veteran Soldi|ers, with but little monies and provisions; she was resolved to vanquish him before he should have fortified himself better, and before the Spani|ards should give him any more assistance. She brought the Council to resolve, that the King should advance with his Army into Poictiers, as was done; but before they marched from Burges the King writ a Letter to Mazarine, dated the 26th. of October, the words whereof were these:



Cousin, I have reason to believe, that according to orders which were sent you, you have raised the Troops which you were commanded to do, and that they are already ready to march to my relief. My desire is, that it be suddenly done, and that you come along with them; to which purpose I have also written to Marishal de Oquincourt to advance with the Forces he hath raised in Picardy, and Champagnia, and by an order sent unto him, have commanded all the Cities and Towns within my Kingdom to give them quarter, and to all my Officers, and Subjects to be assistant to them in their march, I am confident out of the affection, and loyalty which you have always born to my service, that you will do this, it being my will, and so, Cousin, God have you in his protection.



He also writ to Marishal de Oquincourt to raise as many men as he could in Picardy, and Champagnia, to joyn with the Cardinal, and that they should come joyntly in to his succor.
Things being thus ordered, the King, Queen, Duke of Anjou, and all the Court went with their Forces on the 25th. of October towards Poi|ctiers; the greatest Town in France next Paris, but not much peopled: it is the Metropolis of Poictou, seated in the heart of France, very strongly, partly on a plain, partly on a hill, watered by the River Cleive, and inclo|sed within Ponds and Marishes, which render it almost inaccessible, it is not far from Rochel; and because Marishal de Estres had not the Com|mand of this Army, who being Lieutenant General of Vallois, and Laonois, was gone thither to keep them in obedience during the King's absence, Count Paluau was last Commander in chief in St. Amand, near Montrond, to continue the Siege slowly, the Court being unprovided of men and monies for so many enterprises at one and the same time.
Count Harcourt being design'd General of the Army, and Governour of Guienne, followed the Court to Poictiers, from whence the King writ to the Duke of Orleans, complaining grievously of the Prince his proceed|ings, saying, that by his procurement the Spanish Fleet was in the mouth of the Garomne, and that many of his Subjects forewent their obedience, that it being therefore necessary for his Majesty to go into those parts, he gave him notice of it, to the end that he might know he was resolved to keep his Subjects from being injured by the Prince; who having forgotten his word solemnly given, and confirm'd by oath, that he would never have

any dependance upon the Crowns Enemies, nor receive any assistance from them, could not but expect punishment from God, for failing in his duty and alliegance to his King.
The Prince having this mean while secured Agen, the second City of Gascony; and Marquess St. Luke having fortified Montauban, and Cohors with men, and monies, he left Marsine to command the Forces in those parts; and he himself accompanied by Duke Rochefaucolt, and Prince Taranto, resolved to go to Xantes, where staying upon Charente he pre|tended to keep the War from Burdeaux, whose Inhabitants dreaded the King's neighborhood very much, reflecting upon what had been done be|fore: but it being hard to maintain an Army without the conveniency of a City, or some great Towns, from whence Bread, Munition, and other provisions may be had; before he went from Burdeaux, he sent Prince Taranto, Duke Richelieu, and Count de Ognon, with such as they had raised to take Xantes the Metropolis of St. Onge. Monsieur Bassompeier, Son to the Marishal of that name, who was Bishop of that place, strove to make the Inhabitants defend the Town; but they considering the weak|ness of their old walls, and the want of many other necessaries, instead of taking up Arms, accepted of an honourable composition offer'd by the Princes, and received them into the Town, where they made their head quarter, and grounded their greatest security. After the taking of Xantes, the like of the Castle of Taleburg followed upon the same Charente: wherefore the Prince bethought himself of taking Angalesme, which hath a considerable Castle; but not being sufficiently provided for such an en|terprise, he turn'd upon Cognack, begirt with old weak walls, but guard|ed with a great Garrison by Marquess Gionsack, Governour thereof: by which Conde would have secured that tract of Country which extends it self to the Rivers of Dordone and Garomne, and would have kept the King's Forces from entring into Guienne, and might have quartered in that rich and plentiful Country. He left the taking thereof, which he thought would not prove difficult, to the Duke of Rochefaucolt, and Prince Taranto, and went himself to Burdeaux to be assistant in the affairs which were in treaty there; particularly with the Spanish Agents, as also to consult with Count Ognone, touching the managing of the begun War, whom he per|swaded it was necessary to put 4000 Soldiers into Rochel, and to make use of that scituation which lay convenient to receive relief from Spain, and England, and to secure all the Islands, and Towns taken by Ognone. The Prince his intention herein was, how to puzzle the Court most, and how to lay a solid foundation for the subsistance of his party; by making a firm place of retreat and easie to be preserved, without being necessitated to rely upon the unstable people, or confused Parliament of Burdeaux, and might have kept on the Wars; but particular interests having always been the ruine of better Resolutions, Ognone would not agree thereunto, least if the Prince should become master of that place, he should not be so considerable to him, as now he was: wherefore his answer was that he promised, and was confident to preserve it, and that no fear was to be had thereof; whereby the Prince found that the Count dreaded the Kings small Forces more than he did confide in his own.
When the King was got to Poictiers, he haulted there, not thinking it fit to advance further, there being no other Cities capable of his Court in those parts, save Xantes which was already in the Prince his possession, and Angolesme, and Rochel, which were somewhat far off; and having ex|actly ponderated in his Counsel what was best to be done, it was found necessary to secure Rochel, and to keep the Male-contents from making

further acquirements, or establishing themselves better in those Provinces. Those of the Kings party who were in this City, finding this design, sent their Deputies to profess their obedience, and loyalty to his Majesty, and what aversion they had to Count Ognone; wherefore the Court resolved to order Count Harcourt who was then at Niorte raising men, and provi|ding, to oppose Conde his proceedings, whereby to have an eye to Rochel, and to what might be most for the service of the Court, leaving the con|duct thereof to his experienced guidance; and the Marquess of Estisack, Brother to the late Duke Rochefaucolt, who as native of Poictou was well beloved by the people, and the Duke of Roan, of the house of Goufiere, Governour of Poictou were declared his Lieutenant Generals. Count Harcourt marched diligently, with a Company of the French Guard, and Switzers, with the Gens de Armes, and King and Queens Horse, and with Iornack's Regiment of Horse, together with Marquess Plessis Belliere, Lieutenant General of the Army; and being come to Surgeres a little wal|led Town four leagues from Rochel, he heard there that Ognone had ad|vanced a body of 600 Horse, and 1200 Foot to Tonney Charente, to bring them into the same Town, whose Inhabitants he threatned with fire and plunder, if they did not joyn with him against the King. And here Har|court heard also how Rochefaucolt and Prince Taranto, had faln upon Cog|nack with 2000 Horse, and 4000 Foot, playing upon it with six piece of Canon: so as weighing the importancy of both these places, and know|ing that the King's service required no delay in the securing of Rochel, and that he ought not by any means to permit the Enemy to gain reputation by the loss of Cognack, according to his wonted wisdom, provided to sup|ply both these at one and the same time; wherefore causing four Compa|nies of the Guard to advance with Monsieur de Berne, Commanded by the aforesaid de Estisack who was well beloved in Rochel, they were brought in by a great number of the Gentry of the Country, into the City where Estisack was cry'd up Governour, who fortified the heads of the Streets, which lead towards the three Towers upon the Gate, which were Garri|son'd and fortified by Ognone, till such time as they might assault them with Artillery, and a greater number of Soldiers which were expected. Thus the coming of the Kings men into the City made much for the Kings advantage, and made good the prejudice presaged by Conde to Ognone.
Rochel being thus secured for the King, Harcourt went immediatly from Surgeres, with the rest of the Forces which he had, and came the same day to St. Iohn de Angeli, being resolved to relieve Cognack; the good success whereof depending upon making hast, he marched all night, leading the Horse along with him, and as many Foot as he could, intending to assault the Suburbs by break of day, which was intrench'd by the Prince his men, and guarded by above 800 Commanded Foot; with whom the Army incamped beyond the River did communicate, by means of a Bridge upon Boats which was made to that end: but the night being so dark, and rainy, as the Soldiers not being able to march apace, the Sun was risen be|fore they had gotten half way, the Count was forced to return to St. Iohn de Angeli; but this sinister incounter may be said to have the prelu|dium of fortunate success; for if they had faln upon it that day, they would not peradventure have had that good success which they had after|wards. For Harcourt thinking how to compass his intent, was advertised by an express sent from Iohnsack, and Bellafons, that they were able to make good the Town for three or four days, if they were provided with Warlike Ammunition. This imployment was given to Pelseran, wherein he succeeded, conveying in some sacks of powder: they being thus recruit|ed,

Harcourt advanced with the rest of his men to Breissemburg. Conde's generals proceded slowly in the seige; the Town had assuredly faln into the Princes hands, had he not staid so long in Burdeaux, but he came not to his Camp till the night preceding the relief; where finding the River infinitely swoln with water, and the Bridge upon Boats ready to break by the rage of the water, he knew that the Kings men would raise the siege; wherefore that he might not lose the men who were quartered beyond Charente, he made them pass over to the other side, leaving only 18 Com|panies of the Guienne Brigade, which might amount to about 800 Foot, with Officers to guard the Town. Harcourt being advertised of all this, resolved not to lose the opportunity, but immediately made Marquess Plessis Belliere advance, that together with Folleville he might accost the besieged Town, as he did, with five Companies of the French guard, commanded by Genlis, two Companies of Switzers, the King, and Queens Gens de Armes, and Horse, Iernack's Regiment, 300 Foot of the recruit, and the Gentry of Poictou, and St. Onge; all which he drew forth in Battel array within sight of the Town, and of the Enemies Camp. Cognack upon the banks of the River Charente, having a Bridge, which passeth into the Suburbs beyond the water, and an old Castle begirt with strong Walls, and Towers, and with a large deep ditch; but it being re|quisite that at the same time when the Suburbs should be assaulted on the other side, the besieged should also make a Sally and assault the Suburbs, Monsieur de Rochecheviera was sent into the Town to make agreements with those Commanders, and ordering the assault in three parts, that of the middle was given in charge to Plessis Belliere, with the French guards, and 150 forlorn Foot, led on by Captain Chassonville; that on the right hand was led on by Monsieur Folleville, with the Switzers Guard, back'd by the Queens Gens de Armes, and Cavalry; that on the left hand was given to Monsieur Haudecourt, with Harcourts Recruit back'd by the King's Cavalliers, and by the Duke of Rhohans, Gens de Armes. The rest of the Horse were placed in a convenient place, to back those that were to give the assault; affairs being thus ordered, Harcourt summon'd the Suburbs, who answered with the mouth of their Musquets, and Monsieur de St. Au|bine, a Domestick of the Prince who commanded there, said, that was all the composition which they would give. So as the French guards advan|cing under Monsieur Chassonville, they made themselves masters of the first Barricado, as did all the rest with miraculous courage on their parts. Monsieur Heudicourt was wounded on the thigh by a Musquet; Vmont, Captain of the Switzers guard, Cavalliere Bagnol, Beauvoire Captain of Harcourt's Regiment, and Monsieur Godiniere were also wounded.
At the same time Monsieur Bellafons came out with the Gentry which were in the Town, and assaulted the same Suburbs on another part which opens upon the Bridge, whereby he kept the Enemy from saving them|selves by the River: so as after a stout defence, the Suburbs was storm'd, and all that were in it either slain or taken Prisoners; amongst which Monsieur de St. Aubine, Noier, and many other Commanders were taken, and four Captains, eight Lieutenants, and about 300 Soldiers were slain, and the Town was opportunely relieved to Harcourts great glory; for it was done in sight of the Enemies Army, and of Conde's self, who was rea|dy to go wild, seeing his men routed, and had he not been hindred by his men, he would have put himself into a small Boat, and have indangered himself, to relieve his party. The business of Cognack being thus va|nished, whereupon the Prince did build very much, they who had con|ceived great hopes were much dejected, and the Prince his business grew daily worse; he retreated with his Forces in such confusion, as they left

behind them twelve Cart load of Ammunition; as also Prince Taranto's baggage, and in passing over a little River, the Prince his Van taking their own Reer, for Harcourts Forces, was so terrified, as seeking to save them|selves, many of them were drowned.
But because the getting of the three Towers upon the Gate which were fortified, made much for the peaceful possession of Rochel, Estisack having received Artillery and some recruit of Soldiers, presented himself before that of la Catena, and Lanthorn, the Soldiers when they saw the Canon ready to thunder upon them, surrendred upon conditions. But the third, which was greater and much stronger, called St. Nicola, gave more trouble to the Kings men, there being above 130 Soldiers in it, with several valiant Commanders; so as Harcourt came before it himself in person with more strength, and assaulted the said Tower, the Governour resolved to parly: but Harcourt answering that he could not treat with a Rebel, and tel|ling the Soldiers that they should have no quarter, unless they would kill their Governour, and throw him out of the Window into the Ditch: they were so terrified as they slew their Commander, and surrendered on the 27th. of November, and Rochel, together with the Country of Aunis remain'd well Garrison'd under the Government of Estisack. The zeal which not only the Catholick Officers shewed upon this occasion to the Kings service is remarkable, but even the Hugonots, who shewed excessive hatred against Ognone. The Island of Rhe submitted likewise to the King.
After these prosperous successes, Count Harcourt went from Rochel to a Village three leagues off, the weather being so bad as would not suffer his Foot to come further than Surgeres; where hearing that Cavalliere Crequi was come to Parancy, which was within two leagues with the Flanders Forces, and that the Prince had caused his whole Army to come on this side the River over the Bridge of Tonney Charente, he thought to make use of the occasion which was fortunately offerd him by this recruit. He therefore sent away orders to the said Crequi to muster all his men in Pa|rancy, whither he himself went the last of that month, intending to sur|prise the Prince by a secret and sudden march, to which purpose causing all his Forces to pass over a certain Ford by which he was to go, he put himself in Battle array before Tonney Buttonne a little walled Town, where there is a great Tower, wherein the Prince had placed some Mus|quetiers to make good that station: where leaving some few Soldiers to take it, he presently advanced his guards under Plessis Pralin, and gave him order to charge some Squadrons of the Enemy, which appeared on the top of the hills near Moragne, behind the which he thought the Ene|mies whole Army had been, and so to give them battle; but they by the advantage of the night were not seen, so they came not to blowes till the next morning, when the Kings men being come within sight of the Enemy, Crequi on the right hand, Bellafons on the left, and the Voluntiers in the midst, inheartned by Harcourt, who followed them with the body of the Army, they charged the Enemies Squadrons so bravely; as though they resisted stoutly, yet they were pierced through and through, and pursued to a breast-work where the Prince stood with other twelve Squadrons, and could not keep his men from being slain and taken. Plessis Belliere, and the other Officers who were on the head of the Anjou's Regiment, seeing there was no means to pass the breast-work which Conde defended with a considerable body of men, and discovering that there was a quarter on the left hand, from whence some Troops pretended to go and joyn with the grosse body, they charged them so hotly as many were slain upon the place, others saved themselves in the washes, and the rest got to a strong

house, where they rendred upon discretion to the Anjou's Regiment. Harcourt with some others advancing at the same time to cut off the way from the Princes men, met with another breast-work which hindred him, and the night coming on parted the two Armies. The Kings men were incamped half a league from the Enemy, who return'd to Tonney Charente, and past by right over the River, having lost 3 or 4 hundred Gentlemen, together with divers Officers and their baggage. Harcourt went afterwards to Tonney Charente, having re-made the Bridge which the Prince had brok|en. Thus the two Armies stood facing one another for about 20 days, making only some small Skirmish.
At the same time the Castle of Dion which till then had held for Conde was after 12 days siege surrender'd to Espernoun. The King had all this while deferred his Declaration against Conde, hoping that being aware of his errour, he would accept of the agreement managed by the Duke of Orleans, who proceeding slowly therein, the Court grew jealous that they held intelligence together; and that though they seemed to oppose the Cardinals return, yet they did in their hearts desire it, that they might make good their pretences, which were grown very low, and to draw over the people to them: but at last on the 16th. of November the said Declaration was sent to the Parliament of Paris, and was presented by the first President which caused great noise in the City, and chiefly in the Duke of Orleans his Court, and amongst the Frondeurs, the Declaration said, That the Prince of Conde was become guilty of high Treason, having taken up Arms against his Sovereign, and against the State; that he held confederacy with the Spaniard, intending through his ambition to disturb the peace of the Kingdom. The Prince of County, Dutchess of Longue|ville, Dukes of Nemeurs, and Rochefaucolt, with other of their friends and adherents were contained in the same Declaration. The King's De|clarations being to be registred in Parliament, they could not refuse to do it, seeing that Conde was in open War against the King; it was therefore Registred; but with a caution that the Prince might have a months space to return to his obedience; but the Frondeurs, not being content with the proceeding of Parliament, and highly netled with the fame of the actions of the King's Forces in Guienne, foreseeing thereby the Prince his ruine, and therewith the like of their own faction; on the beginning of Decem|ber scattered abroad divers papers in the Streets of Paris, inviting the peo|ple to meet in Tornon-street, intending by sedition to cause the Parliament to make such Declarations, as might divert the Court from their begun pro|ceedings against the Princes. And some of the most outragious, getting into the midst of an insolent Rabble, went first with them to L' Hostelle de Orleans, exclaiming against the bad Government; and then went to the first Presidents house who strongly defended the Courts cause, and conse|quently the Cardinals; for he was grown so hated by the Male-contents, as upon this occasion, and many others, he was in danger of being hainously outraged: but being a couragious Gentleman, instead of hiding himself, he came down into the yard to that tumultuous rout, and did by his pre|sence so appease their fury, as it might be well seen these tumultuaries were set on more by others than by their own passion; for when they saw him not, they were inraged against him, and when they saw him, had not a word to say, such force hath integrity, and a masculine vertue, to mollifie any unbridled insolency.
The Parliament being met the 9th. of the next month, made another decree against the Cardinal, upon advertisement that he raised men to re-enter France; and began to think upon all means how to hinder his return; but he staying still at Dinan, solicited new leavies, whereby

to come and re-inforce the King, and his time of departure growing near, he renewed his desire of a pasport from the Spaniards; but they feeding him only with words, he stole away suddenly one night, and without drawing bridle for eighteen hours went to Bovillion, not without danger of being interrupted by the Spaniards, who kept an eye upon him; or by Conde's Forces, who being quartered on the other side the River, did ever and anon, make excursions into the neighbouring parts. He sent from thence to acquaint the Spanish Commanders that he vvas gone; and that though they would not pleasure him with a pass, he hoped they would favour his friends with one; which was presently granted, and they were with much honour conducted by Don Antonio Pimontel to Bovillion; from whencegoing to Sedam, he resolved to march forthwith with the 4000 men which he had raised, into France, together with the Forces of Marishal de Oquincourt, which were sent unto him by the King.
When this news came to Paris, it caused great rumour, and the Fron|deurs, Parliament, and Dukes of Orleans, and Beaufort were more troubled than the rest; who being surprised when they least thought of it, said aloud that it was not to be thought the Court would have so apparently broken their word which was so faithfully given, and that their scorn in being thus deluded was too apparent. They therefore hereupon called together all the Chambers of Parliament, and decreed that in prosecution of the judgment given by the Parliament four days before, Commissio|ners should be sent to their Majesties to complain of what was done con|trary to their Majestie's service upon the Frontiers, by raising men, giving out of monies, and by news of the Cardinals return, which were all con|trary to his Majesties Declaration, and the Duke of Orleans was desired to send some from him to joyn with these Commissioners, and to insist upon keeping the Cardinal from returning. They afterwards by publick de|cree prohibited all Cities, Towns, and Governours upon those Frontiers to assist him upon pain of high Treason, and though they got but little good by these Declarations, at which all men laughed, thinking it a mad|ness in them to command, where the King had all lawful power, yet some of them were so bewitch'd by a foolish presumption of Authority, as they believed an order of Parliament was sufficient to keep the whole King|dom in obedience. So proceeding from one inconvenience to another, declared on the 29th. of December, that the Cardinal had incur'd high Treason, for having contrary to their prohibitions, return'd to Sedam, and being ready to return to France. They ordered also that his Library, and all his Moveables should be sold, and all his Rents and Benefices were con|fiscated; and voted 50000 Crowns to be given to any body that would kill him, or bring him alive into the hands of justice, desiring his Majesty in such case to grant a pardon to the Murtherer, who if through misfor|tune he should be slain in doing it, they declared the 50000 Crowns should be given to his Heirs. This infamous and scandalous decree, by what was known afterwards, was made by the private intelligence of Count Cha|vigny, who by this means thought to keep the Cardinal from return|ing.
The Court of Rome was acquainted with all this, it being believed that the Sacred Colledge would not suffer such an example to remain in memo|ry of man, and that such remedies might be found for it as depend upon the Pope's Authority; but it being considered that if they shoud fail in their attempt, the Apostolick dignity might be too far ingaged, it was past over, nor did the Cardinal want Enemies as well in Rome, as in France.
This mean while Marishal de Oquincourt following the King's orders,

had appointed the Rendevouz of the Forces which he had raised in Champagnia and Picardy, to be about Laon, to joyn with the Cardinal, and those that he had raised, to come with him into France; so as the appoint|ment being made to meet about Dormans and Esperney upon the Marne on the beginning of Ianuary, the Marishal went from Peroune on the 18th. of December, and accompanied by many other Nobles, he past through Han and Fera, and coming to Nisis, he found there 2000, what Foot, what Horse, and divers other Regiments wherewith he marched the next day towards the River Aisue passing over the Bridge Arcy, and la Merne, and staid at Troisy expecting the Cardinal, who having left his alliances at Sedam, marched towards Esperney, whither he came the second of Ianuary with about 5000 choice men, and he was met there by several other For|ces, and three pieces of Canon. Oquincourt met the Cardinal at Esperney, where it was concluded that Oquincourt should advance with 1000 Horse, and possess himself of the passes of the Rivers Aube, and Senna, which he did; then passing over the Aube without any obstacle near Auglure, and la Senna at Mery he met with the Foot, and Horse Regiments of Monsieur St. Moore. Where hearing that the Duke of Orleans had sent out four Companies of the Langnedock Brigade to Pont sur Iona; Oquincourt ad|vanced with 1000 Horse, indeavouring to get to that Town before the Enemy should be aware of his march. On the 9th. of Ianuary he was upon Alba~, where being informed that two of the Counsellors of the Parliament of Paris, Bytant, and Cowdrey Genies were come thither to break the Bridge, and to raise the Country against the Cardinal, he made a party of his men ford over the River, to discry some Horse, with whom they skirmished, and slew some of them, and took Bitant Prisoner, but Coudrey escaped to Sens. The Marishal being come to the head of the Bridge, which the Towns-men broke down, he acquainted them with the Kings orders, and speaking with Monsieur Morandiere, who commanded Orleans his Forces, and had orders to resist him, he caused some of his Horse-men to light, who fell so couragiously upon the Bridge, as Morandie|re, articled to return to his Master, leaving the pass free to the Cardinal: it was thought that he had secret orders from the Princes not to hinder him, though he could: for finding their business grow desperate, since the whole Kingdom inclined to the King, they knew nothing could keep them from ruine, but some new pretence whereby to justifie their cause, and keep the Subjects from assisting their Sovereign, and that therefore they did not all they were able to oppose their march.
But because Marishal Turenne having honourably disingaged himself of the Spaniards service, and had refused all the offers made by Conde, and was reconciled to the King; Conde gave the command of his Forces in Flanders to the Duke of Nemeurs; who in the beginning of the year 1652, went privately from Burdeaux, giving it out that he went by Sea into Flanders; but came first to Paris by bie-ways where the Duke of Orleans seemed to be very well pleased, as having need of opportune suc|cour; and he was received with extraordinary applause by the Parisians, and because the Coadjutor thought to make the Duke of Orleans foment a third party of French Male-contents, and Enemies to the Cardinal, he used all his industry to effect it, to the end that making the Queen affraid that the Duke might adhere more narrowly to Conde, he thought she might be necessitated to keep the Cardinal away for ever; in which case the Duke by joyning with the Court interest, and strength|ning himself by the Lorrain Forces, he should also undo Conde for ever.
But Count Chavigny, with other of the Prince his friends, held the Duke

of Orleans stedfast, they made him see that he could not subsist but by joyning with the Prince. Nemeurs stipulated the agreement in the Prince his name with the Duke, the contents whereof were the keeping the Car|dinal away, and a general peace.
The news being known in Paris, and the orders given by the King con|trary to his former Declarations, it is not to be said, how incensed those were, who were of a contrary spirit; but all they could do was to make a noise in Paris; for the Kings power prevailed in the Kingdom. And though the Cardinal was withstood in one place, he was fomented in ano|ther. The Parliament of Britanny, being desired by that of Paris to make the like decree with them in favour of the Princes, against the Car|dinal, did order on the contrary, that proceedings against him should be suspended, till the Prince should perform his duty, and till the Spanish Forces should be gone out of the Kingdom: but though the rancor of the Parliament of Paris, and of the Frondeurs could not be greater than it was, yet could not the Parisians be brought to disburss monies for the raising of men, and to provide against the threatning occur|rances, but were always readier to lay on their mouths, than to lay out their monies; the noise continued still in the Palace. The first week of Ianuary the Parliament ordered the Cardinals moveables to be sold, and not to make good the Kings Declarations against the Prince, till that against the Cardinal were effected. Wherefore the Cardinal must be gone out of the Kingdom again, ere the Parliament would pass the said verification; to which purpose they made many resolves which were great in appearance, but weak in substance, and some Deputations were sent un|to the King. The Court spoke ambiguously, and spun out business at length, hoping the time would alay the bitterness of turbulent spirits. The Queen sent Monsieur Rovigny to exhort the Duke of Orleans earnest|ly to remove from Paris, so to take away the apprehensions which were had of him, but it did no good. The Parliament added to their instru|ctions given to their Deputies which they sent unto the King, that they should press Bitaut's Releasement, and that Marishal Milleray should not be made a Duke, till he had given satisfaction to the Parliament of Rheims in Britanny; and moreover that no Duke, Marishal of France, or other Of|ficer should execute their function afterwards, till the Cardinal were with|drawn from the Kingdom; which was thought was done to take away the great credit which he had in disposing of the Offices of the Crown, and making those his friends whom he had preferred thereunto. But the Nobility made small account of this; the more incens'd the Parliament grew against the Court, the less did they value any of its decrees, since they might be anull'd by the King's Authority. And therefore those who sounded affairs to the bottome found it was best to keep the paths of obedience, and not walk in the crooked ways of precipice: therefore the Princess Palatine, who at first was Conde's friend, grew a great confi|dent to the Queen and Cardinal. The Queen sent for her to Court, that by her ready and ingenious spirit she might foment such as were proper to destroy the Cabal of Male-contents; whither she and divers other Lords came. This mean while the Cardinal coming with the Army and all the Generals, from Pont Sur Iona, went to Chasteau regnarde, where hearing that Marquess Sourdis, Governour of Orleans, was come to Gien to keep him from passing over the Loire, he found that the Citizens would not re|ceive Sourdis men, who fearing to be arrested, withdrew his men, and in great hast retreated to Orleans. The Cardinals Army therefore at that Bridg past over the Loire, and quarterd in the Suburbs beyond the River, and in the neighbouring Villages; and going along by Aubigny, came to

Veirson, where he left his Army to be brought by Count Broglio to Guienne; and he came on the 28th. of Ianuary to Poictiers, accompanied by Oquin|court, Granee, Navailes, Maincampe, Quincy, Cossy, Beaan, Lainville, and other considerable persons. He was met without the City by the King, Duke Anjou, Prince Thomaso of Savoy, and by all the Princes and Grandees of the Court. The King came out of the Coach embraced the Cardinal, and went along with him to the Queen, whose joy, as also that of the whole Court was greater than ever; but the gladder these were, the sor|rier were those of the contrary party; which did not appear more in any place than in Burdeaux. Whose Parliament followed the example of that of Paris, and continuing their meetings, and unlawful decrees, drove whole Families of such as were well affected to the Kings service, out of the City. They took a Brigade of Foot into pay, to guard the Town; they provided Victuals and Ammunition; raised plat-forms, half Moons, and other Fortifications about the Walls, whereunto the Citizens did freely contribute their Monies, by little and little they framed the Council del l' Olmiera, so called from the Elms under which it was kept: which grew so great and so considerable afterwards, as in a short time it arroga|ted all Authority unto it self, whence many disorders arose, as shall be said. The chief directors hereof were Advocate Puy, reste Gay, and two others called Villars, and Duratesta, who were fomented by President Gourges, Blanc, Moivesine, Esparguet, Raimonde, Duke, who were all of them Counsellors, and by other unquiet spirits who thirsted after Novelty; and all this was done under the protection of the Princes who made use of these, to keep the other Citizens true to them, and to abase the preten|tions of Parliament.
When the Cardinal was entred into France, the King with his Council of State, did on the 16th. of Ianuary annul the decree of the Parlia|ment of Paris, made the 29th. of December, expresly forbidding all men to obey it, and not to attempt any thing against the Cardinal upon pain of life. He prohibited the sale of his goods, or books; the offenders being to lose as much as they should pay for them, and be fined in 1000 pound, he declared that the said decree was contrary to his intent, contrary to the usual course of justice, and to the custome of the Kingdom, injurious to the sacred Colledge of Cardinals, and to the Apostolike Sea; that the Cardinal was come into the Kingdom by his express order, and to bring with him a good body of Souldiers, raised at his own charge, to serve him in these present commotions; and that being supream King he ought to be obeyed by his Subjects without limitation.
The Prince of Conde not being able to keep longer in the field, as well by reason of the season, as by the blows which he had received from Har|court, put his Forces into their Winter quarters, beyond the Dragona to secure them by that great River, upon which he had divers good Cities and Towns; and having won over the Duke of Rohan, Cabot, Gover|nour of Anjou, who took his pretence upon the Cardinals return, and in|couraged by the Army raised in Flanders by Count Tavanes, which was just then to enter the Kingdom; he caused the people of Angiers to rise; he provided the Castle with all things necessary, and pretended to second the Princes party, whereinto upon several hopes he had thrown himself. Angiers is the chief City in Anjou washed by the River Main, which de|vides into two parts, and a little below falls into the Loire: it hath a very long Bridg well built, with houses on both sides; it is begirt with walls, and Towers all antique; the Castle stands upon a height, flanked by Eighteen square Towers, built of black Stone, with a Ditch cut out of a

Rock, and hath a River on one side, which on that part makes it unaccessi|ble.
The Prince garrison'd Loudan, Durtal, la Flesche, and other walled Towns. The Lieutenant General of Angiers was arrested, and Monsieur Arnaud, formerly Abbate of St. Nicholas, then Bishop of that City being gone into the Country of Servient, found the gates lock'd upon him at his return, and was not suffer'd to enter; The King staid six days at Poicti|ers after the Cardinals return, wherein great concourse of Gentlemen, and Commissioners from all Provinces came to him to do their duties and to assure him of their loyalty.
Divers Councils were held frequently about the present affairs, which were reduced to two points; the one to go with all their Forces into Guienne, to defeat Conde totally, and vanquish Burdeaux, and this was seconded by the Queen, and Cardinal, who alledged that Conde had but a few men with him, and those no veterans, who were cow'd by being beat|en, so as he would easily be made to fly into Spain with loss of all his For|ces, and reputation; and though (the season of the year considered) was thought might prove long, yet they did not doubt the issue. The other was to march towards Paris with most of their Forces to dissipate the Duke of Orleans his men, to countenance the well affected Citizens, and to keep out Nemeurs his men, who were to come from France. Seve|ral reasons were alledged for both these opinions; but it not being thought sit to leave the Prince in Guien where he might recruit himself, and put himself into a condition of continuing the War, the first opinion was ad|hered unto, and it had been effected, had not the insurrection at Angiers hindred it; for instead of going to Guien, the Cardinal thought fit to march to Saumeures, which was done on the 6th. of February, much to the grief of Marquess Chasteauneuf, who finding that it was resolved in the Council to go for Guien, and that afterwards without his knowledge the march to Anjou was resolved upon, thought he was not much considered, and that the Cardinal was again become the Arbitrator of all things: wherefore he resolved to do as you shall hereafter. Their Majesties were received by Monsieur Cominges Governour of the Castle, and by all the Inhabitants with much joy: and here the news of the Duke of Rohan's preparations continuing, and that he fortified the bridge of Cee, the King ordered Marquess Oquincourt to advance with his Forces, and to indeavor by the assistance of the loyal Subjects to get into the Town.
Oquincourt went from Saumeurs on the Tenth of February with the Horse Regiments of Espance, Roquespina, with Fertes Gens de Armes, and with Mazarins, and Barbarino's light Horse; and came the same day to Beaufort; where being advertised from the King, that the Inhabitants had promised to keep a gate open for him, he marched thitherward two hours before day with his Cavalry only, re-inforced by 100 Norman Gentle|men which young Count Grance brought; and the next day he appeared before the City; charged the Enemies that fallied out, set upon the Barri|cado but to little purpose, for it was impossible to storm it without Foot; he lost some Horse, and had some Gentlemen hurt. The besieged fallied out at the same time against the Guard by the Mills, but were repuls'd by Voluntiers who came speedily thither. Five Companies of the Guards coming in afterwards, he the next morning fell upon the Suburbs of Ber|signy, guarded by Barra's Regiment, and by the Inhabitants called Loricersi, more seditious than the rest, who basely did abandon it, and the Kings men entring, fell suddenly to make a Barricado against the City, whereby to fence themselves against a Raveline and a Tower upon the Gate; from

whence Monsieur de Iuxsen a Son of Oquincourt was slain by the shot of a Faulconet. And another Gentleman was slain near All-Saints Gate.
But the Marishal wanted Forces to take the City, wherefore Count Broglio was ordered to advance with his Troops, and Marishal Millerey was ordered to furnish him with four pieces of Battery, and with necessary Ammunition, which was readily done; but it was very hard to bring them, by reason of the extraordinary waters and high wind; their being neither Bridges, nor Barks to pass the Horse over; and for that the Duke of Rohan, had fortified a Village called Pointa, upon the mouth of the River, and furnished it with a great Garrison and with armed Boats; yet Broglia made a shift to get over in certain small Boats, and came without delay before the said Pointa, where he charged the Enemy in their Tren|ches, overcame them, and got into the Village, just when those of the armed Boats were come on land, and were going to Dine. He took Cavalliere Ierse, and divers other Officers Prisoners; and made himself master of the place, and Pass, so as great Artillery, and Ammunition might be brought to the Camp before Angiers; wherewith the Batteries were perfected. They then opened the Trenches, and the Kings men approach|ed the Wall; from whence the besieged shooting off small pieces, and Musquets, the only Son of Marquess Florenville was slain. The Duke of Rohan being straitned, and wanting succor beat a parly, desired a suspen|sion of Arms, and leave for his Wife to come forth, and treat of composi|tion, which was granted; and it was agreed that he for a while should be deprived of the Government of that Province; that he should put the Castle into the King's hands, and that without undertaking any thing contrary to the Kings service, he might retreat quietly with his Family to Paris.
The Garrison of Ponte de Ce was not comprehended in this Capitulati|on; which holding for the Princes Forces were sent against it, under the same Count Broglia, and Count Naivailes; to each of which, Marishal de Oquincourt assigned 400 commanded men, this place lies in an Island in the midst of the Loire, begirt with with several modern fortifications, and famous for Wars in former ages, so as it could not be assaulted but by Boats, and afterwards by an Isthmus of land which thrusts out into the River towards Nantes. The foresaid named Counts imbarqued with their Forces, and being backed by some Gallisoists, landed upon the point of the Island. Broglia assaulted the Tenaglia on the right side, and Naivales on the left, so couragiously as they soon took it; putting most of the Defendants to the Sword. Monsieur de Beauvean, Governor of the place got into the Castle, caused the draw Bridge to be raised, and made signs with his hat, that he would capitulate; the Marishals self treated with him, and granted him his life upon surrender; this enterprise ended thus, whereby the whole Province remain'd in obedience to the King, with the loss of but a few remarkable people; (for besides those that dyed before Angiers, none dyed in this Action of Ponte de Ce, but the Marquess of Signeres, and two or three were wounded.) Oquincourt left a Garrison there commanded by Monsieur Fontenelle, Captain of the Piemont Regi|ment; he return'd from thence to Angiers, and then to the King at Sau|meurs, whose Council thinking that he had done much, published that he had been greatly profitable.
We must not here omit to tell how Marishal Turenne being restored to the King's favour by the Cardinals means, presented himself before their Majesties, ere they parted from Poictiers, by whom he was civilly received, and without re-capitulation of any thing that was past, was taken into the

esteem which he was formerly in. On the contrary, Chasteauneuf being troubled that the resolution of going to Guienne was put off without his knowledge; were it either that he had ingaged himself to his friends, never to serve with the Cardinal, or that he thought he should never be able to indure him, and therefore feared himself might be removed, did of himself take his leave of the King the very morning that he went from Poictiers; and with his Majesties consent, retired to live privately at Tours; so as the Cardinal remain'd sole Arbitrator of all affairs, as for|merly, but not without the Envy and Emulation of those who could not indure that the superintendency should be committed to a Forreigner.
Conde having staid two or three days at Dromet, went to St. Savinian, a place belonging to the Prince Taranto, where he staid a week, and re|turn'd from thence to Braissemburg, and from thence to Xaintes, where he past over the River, and came to Pons. Monsieur Baugy Camp Marishal advanced with 500 Horse by bie-ways, and was advertised that the Ene|nemies Forces were quartered in several places; wherefore about Sun-set he on the tenth of Ianuary forded over the River Ne, at Merpin and two hours before day, came before Brive, intending to surprise some of their quarters, in which Village was Duras his Regiment quartered; where Monsieur Fouvilles advancing with 40 Horse, pretending to be of the same party, charged some Horse who were come out to make discovery, so furiously, as they were forced to retreat with some confusion, and Bougi fell so furiously upon them, as the greatest part of the Enemy were either slain, or taken. The Prince his quarters were divided far one from another; so as though the Trumpets sounded to Horse, they could not meet together time enough to escape Anguier's Regiment, but being charged by Monsieur Vivias with Crequi's Regiment, most of them were either kill'd, or taken Prisoners. Wherefore the Prince hearing that Harcourt was marching towards him, left Prince Taranto in Xaintoigne, to defended Xaintes, Faileburg and some other Towns which were for him, and went with some Horse and Foot into Guienne himself, that he might be sheltred by the River Sille, and by the Town of Bourg, within one league whereof Harcourt was lodged, who diligently pursued him. But Am|bleville, and Berbisieux, two walled, and well Garrison'd Towns being on his back, which might much incommodate the Army: he that would take them must leave pursuing the Prince, and give him time to look to his affairs; otherwise he should err against the Maximes of War, wherefore Harcourt resolved to continue his march, and yet at the same time to re|duce the aforesaid two Towns to the Kings obedience. He sent Marquess Plessis Belliere against Ambleville, who upon the sight of the Canon redu|ced it; he left Monsieur Bellasons with the Regiment of Picardy, to re|duce Barbesieux, who discharged himself therein with much honour; and Harcourts self staying no where, came with miraculous speed near to St. Andrea, within three leagues of Bourg, almost before his march was known; where he found that Aubeterre, whom he had sent before to possess him|self of the passes, and to take up quarters, had been repulsed, and but badly treated, in his attempting the Regiment of Baltazar, which was got into the Village of St. Antoine; and that the Prince was in Arms with all his men, and that he had placed himself in very good order, in advantagious places. So as not daing to advance further by reason of the advantagiousness of the Prince his situation, he spent that night only in some small skirmishes; wherein Harcourt not being able to discover the Prince his weakness, many of whose men were wanting, and could not come up unto him, he lost an opportunity of

routing him totally, and might peradventure have taken him Prisoner. The Prince passing his men here over the River, went to Libourn; and having refreshed his men there, he went to Bergerack, where he made the Fortifications desensible, and return'd from thence to Libourn to see the Princess his Wife, who was with child of a Son which was afterwards cal|led Duke of Bourbone. Being advertised that the Prince of County had taken Guadacosta, a Town three leagues from Libourn, and that he faced Marquess St. Luke, and was ready to fight him, he marched towards him, and came opportunely; for finding the King's quarters lay a sunder about Miradaux, he got into the midst of them; but being to pass over a Bridge, before he could assault them, they had time to give an Alarm, and to put themselves in order about that Town; notwithstanding he charged them with Marche's Regiment on one side, and he himself being on the head of his men, fell so furiously upon them, as he slew many, and took many Pri|soners; the rest got into Miradaux, and gave an Alarm to the head quarter, whence St. Luke came out with his men, and put them into battle array. The Prince did the like, though he were fewer in number; thus they stood looking upon one another, not doing any thing. Prince County came thither four or five hours after with the Marquess Montespan, and with the rest of the Forces; and here a Council of War was held, to know whether they should charge the Kings Camp or no. Conde's Foot were but few, and all new men, they exceeded not 500 Foot, and 700 Horse: St. Luke had about 2000 old Foot,  700 Horse, the situation was steep, and advantagious for the King's men; so as it was thought fit to forbear attempting them, till three pieces of Canon were come, which the Prince had sent by water to take in Agen. All the day was therefore spent in lusty skirmishes, wherein the Marquess his men had the better at first, but when the Prince having released some of the Kings men whom he had taken Prisoners, let the Enemy know that he was on the head of his Troops, the Enemy were so affrighted at his very name, as they began to retreat by night to Leyteres, two leagues off, in such disorder, as the Guard which was advanced by County, discover'd their march, and gave notice thereof to the Prince his Brother, he took with him what Horse were rea|dy, caused all the rest of his Soldiers to march, and overtook the Enemy at Miradaux, and charged them so furiously, as he routed the Enemy, who ran with some loss; then with no less fervour, he fell upon the Brigades of Champagnia, and Lorrain; who not being able to make their party good, unbacked by Horse, got into the Town, but fared but ill; the Town is environed with old weak walls, broken down in many places, and may ra|ther be termed an open Village, than a walled Town. The Prince sum|mon'd Count Marin Camp Marishal, and Couvanges, Colonel of the Lor|rain's Regiment, to surrender upon discretion; they offer'd to yield up the Town, and not to bear arms against him for six months. But Conde finding the Town weak, and that it wanted Warlike Ammunition, thought he should have them all Prisoners of War within two days: wherefore he refused their offer, and resolved to attack the Town, and planted two pieces of Artillery against it, though he had but 80 Bullets, and very lit|tle powder. The besieged were likewise but badly Ammunition'd: but St. Luke found means to have some brought in every night; yet the Prince resolved to make a breach, and made his Horse men light to give an assault, but was hindred, as not being in a fit condition. Count Harcourt was come again to St. Iohn de Angeli, after his having given many defeats; where haring of the Prince his proceedings, marched speedily towards him, he past the Garomne at Avilare; The Prince being far inferior in num|ber,

would not stay for him, but quitted the enterprise of Miradaux; and retreated to Stafort, where he refreshed his men, and divided his Army in Pluma, Peregrin, and in the neighbouring Towns; and sent from thence a party of Horse to inquire after Harcourts ways, who was gone from Avilare to Lomagna, intending to secure his quarters, by taking Beaumont, a little walled Town upon the River Gimona. Marquess St. Luke being gone from Auch with other Forces, was marched towards him; and Saufbeauf advancing as near Stafort as he could to charge the Troops which should come out of the Enemies quarters, Count Illabone, and Aubeterre, went towards Pluma, to charge Conde's Gens de Armes who were quarter'd there, and St. Luke went also against Pergaime. Harcourt with the rest of the Army tarried in the midst of them, to releive such as should have most need; The Prince not having had any news of the Enemy, till such time as they were got into the midst of his quarters, was much surprised; but being an excellent Commander, and good at putting on resolutions, he presently made all that were with him get on Horseback, and drawing forth his Foot, accompanied by the Dukes of Rochefaucolt, and Bel|garde, Count Marsin, and others of condition, went to discover the King's men, which he found to be so many, as he was forced to retreat, not with|out danger; and sent to all his Forces to meet at Buet, a Town upon the Garomne, that they might go from thence to Agen. Harcourt pursued him, and would assuredly have routed him, had he not tarried to take Pergaime, whither all the Guards of the Prince his Generals were gotten, command|ed by Monsieur Roches; where the Town being well walled, he tarried till the Prince was come to Buet, and had past over the Garomne, which was done with much fear, and in such disorder, as had but 200 of the Kings Horse then appeared, he would have run danger of being defeated and taken. The baggage which had not time to get to Buet, was sent by water over against Agen, whither it was no sooner come, but Harcourt (leaving St. Luke before Pergaime) followed him with the rest of his Forces to Burg, over against that City. Illabone, Crequi, and Coudray, Monpensiere, fell furiously upon the Baracadoes, which were no less vali|antly defended, and the forlorn hope being lost, Conde's men did so seaso|nably defend themselves, as the Prince hasting thither, and sending his men to assist their fellowes, he freed them from danger, and forced the assailiant to retreat; thus his baggage got safe to Agen, and the King's men lost their attempt. Harcourt staid all that day in Estillac; and the next day return'd to before Pergaime, but finding it already surrendred upon discretion he sent Cowdray, Monpensiere, and Fermecon towards Stafort, where there was 300 of the Prince his Foot and some pieces of Artillery, and easily made part of the Garrison turn over to the King, and other some return to their own howses, upon promise never to serve any more against the King.
At the same time the Marquesses of Mountonsiere, and Plessis Belliere, by intelligence with the Citizens, had besieged Xantes by approaches, and battery. The Garrison which was not able to defend themselves against the Enemy within and without, capitulated, and on the twelfth of March 600 Foot, and 50 Horse marched out; which acquisition drew after it the like of Faileburg, whereby the whole River of Charente was reduced to the King's obedience, except it were Bourages, which held still for Count Oguon. Whilst the King's Forces were imploy'd about Angiers, the Duke of Nemeurs hasting for France with the people which he had raised in Flanders, marched with about 8000 men for Fonsomma in Picardy, from whence he went to the Province of Vexin, where the Nobles being

assembled to the number of 1000 Gentlemen, hoping to have been back by de Elbeufs, and Aumonts Forces, would have kept him from advancing, being incouraged by the Coadjutor, who having many friends in those parts, did privately indeavour to keep Conde from receiving so considera|ble Forces. But being afterward spoken unto by Orleans, who protested he would complain of him in case his aversion to the Prince should cause him do otherwise than he would, the Coadjutor forbare soliciting the Nobles, who were assembled at Maine to consult how to oppose Nemeurs; The Duke of Orleans sent credential Letters to them by Marquess Villenes to appease them, giving them his word that they should not be injured by the Soldiers. Villenes found them otherwise minded, so as he had much ado to perswade them: the Gentlemen were not willing to understand him; fearing least by permitting those Forces to enter their Province, they might draw the King's Forces after them, and that making that place the seat of War, they should feel those miseries which are the product of Military licentiousness; but afterwards considering that they could not keep from what they feared by opposition, they resolved to be quiet. They therefore sent three of their number to the Duke to tell him that instead of hindring, they would assist him in his march, which they rati|fied in an assembly held afterwards at Magny in the beginning of March; wherefore the Duke to make good his word, that they should not be badly dealt with by the Soldiers, sent Monsieur St. Ibar, one who was well known to the Spaniards, as to them; so as Nemeurs past to Mantes without any obstacle; which Town he had secured some few hours before he came thither: having thus past over the Scene, he quartered his Army about Hadam, a little City which lies between Chastres, and Paris; and whilst he refreshed his Forces there, he together with Tavannes, Clainchamp and most of the Spanish Officers went to Paris, where they were received with extraordinary applause by the Inhabitants, as deliverers of their City.
The Duke of Nemeurs, and the other Commanders thought not when they came first thither to tarry there above two or three days, but to re|turn then, and joyn with the Duke of Orleans men which were comman|ded by Duke Beaufort, which returned from the Provinces of Perche, and Main, whither they were come when they heard of the siege of Angiers. But were it either by reason of the good entertainment they found there, or by reason of their natural negligence, and being fomented by Orleans, fearing least the Prince his Army, by taking Towns upon the Loire, might go to the relief of Montrond, or go into Guienne, afforded time, by entertain|ing them in pastimes at Paris, to the King's Forces to go from Angier's, that they might take Ponte de Ce, secure the Provinces beyond Loire, and come to Blois, and so to Sally; which fell out just so. For having dispatched the business of Angiers, and knowing that Nemeurs was come into France, the Court thought fit not to prolong time, but diligently to provide for affairs on that side, whither all their friends desired the King would come. Their Majesties went from Saumures on the 7th. of March and went to Tours where divers Lords sent from several Provinces, and Cities, came to assure the King of their Loyalty, and Obedience; and amongst the rest Monsieur Chamuallon, Archbishop of Roan, Primate of Normandy, sent by a great many Preates from Paris, touching the decree made against the Cardinal, shewing the King what injury was done thereby to the Church of Rome, and to his Majesties self in having a servant of his out|raged. The Archbishop was graciously received, and this Commission was famous as well for the matter, as for the persons who brought it; and it fell to this Prelates share to preach before the King, who appeared in a

glorious manner, and with much eloquence enlarged himself upon the Parliaments proceeding so rigorously, and by such unusual ways, against a Prince of the holy Church, not respecting that these were forms prohibi|ted by both Divine and humane Laws; and which was miraculous, he in his discourse did openly praise the Parliament, but obliquely stung it.
Marishal de Oquincourt marched at the same time with his Army, to the same part by the way of Burgueville, and Beaumont, and sent his Artillery to Tours to be imbarqued upon the Loire; and he with all his Troops went to Merolles near Blois; whither the Court came likewise, which restored Count Servient to his former State imployments.
Oquincourt went from Chartres, towards the Loire about Vandosme, to oppose the Army of the Princes (for so hereafter we will call it) and chose Baugency for his station; and sent Monsieur Plainville thither with Rethlisi's Regiment, for the nearness of the Enemies Forces made him fear that place would be assaulted, whose loss would have been a great hin|drance. The King staid some days in Blois, as did his Forces in the neigh|bouring Villages; where the Soldiers for want of pay committed unheard of extortions, and over-running the Country in parties, they were met with, and a Serjeant Major of Valloi's Regiment, with two other Captains were taken Prisoners. The Kings Council met oftentimes in that City to consider whether the King had better to go for Orleans, or Paris; it was long disputed whether or no he should go straight to Orleans, where the Inhabitants were for certain faithful to the King, or whether he should go some other way, since Marquess Lordis was ill affected to the Court, and an Enemy in particular to the Cardinal, which was the reason why that thought was given over; as also for that the King was not able to advance with safety, his Army not being great, and for that he ought not to trust himself in the hands of an indiscreet people, apt to sedition.
They therefore thought of sending the Guard de Seaux, and Council thither; but neither was this adhered to, it not being thought fit to hazard the King's Authority, by exposing his commands to the danger of not be|ing obey'd. It was therefore held better to advance with the Army, and to do as occasion should serve, when the expected recruits should be come. They therefore went from the quarters about Blois on the 26th. of March, where passing over the River upon the Bridg, they resolved to march to|wards Gergeau, whither Vaubecourt, and Paluau's Troops were to come. Marishal Turenne was sent thither with 2500 men; to take upon him the command of the aforesaid men, and together with Marishal de Oquincourt, to do what should be best for the King's service. And the King with the Court went also from Blois to Sully, and the Army was quartered at Sandil|lon, between Orleans and Gergan.
The Princes Army, after having taken some contributions from the parts about Chastres, went into Beaux, the Province wherein Orleans stands, with intention according to Nemeurs opinion, to take Gergeau, and Guien. Those of Orleans wavering in what they had best do amidst this noise of Arms, being incited on the one side by seditious people, who were of opi|nion, that they ought not recede from the obedience of the Duke of Orleans, who as Lord of that Town, if they should so do, would hold himself highly offended; and being sorry on the other side to forego the duty of good Subjects to the King their Sovereign, resolved to remain neuters; whereof the Duke of Beaufort, who was come to that purpose to that City, being assured, he acquainted the Duke of Orleans therewith; adding that if that Town should be taken by the King, he would be forced to forsake Paris; wherefore he thought it necessary that he should come

thither himself in person, to keep them all obedient with the Authority of his own presence. But the Duke, not thinking it fit to abandon Paris when the people were so wavering, ready to yield to any the least acci|dent, resolved to send Madamoiselle his Daughter thither, to weaken the Kings party by her presence, and to incourage the favourers of his Family, who were many. This Princess assuming a generous and man-like spirit, did not refuse to go; but did so cheerfully imbrace the proposal, as she ap|peared another Zenobia, or Thalestris, who was going to make new con|quests. She went from Paris accompanied by the Marchioness of Fronse|neck the young Countess of Fiesco, by the Duke of Rohan, by two Coun|sellors of Parliament, Croisy, and Bermont, and by many other Gentlemen of condition. She past by Estampes; and after having been received two leagues from Turry, a great Town in Beaux, by the chief Officers of the Army, a Council of War was then held in her presence, wherein it was resolved that the Army should march the next morning straight to Gergeau, to secure that Town which had a Bridg over the Loire; and that in case they should meet with any difficulty by the Kings Forces, which were not far off, that then they should indeavor to make themselves masters of Guienne; in performance whereof, Beaufort advanced to Gergean, which was seated upon the Loire, and walled about after the old manner; but finding that Marishal Turenne had cautiously prevented him, who was come into the Suburbs beyond the Bridg, he was forced to hault, and fall to blows without any advantage; for though there were none to defend it but some of the Kings Officers, who had accompanied Turenne, they did so excellently defend it, as after Beaufort had lost several Soldiers, and had had many chief men wounded, amongst which was Monsieur Sirot, Lieu|tenant General, who not long after dyed, he was forced to return towards Loris, a Village over against Sully on the Rivers side.
Madamoiselle being this mean while come to Orleans, she found the Gates shut, and guarded by armed Citizens, whom she acquainted with her being there; and at the same time appeared the Guard de Seaux, on the other side the River, who was sent by the King to keep the people in their obedience. The Counsellors were at that time met in the publick Palace, with several chief Citizens, to consider how they should receive this Court-officer; the Guard not being able to open the Gates to any without express order from the said Council, sent presently to acquaint them how that Madamoiselle was come on the one side, and the Guard de Seaux on the other; about which, whilst they were considering what to do; Madamoiselle being upon the ditch, and weary with attend|ing an answer, walked toward the River; which the Boat-men observing, they boldly ran to the Walls, and breaking up a little Gate, brought her into the City, not being withstood by the Guards of the next Gate; where she was cryed up by all the people; many whereof were gained some days before by some monies given by Monsieur de Fiesco, to spoil the management of Monsieur Gras, master of the requests, who was sent thither to that purpose by the King. The people flocked together in great numbers in the Streets through which Madamoiselle past, to see, and reverence her, and she using that French liberty towards them, which does not at all derogate from civil modesty, their acclamations grew so great, as all the City wondred at the unusual, and unexpected hardiness of that Princess. Then going to the publick Palace, she made the Council adhere to her party; and to keep the Guard de Seaux from coming into the Town, she went the next morning to the Gate upon the Bridg; and getting jocundly upon the Tower, she saw none appear in that Suburbs, but Mon|sieur

Champletreaux, whom she defied; whereupon the Guard de Seaux re|turn'd to Court without attempting any thing, much confused at what he had seen, and heard. The King therefore not being able to go by Orleans, nor by Chartres, whither the Duke of Orleans had sent Marquess de la Fretta Governor of Chartres, to make the people take up arms on his be|half, they resolved to go by Gergeau, where finding the Bridg broken by the violent current of the water, the Court went to Sully, and the Army to Saudilon which was not far off; but as these marched towards Guienne, the Princes Army went coasting along the other side of the River, to hin|der his designs; the Princes had in their Camp about 10000 men, 4000 old Soldiers of the Duke of Orleans, commanded by Duke Beaufort; the rest were commanded by Nemeurs. The next day after Madamoiselle was entred Orleans, Nemeurs sent to her to complain for that she had not followed the resolution which was taken at Turny; Nemeurs knew that Conde's Enemies had infused jealousie into the Duke of Orleans, as con|cerning his march, making him believe that the Prince meant to make use of his men, only to secure the pass over the Loire. To which the passion he had to serve Conde being added, and to win honour for himself in the War, he was impatient that Madamoiselle had not followed his advice. Madamoiselle on her side, being displeased that the agreements put on in her presence, were not more punctually observed; sent to Nemeurs, Beau|fort, and the other chief Commanders, to meet the next morning in one of the Suburbs of Orleans, to resolve of what was best to be done; she was the first that came thither, and then came the Generals and chief Of|ficers, and the Duke of Rohan, who could not be admitted into the City, the people being jealous of him, and refusing to receive him. The Coun|cil being met, two opinions were proposed; one was to go and take Montargis, a great Town Walled after the antient manner, but for scituati|on of great importance; being 25 little leagues from Paris, upon the way to Charite, with a Royal Palace in form of a Castle, washed by the River Oing; they had let slip the opportunity of taking Gergeau, and Guien, which were possessed by the Kings men: The chief motives were, that by securing Montargis, Paris was likewise secured; the Princes Army lying between it and the Kings quarters. The second opinion was to take Blois, which was abandoned by the King, and so without all difficulty they might have a passage over the Loire. Beaufort, and generally all the Duke of Orlean's Officers, were for the first, and many of Conde's Captains, par|ticularly Cleynchamp and Tavanes: for they knew not Nemeurs his secret design, which though he concealed it, was to go first to Montrond, and raise the siege: but he not declaring himself; it was resolved to go to Montargis; wherefore, were it either that Nemeurs was sorry that Beaufort had won the opinion, or that he did really think his opinion made more for the Prince his interest, he said it was strange that those who had pro|mised to serve the Prince, should fail him. Beaufort thought he mean him, and said he was a man of his word, and that it was false that he had failed the Prince. Nemeurs was offended with this answer, and said he lyed. Beaufort getting to him before they could be parted, struck him on the face with his hand; and Nemeurs gave him many ill words: but they were parted, and were indeavoured to be made friends. Beaufort was told that all that Nemeurs had said was not sufficient to satisfie him for the blow he had received; so as at last he was perswaded to ask him pardon; the which he did with very much affection, with tears in his eyes, and saying, that he had rather have been Bastanaded with that Cane which he had in his hand, than that any difference should have past between them.
The Prince his affairs suffered much by these differences, and affairs in Guienne went no better by his continual losses; wherefore when he had quartered his men about Agen, he knew he could not tarry long in that Province; he therefore thought to go to Nemeurs his Army; but first to put a Garrison into that City, to withstand Harcourt's attempts, and against the intelligence held therein by the King's party. He therefore sent Countie's Brigade thither, perswading the Consuls to receive a strong Guard; the desire was so ill interpreted, as it was given out that he meant to sack the City, which made the people begin to murmur, to make Con|venticles, and at last to take up Arms. The Prince got presently on Horse|back, rid through all the Streets, and made those that had made the works throw them down; but not being able to be in all places at once, he was no sooner gone from one place, but disorders grew there again; wherefore finding that without speedy remedy the tumult would grow past all help, he thought good to bring in Counties said Brigade, on the Rivers side by the Gate Grace, making it hault in the first Street which leads to the Gate. But this, instead of terrifying the people, did so augment the sedition, as in a few hours above 100 Baracadoes were made. The Prince notwith|standing with his wonted undauntedness kept on Horse-back in the Streets, together with his Brother the Prince of County, Duke Rochefaucolt, Prince Marsilliack, Count Marsino, Marquess Montespan, and Marquess de Force, and with divers Officers and well born Gentlemen; and notwithstanding the horrid confusion, he went with his accustomed gravity and fierceness, sometimes to one, sometimes to another Barracado, to make them be thrown down; but if the people did for the present yield respect to his person, as soon as his back was turn'd, they would make another within ten paces of him; and so great grew the insolence, as one presented a Pistol to his breast, threatning to give fire. But he without changing countenance staid above three hours amidst those Barracadoes, and rash Plebeians, meaning still to make the Troops enter, but could not get the people to consent thereunto: amidst this hurly burly an accident had like to have happened, which would have put the Prince and all that were with him in danger of their lives; for Monsieur de la Magdalena being on the head of Countie's Brigade, one of the people discharged an Harquebuss at him, which by good fortune mist him narrowly, shooting only some of the hair of his head off. This Gentleman discreetly made, as if this accident had happened by chance, which if he had gon about to revenge, things might have grown desperate. The whole day being thus spent, and the Citizens being resolved not to admit of any Forces; the Prince approved of the advice of some of his friends to seem satisfied with appearances; he therefore willed the Duke of Rochefaucolt, (who was particularly well beloved in that City) and Marquess Montespan, to work it so, as that the Citizens might go home, and that meeting in the publick Hall, they might beg pardon for their Error; whereupon he would make his Soldiers re|treat, upon condition that they would by a new oath of fidelity, be bound to raise a Regiment at their own cost to defend the City; which submissi|on being made in publick, the Baracadoes were thrown down, Countie's Regiment retreated and all things were hushed up.
By reason of these successes, and of the bad condition of his affairs in Guienne, where it was impossible to do any good with new Soldiers; he re|ved to go speedily to head his men who came from Flanders, and who were joyned with Orleans his men; and not being detained from doing this by any thing, but out of the consideration that he must then abandon a City, and a Province, meaning Burdeaux, which had declared for him, his friends

perswaded him that he had no way to save it, but by this diversion; for by that means he should draw all the Kings Forces to where he should be; to which they added, that Paris stood in need of being fortified by his pre|sence, especially since it was thought that the King would go thither. That Moreover it was necessary for him to go thither to oppose the Coad|jutors designs, who did all he could to make the Duke of Orleans fall from him; which did the more oblige him to see whether it were better for him to be friends with the Court, or else to agree with the Coadjutor, or at least to make him of no use to the Duke. Upon these considerati|ons, and with intention to adjust himself with the Coadjutor, to which purpose he had sent power for treating to Monsieur Croisy, he undertook a hard and dangerous journey; he went privately from his Camp on the 24th. of March; accompanied only by Rochefaucolt, and his Son Prince Marsilliack, Count Levy, the Barons of Chavigny, and Guitaut, Messieurs, Berzenet, and Gourville, and marched nine days, and nights, with very lit|tle or no sleep, through the Provinces of Limosin, Auvergne, and the Burboness; and the last day Guitaut being known by a Courier of the Cardinals, the news was sent to the Court, which was then at Guienne; and they thinking that he went towards Chastillion, Monsieur St. More was sent after him with 200 Horse, to take him Prisoner; but Conde had the fortune to escape that danger; for having been all Easter-day amidst the Kings Horse quarters, he came to Chastillion, just when the Kings Cavalry were quartered in the Town, wherefore he parted from thence at mid|night; and passing within 70 paces of St More, without being discovered, he came to the Wood of Orleans; where he fell upon the fore-runners of Nemeurs his Army; making towards them, and crying Chi Vive, he made himself known unto them; the news of his coming being known, the Army vvas as much joyed, as he vvas confused to find the disagreement amongst the Generals. He sent Gourville from thence to Paris, to acquaint the Duke of Orleans vvith his being there, and he vvas ready to go thither himself in person, (not knowing how affairs went at Court) to establish agreement, to inhearten those that were for him, and to cure the inconstan|cy of the people, which are apt to vary according as accidents alter. But knowing afterwards that the Court was recruited in Forces and courage, by the coming of the Duke of Bullion, and divers other Gentlemen, and Soldiers, from several parts, and that Marishal Turenne was their General, he thought it better to tarry in the Army. Great joy being expected in the Camp at Loris, by going off of Guns, and Bonefires, for the Prince his arrival; the Court was not a little troubled at it, finding their designs vanished, which they had built upon the unruliness of the Princes Camp.
Good discipline being established in the Camp by Conde, and all men being incouraged by their belief in his Valor, he caused Montagris to be assaulted. Monsieur Mondraville, who had put himself into the Castle with eight Gentlemen, and 200 Soldiers, was forced to surrender, not finding his men so firm as he expected. Monsieur Cotiere, who was ad|vanced to relieve it, finding it in that condition, retreated, doing nothing. By the taking of this place, the way was opened for the Princes, into Burgundy, and the design which they might have to prolong the War, was thereby facilitated. The Kings Generals lay betwixt the River Loin, and the Channel Briara; Turenne at Briara; Oquincourt at Blenau, four leagues from the way that leads to Chastillion, where the Channel, and the River joyn. Turenne visited Oquincourt in his quarters, and told him what advantage his quarters gave to the Enemy; and at his return he met

with a Letter from the Inhabitants of Chastillion, which assured him of their obedience, and confirm'd the news, that the Prince having left his Cannon, and 200 men at Montargis; was marching towards Chasteaurenart, which made the King and Court believe that he was marching towards Burgundy. The same night Oquincourt writ to Turenne, that he was assured by divers Prisoners, that the Prince was marching towards him, and desi|red him that he would come and joyn with him suddenly, and at the same time sent order to his Troops to draw near the Dragoons quarters, making his baggage march; and leaving only 200 Foot in his head quarters at Blenau, he marched into the field. But the Prince, who in all actions of War hath always been acknowledged to be incomparably solicitous, ad|vanced so fast, as surprising part of Oquincourts Troops, he fell upon seve|ral bodies which lay asunder; so as one only Volly of shot, and the dark|ness of the night routed the Horse Regiments of Maipas, Rochpine, Ren|ville, Beivau, Bourlement, and Moret; the Foot Companies of Naivailes, Boda, and the Polacks, and others who were left in the field, saved them|selves, some in one place, some in another, so as the baggage being aban|doned, fell into the hands of the Enemies.
The Prince making forward immediatly, fell upon the Dragoons which lay below, and sack'd their quarters; some of them retreated to an old Castle near hand, which was surrounded by a ditch, from whence they made some Musquet shot against the Enemy, and being will'd to surrender, they refused till they should see Cannon; which being brought they capi|tulated, and the Commander with many of the Soldiers took pay of the Prince. Count Tavanes fell upon and defeated another quarter of the Croats, and the Prince by these happy successes, advanced into the head quarters without any opposal. Oquincourt drew his men out into Battalia upon the banks of a River, to dispute the pass with the Enemy; but being advertised by Monsieur Siury Lieutenant of the Croats, that they had al|ready sack'd the baggage, he notwithstanding made his Troops advance at the same time to the River side; Monsieur Gonterey headed Mazarines Horse; all the French Horse were not as yet come. The Duke of Nemeurs having already past over the River with some of his men, the Kings men thinking that more of the Enemy were past, retreated to beyond their quarters, and left the breast-work free to Conde, who passing over on the head of 100 Horse, went with some others to fall upon Oquincourt's hind|most quarter; which he took, as he had done the others; and whilst they were busie in plundering here, the Marishal knew by the light of the fire which burnt the Houses, that there was not above 300 of the Plunderers; wherefore he made towards them with 700 Horse, which when the Prince perceived, he drew out his Squadron, and marching in the first file himself, with Nemeurs, Beaufort, Rochefaucolt, Marsillac, Tavanes, and three or four more of his Gentlemen, he exposed himself and all the chief of his party, to do the duties of ordinary Gentlemen.
The Kings Troops charged his Squadron, and having given fire, neither side gave back, but at the second Volly the Duke Nemeurs was wounded, and had his Horse kill'd under him; at last the Prince was forced to give back; and all the Officers having made the light Horse stay, haulted some 50 paces off; not being further charged by the Kings Troops: wherefore a Squadron of 30 Horse belonging to Megly, coming on at the same time. Conde and the rest of his Commanders placed themselves again on the head of his men, and charged Oquincourt on the Front, and worsted him, nor were his men ever able to rally again. From thence he went to before

Blenau, and Oquincourt followed the baggage which was then totally plun|dered by the Prince his men.
The Marishal by reason of these exigents, retreated by the advantage of the night, to joyn with General Turenne. Monsieur de Espouse headed his Squadron and went directly towards St. Prive, that he might get from thence to Briara. The Croats staid in their first quarter, sounding their Trumpets, to make it be believed that their whole body was there: and they had order if they should be charged to run as fast as they could by another way thither. Oquincourt rid all the rest of that night, and met not with any incounter, for the Enemy did but seem to follow him, and in lieu thereof chased 200 Horse, which on purpose went another way.
When Turenne heard first of the assault, he caused to sound to Horse, throughout all his quarters, and joyning his Troops speedily together, he marched toward the place where the assault was given to bring relief; but having heard by the fugitives of the disorder, and the misfortune (which fame makes always greater than it is) being ratified by divers Captains and Officers, he thought half the Kings Troops had been lost, and that in such a case, it was better to think of retreating, and of saving the rest of the Army (which if it should be lost, the Kings person would be in no small danger) than to hazard a new bickering; yet he took a con|trary resolution, and rallying his Soldiers as he marched, he went straight toward Osay, on this side the Channel, where Count Naivailes quarters were, thinking by the knowledg he had of those parts, to get into some advan|tagious station, and that when the Prince should see him march so franckly towards him, he would be more weary in his march, and more apprehen|sive; and that fortune, (which always favours the forward) would not abandon him in this, which was thought a great piece of valour. When he had put his men in battel array, and had rallied many that ran away, he advanced couragiously against the Enemy. There is a small thin Wood within three leagues of Briara, which parted the Generals quarters, nor could the one come to the other, but by a narrow causey, near which Turenne advanced, thinking to make the Prince believe that he would make use thereof, and defend it: which the Prince did cunningly suffer him to do, intending afterwards to incompass him, and totally undo him. But Turenne with the wariness of a gallant Commander, possest himself of the causey with 50 Horse, observing Conde's ways; who thinking to have him in a Net, went presently towards the Wood with his whole Ar|my, and with two pieces of Artillery. Then Turenne in stead of defend|ing the Causey, as he made it be thought he would do, and which would have been his utter undoing; came speedily out, and drew out his men into an orderly Battalia, in the midst of the plain, whereby Conde thinking that the Kings Army retreated, sent out some Squadrons to pur|sue it. But Turenne facing soon about, fell upon those that were advanced, that he might fight them before the rest were come forth. Conde know|ing his disadvantage, haulted, and recalled those that were advanced, declaring that none but Marishal Turenne could have kept him from an in|tire Victory, and that of all the friends that he had ever lost, he was grie|ved for none so much as for him. The Kings men drew up towards the Wood, where they planted their Canon, and began to play upon the Ene|my, who were a little damnified, not having Canon sufficient to answer the frequent shot of the adversary: Monsieur Marrais, Brother to Mari|shal Grance, and chief Commander of the Valoi's Regiment, were there slain. Turenne having thus by his mere industry, stop'd the Army of the Princes: they stood facing one another all that day; when Oquincourt

came in with almost all his men; for he had lost but few, and those more by the darkness of the night, than by the Sword of the Enemy. Oquin|court spoke with the Prince, who in a civil manner sent one of Turenne's Captains, whom he had taken that night, back to him, and writ unto him, that though he never thought to have seen him in the head of an Army against him the Prince; yet he declared that he had always been bound to him, and would ever be his servant, he presented his service in the same Letter to his Brother the Duke of Bullion. The rest of the day being spent in the playing of Canon, the Kings Generals a little before night caused their Troops to retreat; Conde did the like, returning by the same way that he came from Braliera, and went the next day to Chastillion, where having staid three or four days, he found it necessary to go to Paris, being sent for thither by his confidents, to interrupt the treaties which were then in hand between the Inhabitants, the Parliament, and the Duke of Orleans, by such as were partial to the Court, and for the jealou|sie he had of the Coadjutor. The Dukes of Beaufort, and Rochefaucolt, Prince Marciliack, Monsieur Guitaut, and divers other Lords and Gentle|men went along with him; which was the cause of the prejudice which afterward befell him, and his party.
The nights success being brought to Court, with such inlargements as use to accompany uncertainties, did much perplex all mens minds, for it was thought that day would prove fatal to one or other of the parties; and as the French measure affairs by their own passions more than any other Nation, this doubt remained a while; but when the Cardinal was fully informed of what had happened, he presently informed the King how affairs went, moderating the boasts which were made by the Enemy. His Majesty with a generous and Princely mind leapt out of bed, and said he would be at the head of his Army himself, promising himself good fortune, by the justice of God, who is the giver of all Victory; which when the Courtiers heard, they all took Horse, and came to the Castle, desiring to be honoured with some Command. The Duke of Bullion, was made conductor of the Voluntiers, who having got some 200 toge|ther, came presently to the Court.
The King got on Horseback, attended by his menial Servants, Guards, and Gens de Armes; having moreover the greatest part of the Switzers, and French Foot Regiment; the rest whereof staid to guard Guinne. He was further waited on by the Cardinal, Prince Thomaso of Savoy, by Villeroy, and Plessis Pralin, Count Brienne, and divers others. When he was got half a league out, he was by all his Council desired to hault, till he might know the condition of affairs certainly, and accordingly resolve what to do; not any one who had a Sword, staid in Guienne.
The Council did not intend to expose the King's person to the uncertain|ty of fortune, but to let the battle begin, and that then the King might move accordingly, with his Guards and Courtiers which amount to nigh 3000, and they hoped that the Soldiers would thereby be so inheartned, as they doubted not the Victory. Certainly such a resolution would mightily incourage the Combatants, by reason of the incomparable affecti|on which the French bear unto their King; as was infallibly witnessed; for Bullion being come within sight of the Army with the aforesaid Vo|luntiers, and it being said, that the King was there, the Soldiers threw up their hats, leaping, and dancing, with such joy and jubilee, as if they had longed for nothing but to fight the Enemy.
Whilst War was thus in France, nothing of novelty hapned in Italy, for Don Lewis de Haro, favourite to the King of Spain, hoping to recover

Catalonia with as much honour, as it was lost with dishonour by his prede|cessor, applied himself with all his might to recover Barcellona; the King of France being diverted by civil Wars at home, was forced to slacken his remote assistances. When Marquess Mortara had finished all the circumval|lation about Barcellona, to the line drawn from Sans to St. Matona, he on the sixth of Ianuary, gave order for the building of a Fort called St. Rey, upon the Mountain Mongevick, whereby he did almost totally finish the Circumvallution.
And the, French though troubled by intestine Wars, forbare not doing what they were able. When the Marquess de St. Andrea Monbrune, had refreshed his Forces for twelve days in Languedock, he marched with them towards Barcellona, and on the 4th. of Ianuary, they passed over the hill Pyrius, where he mustered 1200 Horse, and 450 Foot, and when he saw his Forces on Foot, he himself went to the Rendevouze which was to be at Estalrich, where he found Marishal della Motta waiting for them; but the Catalonians were backward, much to the grief of the French, who were removed from their good quarters in France, to bad ones in Catalonia; and where they suffered very much. La Motta had with him three Regi|ments of Foot, and one of Horse, of the old Catalonian Army. And Monsieur de Allets was sent with these Horse to take the Abby of St. Colga, where all the Forces met. The next day the Marishal, and St. Andrea, went with their Guards and with 50 Horse, to discover the situation of the Spanish Camp, and finding that this was the properest place, the French Army incamped within half a Canon shot of the Circumvallation. The old Catalonian Troops were placed on the right hand, and those of St. Andrea, which were called the Italian Army, on the left, and being ranked all along the hill, in the Front of the Enemies Camp, Count Pardalian ad|vanced, to see by which way he might relieve it; he found the line was not yet fully finished, though furnished with sufficient Forts; with good store of Soldiers, and Artillery; he resolved to attack the weakest, which was before the Fort Sans, and Baron Sabacks quarters, wherewith he ac|quainted the besieged by some that he had convey'd in on purpose, to let them know, that after midnight he would assault the line, to the end that they might make out a general sally at the same time, and so the Spaniards Trenches might be at one and the same time, assaulted on both sides; but the Soldiers moving too early, they were to hault a while, and being for|ced by excessive cold, made fires, whereby the Spaniards discovered the Frenches designs, and had time to draw out their men into Battle aray; two hours after midnight, the French marched directly to the lines; which they did so furiously assault, as a Serjeant of the Norman Regiment, leapt into the Trenches, by whose example others did so likewise, and made themselves masters of the Corps de Guard, the Soldiers whereof threw away their Arms, and began to run.
The French would have effected their design, if the besieged had sallied out at the same time; but they alledged that they did not know the signs well, and that they wanted time to advertise la Motta therewith, that so they might have been backed by him: wherefore the whole Spanish Army falling upon them, they were forced to retreat to their former quarters, where they tarried some days, till driven away for want of water, and forrage, they went to St. Bois, a Village on the plain of the River Lawbre|gate, as you go from Taragona to Barcellona, where there was better store of forage, and which place lay fitter to incounter all the Enemies Camp, be|twixt which and the French divers skirmishes past, and the Marishal think|ing how he might bereave the Spanish Cavalry of forrage; possess'd him|self

of three or four places about the lines, whereby he defrauded the Spaniards of more than half their forrage; and as this did straighten the Spanish Camp, so was it an advantage to Barcellona; here the French made many acquisitions, as of the Tower of L' Eglise de St. Hospitalle, within one hours space without any loss, as also another house that was fortified, which yielded upon discretion; which being done they returned to their quarters which was imputed to them for a great error, for if they had advanced with their whole body, it was generally thought they might easily have relieved the City, or have obliged the Spaniards to a battel, which the Spaniards avoided; not long after the Marishal went on Foot by night, accompanied by Count Pardalian, six of his Guard, and a Catalonian guide, being followed by St. Andrea, with 200 Horse, to dis|cover the quarter of Sans; and finding it fit to build a Fort upon the Mountain St. Pietro Martire, he did so, and put 500 Foot into it; this ser|ved to overlook almost all the Spaniards Camp, being within Musquet shot of the Abby of Petalba, which the Spaniards had fortified a little without their line.
At last many expedients being discussed, they resolved to indeavour relief by assaulting the Fort Alfonso, and to enter Barcellona on that side; he acquainted none with this, but the Marquess of St. Andrea, and Maren|ville, and Count Pardalian. The first whereof was to command the Troops which staid without; and the other two were to follow him with 500 Horse, and as many Foot. Fort Alfonso was a Tower, fortified upon the Sea bank, one side whereof was secured by the Sea, and the other by an unaccessable Fen, which served for a Trench for above 2000 paces, it had a strong Palisado on each side, which were to be broken before the Horse could pass.
The Troops of the old Catalonian Army were to fall on the right hand towards the Sea, and those of the Italian Army on the left hand towards the Fen; which was accordingly done on the 22th. of April.
Pardalian, who was to manage the assault on the left hand, set on the Norman, and Britain Foot, against the Palisado, and after having dislodged those who defended it, and made tryal of a furious Volly of Canon and Musquets, they did all they could to pluck down the Rafters, so to make way for the Horse, which the mean while was exposed to Musquet shot which plaid from the Fort, but they could not break them.
In these straits Pardalian meditating on what side he might advance, it happened that a Horse of a Soldier that was slain, went wandring up and down, and at last past over the Fen; whereupon the Count made forward presently, though the water came up to his Saddle skirts, and past safely over, being followed by Boessack's Regiment, and by Prince Thomaso his Squadron of Gens de Armes; and he charged the Enemy so furiously, as after a fierce bickering he routed them quite, and pursued those that re|treated to within their quarter of Sans; he himself not being at all wounded, though his cloths were shot through and his Horse shot under him five or six times. At the same time the others fell on on their side; and came through the Sea-water before the Palisado; they assaulted the Fort by Ladders, which proving too short, they could proceed no farther, but instead of tarrying to make new attempts, by which they were likely to have done their business, the Marishal went towards the City, being earnestly intreated so to do by the whole Council of Catalonia; which hindred the getting of the Fort, so as it was known at last, though too late, that those of the City had Counselled amiss: and the Spaniards grew so apprehensive of that Fort, as they presently caused it to be new

fortified, and provided all things necessary. The Marishal was welcomed into Barcellona with extraordinary joy, and jubilee, for having exposed his life to so evident danger for their liberty; when he was got in, he chiefly be thought himself how to make use of the great Garrison to open the passes; considering that the Horse which were above a Thousand, could not be maintained long in the City; wherefore he resolved to fall again upon the Fort Alfonso. St. Andrea being without with the rest of the Army, which was much lessened, studied also how to break the line, and so to get into the City; the Marishal in the mean while who acquain|ted St. Andrea with his design, and agreed upon the manner how; thought to attempt the Fort Rey, which the Spaniards had built within Musquet shot of Mongevick, and the next morning planted a Battery of six Ca|non against it, intending to assault it. But Marquess Mortara who had drawn out his Army behind it, to defend the Fort, was contented to play upon it for five days, till he had answered St. Andrea: who going the mean while behind the Mountain St. Pietre Martire, and seigning to re|turn to his quarters, fell privatly upon a Fort under St. Ierolomo and took it; cut the Garrison in pieces, and took a Captain who commanded it Prisoner, and took two pieces of Artillery, and gave sign by fire to the City thinking that the Citizens would have sallied out, or else would have faln upon the Fort del Rey. But they doing neither of these, and St. Andrea not being able without Foot to maintain the Fort, he abandon'd it, and return'd to his quarters; where hearing that the Marishal intended to assault the Fort Alfonso, he sent Monsieur Brecourt into Barcellona to de|sire some Foot, without which he said he neither could keep his quarters, nor undertake any thing against the Enemy. The Marishal sent him the Regiment of Britany, and Normandy, which were not above two hundred Foot, and sent Monsieur de la Place with them, to consult with him about the taking of the Fort Alfonso, and Mongevick. The French advanced notwithstanding, and fell so furiously upon the Spanish Horse, as notwith|standing the fires which the Spaniards made from the Fort, and from their Ships and Gallies, they routed them, and forced them to fly into the afore|said Fen, with great loss of Soldiers and Officers, amongst which Boutiers self was sorely wounded, and divers Captains taken Prisoners. The Marishal received a Pistol shot in the thigh: Perdallian was shot by a Mus|quet in the Arms, and also Maranville in his breast-plate; but the French for all this could not effect their ends; for the Spaniards having discovered their design, doubled their Guards, and had seasonably put Five hundred Foot into the Fort; so as not being longer able to resist the thunder of Canon, and Musquet, which plaid continually upon them from all parts, they were forced to retreat, which they did in good order, and without loss; the Marishal retreated into the City, and St. Andrea to his former quarters.
Whilst the Spaniards insisted upon the siege of Barcellona, they thought of taking other places also, which the French were masters of in Catalonia; and particularly upon those on the Frontiers of Aragon. Count Lemose, Viceroy and Captain General of Aragon, having upon several occasions in|deavoured to surprise Bellaguer, but still in vain, resolved to attempt it once again. Don Pietro Valezuela Mendosa Governour of Lerida, cast his eye upon the said Bellaguer, and prepared to get it by the intelligence which he held with some of the Inhabitants; in pursuance whereof, his Garrison being re-inforced by some Foot, and by a hundred Horse; he sent Don Iovanni de Sala Manques to confer with his friends in Bellaguer; and to agree upon the business. They readily offered, that six of them

would open a portcullis in the Bridg, that they would kill the Guards, that they would do it by day; and that those that were to do the business should hide themselves in the Covent of St. Dominico, which was upon the head of the Bridg; and that to the same purpose they should place some silly companions in the other Monastery de la perellas, who were made to believe, that this was done in expectation of some French Merchants; who were to pass over the neighbouring Mountains with rich Merchandise; this being agreed upon, the Spaniard went on the 7th. of Iuly to the pla|ces appointed and were recruited by some Forces brought by Don Pietro de Lara; they placed themselves so as that the Horse might withstand those who should first advance; They were not above Four hundred, they marched very silently, and got into the Monastery of St. Dominico The French Garrison, before they open the Gates use not only to look about all the places about the Town, but to visit the neighbouring Covents particu|larly. The Serjeant Major hid himself, and his Foot in a certain place which the French had never observed, and placed his Horse in a place apart, called Valfagona. When day appeared, the accustomed Guards went out to search the Covent; the Governour came to the Gate himself, to wish the Souldiers to be vigilant, and to keep all Country people out. Sala|manque sent a Frier who was held partial to the French to acquaint his con|federates in the Town, and agreed with another, that whilst the one should enter by the first Portcullis, the other should possess the second; this being done, the Serjeant Major came forth with his men, and cutting the Rafters,  breaking down the Gates, got with his best men at last into the City, and after a small skirmish, wherein few of either side perished, he forced Faro the Governour to retreat with his Garrison into St. Marie's Church, where he capitulated to surrender the Town the same day upon honourable con|ditions, which were granted him by the Governour of Lerida, who upon the first advertisement went thither himself in person.
The Spaniards having gotten Bellaguer thus, turned presently upon the Castle of Castellon de Farfana, and from thence to Camerassa, both which not being provided for defence, received the first offers which were made by Pietro Valenzuela, and yielded obedience to the Spaniards.



1652.THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The EIGHTH BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The Prince of Conde leaves the Army, and goes to Paris. The Parliament sends again to the King to discard the Cardinal. The Coadjutor Conde is made Cardinal. Graveling is besieged, and taken by the Spaniards. Mar|dike is forsaken by the French. The King of France goes from Guien, to Melune; and from thence to S. Germans. The Army of the Princes for|tifie themselves in Estampes. S. Martino is taken: Divers other incounters. Orleans, together with Conde, send to Court to negotiate Peace. Duke Charles of Lorrain enters France. He makes the Kings Men raise the siege of Estampes. They incampe near S. Clou. New troubles in Burdeaux. The beginning of the Olmira. Rumors in Provence. The King goes to S. Dennis. The Prince of Conde indeavors to bring his Army to Charrenton. He is followed by Turenne. He gets into S. Antoine; where he is assaulted, and a bloody business follows. By Madamoiseles means, the Gates of Paris are opened, and the Princes with their Men are received in. New Sedition. The Palace of the Communalty is fired; with much confusion, and disorder, not having effected what the Princes desired. Conde solicites the Spaniards in Flanders to assist him. The King goes to Pontois, and carries the Parlia|ment thither. Most of the Counsellors refuse to go; stay in Paris, and con|tinue the Assemblies. The Cardinal goes from Pontois, and withdraws out of the Kingdom. The Parliament declares the Duke of Orleans, Lieute|nant General of the Crown; and set 50000 Crowns upon the Cardinals head. A Duel between Beaufort and Nemeurs; wherein Nemeurs is slain. A general Amnesty published by the King of France. The Duke of Lorrain, Prince of Witenberg, and Spanish Army, in Succor of the Princes; they besiege Marishal Turenne in Villanova. Montrond Surrendered. Har|court retreats to Brisack. The Miseries of War. Candalle commands the Forces in Guienne. The King writes to the Duke of Orleans. Barcellona besieged, and lost.

WHilest Arms were thus managed in the Field, Counsels were frequently held by both parties, what resolution to put on: The Malecontents being still more desirous how to establish themselves, by lessning the Kings authority. All agreed, that the Cardinal

was the ruine of the Kingdom: All Paris was full of Libels, and Satyrical Verses; of fabulous Histories, and politick Discourses. Which casting durt upon Mazarine, and the State Ministers, redounded to the dishonor of their Royal Majesties; and put bad impressions into the common peo|ple, who were ignorant of the Arcana Regum. All the streets sounded of nothing but of the Praises of the Princes, and of the Archduke, who were celebrated both in prose and verse, by infinite Writers, stiling them Liberators of the oppressed People. And many Parish Priests did in their Pulpits take no less liberty, railing upon the present Government, and filling the Peoples ears with sinister impressions, with no less blame to the Superiors who tolerated it, then to the Authors thereof. The Parliament desiring nothing more then the Cardinals ruine, sent President Nesmond with Five Counsellors, and other Deputies of the City, to Sully, where the King was, to represent how necessary it was to put the Cardinal from his Council, according as his Majesty had formerly promised: Wherein Nesmond spoke with no less eloquence then freedom, upon the Declara|tions made by the King, and by the Parliament; and did much complain, that they had been so delusively broken: But the Court was not at all moved with this; for the others might well barke, but they could not bite.
The Coadjutor, in the interim, continued in making a third party, by staving the Duke of Orleans from off Conde's enterprise; with whom he seemed desirous to be Friends, and did really negotiate it. But this was rather to perswade the Court to concur in his being made Cardinal, which he thought the Court did cunningly prolong, than out of a desire to re|concile himself to the Prince: Who finding how necessary it was to make himself sure of the Duke of Orleans, and to get the City declare for him; as also to receive applause for the happy success at Blenau, and to justifie himself in Parliament, touching the Declaration made against him by the King, and which the Parliament had justified, but suspended the effects for a while; came to Paris, where he was received with general applause, being met by the Duke of Orleans, and an infinite of people. The next day he came into the Assemblies, indeavoring to justifie himself. These Reasons brought him thither, but could not keep him there, but for a while; for the Army needed his presence. Count Chavigny, who, as it was reported, had made his peace with the Cardinal, by the mediation of Monsieur Faber, and who did intend to do so with the Prince likewise: Possest the Prince with new jealousies of the Coadjutor, and of Chasteau|neus; alledging the example of the Duke of Orleans, in Count Soisons affairs, who had recourse to the King for favor. By these pretences Conde was detained in Paris, and went not to his Camp, whereby great preju|dice insued to his party, and greater to his Forces, which in a short time, were almost all dispersed. It was already agreed by the chief Citizens of Orleans, That the Prince coming to visit Madamoiselle, should be admitted into the City, which might be a colour for them to declare fully after|wards; but his abode in Paris ruined this design also.
Nesmonds relation of what he had done at Court was afterwards read, and the Kings Letters of the first and second of March, which were written to the Parliament, wherein he commanded, That all Decrees whatsoever, or Declarations, were made against the Cardinal, should be delivered to the Guard de Seaux; whereat the Counsellors were much troubled, and would not permit that the said Declarations and Letters should be assigned over: Whereupon the Parliament when it met, did ordain, That the same Commissioners should return again unto the King, to desire him, that

the Remonstrances of the Parliament might be read in his Royal presence; and that he should be earnestly desired to give an answer: Wherefore the Declarations of the Duke of Orleans, and of the Prince, were sent him, mentioning the Reasons, why the Parliament had forborn to Register them. It was afterward ordered, that the General Assembly should meet in the Pallazzo de la Communita, where the same Declarations might be made, and that there the sending the Cardinal away, and the General Peace as well within, as without France, might be resolved upon by the whole Body of the Citizens; and that, in the interim, all Decrees made against the Cardinal should be fully executed.
But before we go further, we must not omit, that the Pope when he made Cardinals in March, made the Coadjutor Gondi a Cardinal, who would afterwards be called the Cardinal of Rets, Increasing his pretensions by this new Dignity, he kept his wonted customs, as well to abase Maza|rine, as to ruine the Prince; he was very careful, that discord between Conde and Orleans, might not prejudice his particular designs  for he knew, that when, by their means, he had supprest Mazarine, he might more easily quell the Prince of Conde, whose Sword he feared not so much as Mazarines Head-peace.
These Differences, and particular Interests, the more prejudice they brought to France, the more did they redound to the advantage of Spain. For the Archduke incouraged by the present conjuncture, resolved upon the enterprise of Graveling, which wanted Men and Necessaries; and where the Governor, Marishal Grance, was also wanting, who was then at his House in Normandy. Wherefore sending an Army of Seven or eight thousand Foot, and of Three thousand Horse into the Field, conducted by the Count Fuenseldaglia, Prince Ligny, and the Marquess Sfondrato; Count Basigny, Governor of S. Omers, was sent with a good Body of Men to possess himself of the Avenues, till the gross Body might come to be|siege it, before Grance should get in, as he intended; to which purpose, he was raising Forces in Normandy: But these levies went slowly on, as well for want of Moneys, as also not to cause jealousie by raising Men in that Countrey. Duke Longueville, who was afraid to be held contuma|cious by the Court, by reason of his alliance with Conde, and of the new Negotiations introduced by the Duke of Orleans, who sought by all means to make Longueville declare for him. Which though it did not work upon that solid, and peaceful Prince, yet was the Court jealous of some collu|sion between them: And because it behoved the Spaniards, if they would besiege Graveling, they must keep it from being relieved by Sea from Calice, where Count Charrot was Governor, or from Dunkirk, where Count d'Estrades commanded. Don Iohn d' Almara, Governor of Ostend, came there with some armed Vessels, to keep them from going out, who might be sent to the place besieged, another Squadron of Ships lying still in the Mouth of the Haven of Dunkirk. On the seventh of September, Fuenseldaglia sat down before it; as did also the Archduke within eight days after, making the Trenches of Approach, and Line of Circumval|lation be made, and lodged his Army in four Quarters, abounding with all things necessary, by the conveniency of bringing them from Newport, and from S. Omers. Graveling is so well fortified, as it is almost impreg|nable, wanting nothing that is requesit to an exact Fort. It stands in the Mouth of the River Aa, begirt with five strong Bulwarks, and with a Cittadel fortified by Charles the Fifth, to serve as a Rampire to Flanders, and as a Bar of Defence to France. All necessary provisions being not|withstanding presupposed of Soldiers, Victuals, and Warlike Ammunition.

Which Monsieur Valibert, the Kings Lieutenant in that place, wanting, he knew he should be shreudly put too it, without speedy and convenient recruits; wherewith he speedily advertised the Court, and also acquainted d'Estrades with his wants, who calling a Council of War, resolved to abandon Mardike, and demolish it. But not being able to bring the Garison by Sea, all the Marriners being run away at the news of the siege; nor being able to carry them by Land, for want of a Horse Convoy, he was to use his wits, and to seek how to do it some other way.
The Spaniards had a guard of Three hundred Horse upon the way, between Mardike and Dunkirk, and One thousand Horse in Villages thereabouts, which it was probable would go thither, when Mardike should be abandoned. Wherefore the places where they formerly were, being free, Three hundred Men might be easily conveyed into Graveling. Upon these hopes, d'Estrades went with One thousand Foot, and four small piece of Cannon, and at unawares fell upon the Spanish Horse be|yond Mardike, he blew up the Bulwarks of Mardike, rased their Coun|terscarps, took all their Cannon and Ammunition, fired their Houses, and retreated into Dunkirk with Three hundred Men that were there in Gari|son, who had meat but for two days. This design being happily effected, the Spaniards removed presently from their Quarters, and came to dis|mantled Mardike with three Brigades of Foot and One thousand Horse: Wherefore those other places being free, Monsieur Villers, who was Cap|tain of the Guards, went with four other Captains, many Officers, and Three hundred commanded Foot towards Graveling. That he might en|ter there at the same time when Estrade coming from Dunkirk with Five hundred other Foot, might divert the Enemies elswhere, and draw them as near him as he could. In performance of which Agreement, Villers by night, on the Seventeenth of April, by the help of guides, past over three Rivers, and one Fen, the water coming up to mens middles; and speedily marched six leagues. Being come to a little Bridge at the en|trance into the Enemies Line, he charged a Troop of Horse and One hundred Foot, who were there upon the Guard, and having treated them not over well, he got into the Town with Two hundred and thirty men, having lost the rest in those Rivers which were deeper then he thought; which when Estrades hard, he presently mustered all the Garison of Dunkirk, viewed the Ammunition, that he might the better know how to defend himself, if he should be assaulted, which he assuredly thought he should be; where he found Two thousand Soldiers, and Four thousand Inha|bitants, who wished well to the Spaniards, and Victuals for no longer then May. Wherefore he thought it good to rid the Town of Three thousand useless Months, which he put out of the Town, and brought all the Corn into the publick Magazins: And whilest the Spaniards were busied about the siege of Graveling, he got in all the Victuals he could from the Neigh|boring parts, sent out Two hundred Foot against a Village called Vulpes, between Fernes and Newport, where storming a Guard of Fifty Musket|tiers, he took away all the Corn and Cattle he could find: And on the other side of the River Colme, took divers Barks loaded with Wine, Beer, and other things, which were going to the Spanish Camp, and took several prisoners.
When the news of the siege of this important place came to the Court, their discontent was doubled; being imbroiled by the Princes, and ha|ving Civil War. Wherefore they poured out imprecations against Conde, the first Author of all the misfortunes that were, and that were likely to

be. But he laughed, and laid all the blame upon the Cardinal, so, as there is nothing which doth more advantage the interest of a third party, then discord between the other two. The Spaniards were so fortunate this year, as even the very French did applaud their proceedings, which made them easily active in those enterprises, which otherwise would have required longer time, and have been of uncertain event. The Court did notwithstanding, forbear to apply Remedies to the weighty emergencies wherewith it was miserably distracted. Marquess Oquincourt after the siege of Estampes, leaving the Kings Army to be commanded by Turenne, had order to go with Five hundred Horse to that part of Flanders, and to joyn with Monsieur Mondedieu who had Two thousand Foot, joyntly to in|deavor the preservation of the place besieged; some Ships were listed in Britanny, and some in Normandy and Calice; but want of moneys hindred Provisions; nor were they to abandon the needs of their own Kingdom. Wherefore their applications were so weak, and slow, and on the contrary the Spaniards were so solicitous, and vigorous in their resolutions, as the Walls being still plied by Artillery and Assaults, the Inhabitants by reason of their small number, not being able to hold longer out, were forced to capitulate; and upon good conditions of War, to march out with three pieces of Cannon, and about Eight hundred Foot, went to Calice. Thus the Spaniards with no small glory were masters of one of the most famous Forts of Flanders; and which was to make way for the recovery of Dun|kirk; towards which, Don Fernando Solis went with Four thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, within half a league of Dunkirk; which he quartered in several parts, and fortified himself every where, insomuch, as the Fort was blocked up at large round about. Above Two thousand of the Spanish Army perished before Graveling, and divers Officers, of which, Marquess Sfondrato, General of the Artillery, was one, which sadded all their content. He was shot by a Cannon in a sally which the besieged made out, on the seventh of May, and died on the tenth.
At the same time when Graveling was besieged in Flanders, the Spa|niards forgot not to think how they might get the long wished for Casalle; the best means how to effect it, was looked into by the Spanish Agents; and it being hard for the Spanish Army to approach that City, whilest all the Avenues were guarded by the French; the Marquess of Caracena, Go|vernor of Milan, knew that it was necessary to have Trino, which lying in the way to Casalle, as well by the way of Poe, to which, it is very near, as by Land, if it should be left in the Enemies hand, would have much incommodated the enterprise. Wherefore, about Ten thousand Soldiers being raised upon the Frontiers, together with Artillery, and all things necessary for War: Trino was assaulted on all sides on the fifth of May. There were Six hundred Foot and Seventy Horse in the Garison, under the Government of Catalano Alfieri, a Piemontese, who commanded there in the Duke of Savoys name; Too small a number to defend so great a cir|cuite as was that of the outward Fortifications; so as it was undoubtedly lost without speedy Supplies: Which the French not being, by reason of their weakness, able to send, the care of preserving the place lay wholly upon the Dutchess of Savoy, who presently caused Three hundred Foot to be raised, and gave order that they should fall dovvn the stream to recruit the besieged: But it proved in vain, for the Captain vvho had the charge of them, for vvant of Boats, as he affirmed, staid tvvo days longer then he ought to have done, vvhereby the Spaniard had time to hinder the attempt. Wherefore the besieged failing of their hopes, capitulated, and marched out vvith Arms and Baggage. Wherefore Caracena returned

glorious to Milan, but left the Army distributed into divers quarters upon those Frontiers, that he might be ready for new enterprises, when the ap|proaching harvest should be ripe. This acquisition was as acceptable to the Spaniards, as that of Graveling. For by taking Trino, they might as|sault Cassale, and drive out the French, as they had hopes by Graveling to recover Dunkirk, to the great glory of their nation; who not only by valour, but by wisdom, knew how to make use of their Enemies confusi|on and weakness.
Greater disturbance continued still in Paris, then elswhere: Whether when Conde was come, it is impossible to say, with what expressions of joy he was received, to that degree as the Kings faithful Servants, and the Cardinals Friends durst not stir out of doors without great advised|ness. Which made the Marishal de l'Hospitalle, the Provost of Merchants, Cardinal di Retz, and the Dutchess of Chevereux, send to desire their Majesties to come speedily to Paris; for otherwise, when Conde's faction should be grown stronger, they themselves should be forced to forgo all Agreements and Treaties. The Kings Council being hereby incited, and that they might preserve that great and powerful City, resolved to draw near to it. There were divers ways to go thither, or to S. Germans; for the Queen would not trust her self in the City, being acquainted with what had past; nor would she have been there received, having the Cardinal with her. The shortest way was by Estampes, but by reason the Princes, their Army lay about Montargis, and might fall upon the Kings men, either on the Flank, or Rear; they took a way which was further about, but more safe; which was, that the King and his Court, with some fevv more, got to Auxere, vvhere passing over the River Tone, they vvent to Melune, being sheltered by that River, and by the River Seene. Their Majesties vvere received in Auxeres vvith incredible joy. So as the Court being comforted to find so great loyalty in those Inhabitants, the King dismist his ovvn Guards, and vvould be guarded by the Citizens. Aux|eres is one of the chiefest Cities of Burgundy, seated upon the Banks of Tone, begirt vvith Walls and Tovvets, after the ancient form; of a large circuit, and vvell peopled, having about Five thousand armed men usual|ly lifted in it. From thence their Majesties came to Sens, an Archipiscopal City upon the same River; and from thence to Montreule, and so to Me|lune upon the Seene, vvhere the King vvas received also vvith extraordi|nary content; and thither came many Parisians to kiss his hand, and to assure his Majesty of their uncorruptible fidelity. And the preservation of all these places, being the only means in these present conjunctures to vvin the game, (for from those plentiful parts, the Parisians greatest sub|sistance comes,) Foot and Horse Garisons vvere put by the King into For|geaux, Iogray, Sens, Montereux, and into all the Walled Cities, and Tovvns, in those parts. And vvhilest the Court vvent from one place to another, the Army marched still by the parallel Line: So as vvhen the Court came to Melune, the Army came to Moret, a little Tovvn upon the River Loin, near Fountainbleau, not incountring any Enemy; for they lay tovvards Estampes, to keep the Passage, and Communication free be|tvveen Paris and Orleans. The Famishing of Paris vvas propounded in the Kings Council, and the compelling it to lay down all contumacy, by bereaving it of the Commerce of the River; but the Cardinal vvould not listen thereunto, knovving, that though the City fell then into ex|travagancies, it vvas by the procurement of some seditious people, vvho vvere more greedy to advantage their ovvn particular interests, then the publick good, as vvas given out; but that being freed of the

Witchcraft vvherevvith thev vvere possest, the King should not need to desire any thing of his Subjects: Moreover, that it was not good to exasperate the people of that City yet more by rigor, and to preci+ pitate them desperately to declare for the Prince, which was the thing desired by him, and his followers, and without which their party could not subsist. That those people often altered their opinion, and sometimes for the better, as it was likely, they might do now, they having desired his Majesty to return to his Royal Throne; to which they had sent Mon|sieur de Leaygue to him: Though by these strong Reasons he sought to per|swade the Council to return, it was notwithstanding observed, that the Parisians were only moved by the suspicion they had of the Kings Forces, which not being able of themselves to oppose, they must consequently throw themselves into the hands of Foreigners, or succumb to the Regal Authority.
But three things hindered the effecting of this Council. The first was the condition of those who made the invitation; the second, because their Subjects who were well affectioned to the Court, counselled the contrary; the third, that it became not the King to put his person in ballance with the People or Frondeurs, without good Caution. By these, and the like arts, Paris was kept from declaring particularly, but keeping, as it were, Neutral, though it appeared otherwise, it afforded time for such things as made for the Kings behalf: The Court went afterwards from Melunt, to Corbeile, and from thence to S. Germans, by the way of Silly, being still sheltered by the Army.
But before the King went from Gien, he sent a Letter to the Marishal de l'Hospitalle, and to the Corporation of the City, to acquaint them with his going from thence, and with his drawing near Paris: Wherefore he commanded, that no Assembly should be made before his coming, for he intended to be there in person; and having heard under hand, that Guards of the Inhabitants were to be placed at the Gates, he gave order likewise for the same; to let it be seen, that it was done by his Majesties order, and not by the Parliament. And the said Guard being desired by Merchants, as well in respect of the nearness of the Armies, which came even to the Suburbs; as for the peoples insolency, who in a sedition, were apt to plunder the houses of the ablest men: And that though Paris was not in open Rebellion against the King, they held notwithstanding frequent cor|respondency with the Princes; and for that Counsels and Preparations for War were made there, and in the Assemblies; a General was made, who should be one of the Corporation, assisted by the Deputies of Parliament. In which Parliament it was Decreed, That when the Cardinal should be driven out of the Kingdom, with assurance never to return; they would immediately lay down Arms: But as they made use of this pretence, only to make the people believe their actions innocent, and that they aimed at nothing but the Publick good, by sending away that State Minister; to whom they imputed all their grievances, and the continuance of War. So the Court, knowing, that if the Cardinal should be sent away, they should get no more by his dismission, then they had done when he was before sent out of the Kingdom; and that by yielding to the Princes pre|tensions, the Regal Authority would be insensibly wounded, which ought to be absolute, and independent: They also pretended, that it belonged neither to the Princes, nor to the Parliament to give Laws to their Prince, but to receive Laws from him: And that the very pretending, that the King should make use of such State Ministers, as they should chuse, de|served correction; since it stood not with the Maxims of good Govern|ment,

That any of his Majesties Council should depend upon any bodies will but the Kings. They therefore said it was impertinently done, to de|sire that any one should be turn'd away whose service the King approved of, to place another there who was not so much to his satisfaction; and who would be more careful to please private men, than the publick, or the Crown; and that it did plainly appear that to deprive the King of the Cardinal, was to take his satisfaction from him as they listed; that there|fore to avoid so pernitions an example, though the King should have a mind to dismiss him, he should forbear doing it, and maintain him against all men; the King being their sole Patron and Master. The Parisians who were not aware of the Princes their actions, had a general assembly the next day, wherein they chose Commissioners to desire that their Majesties would return to Paris and to send away the Cardinal, which was the way to restore peace to his faithful Subjects. But the Council finding that the design of the Princes, and Parliament was to banish the Cardinal, to the end that they might govern all things as they listed; they would not alter their resolution of maintaining the Royal Dignity, but on the contrary resolved to suppress the exorbitant, and indiscreet pretences of the Princes and Parliament; wherefore they indeavoured to gain time, and to keep the Parisians Neutrals, that they might not assist the contrary party with men and monies, which they wanted much. The Princes and Parliament on the other side, studying to preserve their credit with the people by the specious pretence of easing their grievances, forbare not any thing that might incite the fury of the Inhabitants against the King's Agents; and because it was necessary for the Commerce of Paris to keep the King's Army from passing over the Seene, and to exhaust St. Germans of all things; by keeping it from the daily helps which it received from Paris, they raised some Troops which being joyn'd to other Forces, overran the neighbour|ing Country by night, doing more harm to the neighbouring Town, and Villages, than did the Kings men who came even to the Gates of Paris.
The Prince of Conde caused two Arches of the Bridg of St. Clow to be broken, and all the rest that were upon the Seen from Paris to St. Ger|mans; and placed good Garrisons in St. Clow and Neully; with Ammuni|tion furnished from Paris, but at the cost of the Princes: for the Parisians could never be brought to disburse any monies for them in this War; whose Troops having taken Estampes, they pretended to fortifie themselves there, hoping thereby to keep Paris, and Orleans true to them, which was their main business. Whilst the Kings Army was quartered in Chartres and thereabouts, the aforesaid Troops threw themselves into Estampes, with their Lieutenant General: for the Prince, and Dukes of Nemeurs, and Beaufort were gon to Paris, to keep the Frondeurs, and their friends true to them, many whereof wished for the Kings return, and willingly listned to treaties which were then in hand touching the receiving of their Majesties, who if they had then freely appeared they would have been welcomed with all joy and applause, and the Princes, and their party had been dri|ven out for the common people were easily wound about, and the Citizens were mightily affraid they should make tryal of War, and the miserable effects thereof: the Princes men had abundance of Victuals in Estampes, which the Kings Forces wanted mightily; wherefore Marishal Turenne, who managed the War with much precaution, when the Court was come to St. Germans, and that the treaty of publick peace was begun; upon the Princess of Orange her passing through Estampes, and before the jealousie of the Duke of Lorrains marching towards Paris grew greater, bethought himself of a gallant design. After he had received a pass from the Court,

and sent it to Madamoselle to carry her to Paris, he propounded to the Marishal de Oquincourt, and to the other head-Officers, that the said Princess being gon to Estampes, and the Army of the Princes, which were drawn out in Battalia, when they should be retreated to their quarters, and the better half of them according to custom gone for forrage; they might easily get some good advantage by falling upon them at unawares. Upon this, with general consent they got on Horse-back, and marched quietly with all their Troops and Artillery on the third of May, (which was the next day after Madamoselle was gone from Estampes,) thitherwards leaving the Horse Regiments of Marcuse, and Lamet, and Rales, Burlemonts, and the Crowns Foot to guard the Bagage at Chartres: which was five leagues from Estampes, the design was to surprise the Suburbs St. Martine, wherein part of the Princes Troops were; and having past the River Fuleville, they marched quietly, and in good order, till an hour before day, within sight of Estampes; the Enemies Army kept in Battalia; and when Madamo|selle was gone, Conde's Regiment, and that of Burgundy, together with seven other Dutch Regiments of Foot, and Virtembergs and Bruchs Horse Regiments, quartered in the aforesaid Suburbs which was to be assaul|ted.
The Kings Generals finding the adversary thus quartered, they drew out a body of commanded men from out the body of Foot, to place them in the intervals of the Squadrons of Horse, together with all the Pol-axes; the Army was drawn out into Battalia, the Canon was placed within Mus|quet shot of the Town. Turenne took upon him the most dangerous charge with 300 Soldiers, whilst Oquincourt was to assault the other end of the Suburbs with 500 commanded men. Virtemberg, and Bruchs, Dutch Regiments, who were placed without, were forced by some shot of Artil|lery to alter their station; the forlorn hope fell on upon the Suburbs; but finding stout resistance, for the Princes men were many, and well for|tified, Turenne came in with his own Brigage, and those of Vxelles, and Picardy, and after a hot skirmish, made himself master of some of the houses, and of some of the Garden Walls which were defended by the Enemy, even to throwing of stones: the mean while Oquincourt making forwards in the head of his men, with his Sword in hand, was the first him|self that got over the Wall, and driving the defendants into some houses that were near the Church, yea even into the Church and Church-yard, where they Barracadoed themselves. But because the Kings men at their entrance into the Suburbs fell to plunder, so as the Enemy might have come out upon their backs, and get some great advantage in that confusion; Monsieur Varennes, a Voluntier who was near Turenne, rid with loose reins into the Suburbs, and making the Soldiers come quickly out of the houses, put them into Squadrons in the Street before the Church-yard; and seeing some of Count Broglio's Soldiers lead Count Brioll Prisoner, e desired him to let those Soldiers know, that there being no hope of safety, their best course was to yield; which he refusing to do, Turenne sent him away Prisoner, and caused a call to be beaten to Pieur's Regiment, who were fighting desperately there: whose Officers knowing Varennes, capitulated and became Prisoners of War upon his word; at which time Oquincourt coming in on the other side, all the rest were also made Prisoners. Count Tavanes, who was in the Town with the other Commanders, thought to go out and succor his side; but being beaten back, all that were in the Suburbs were left to the discretion of the assailants, and all the Soldiers, and Officers were generally slain, or taken, not being able to get into the Town; nor to ford over the River. The Burgundy Brigade abandon'd its

station, and retreated intire; Conde's Regiment did make stout resistance, and recovered a place, where the Kings Commander yielded upon discre|tion. Thus there being no more Enemies to make opposition, the Suburbs was totally plunder'd, and little less than burnt to ashes; and the Generals much to their glory return'd to their quarters at Chartres; and two days after to Palaisau. Many of the Kings Officers and Soldiers dyed in this action, and the young Count de Quinchy, and Carlo Broglio were sorely wounded, whilst they fought valiantly amidst the Enemy; this action was generous, and noble for which the Generals were much commended, and the credit of the Princes was very much lessened. The King staid at St. Germans, whither a Deputation was sent unto him in the name of the Duke of Orleans, and Prince of Conde, from Count Chavigny, and Secre|tary Goulas, and the Duke of Rohan; but not without jealousie of one another; for it was thought their private instructions differed from their publick ones; doubtless Chavigny was the ablest and wisest, and he was for Conde, Goulas was for Orleans, and Rohan for them both; these went with seeming orders not to confer with the Cardinal, but by private agree|ment to treat with him; as soon as they were come to Court, and had made their Commission known, they were told (the better to cloke the cause of their coming) that they had taken pains to no purpose, and that so they might return, so after having shewn some reluctancy, they obeyed the Kings will without any contradiction; whilst all were curious to know the contents of this conference, they were struck with wonder when it was known that the Gentlemen were shut up with the Cardinal in his Cabinet, and that they did privately negotiate with him; but they were much more a stonished when they heard that Count Chavigny had himself alone private conference that night with the Cardinal, to whom he propounded the Prince his full agreement, if four things might be granted him, viz. That Count de Ognone might be made Duke, and Peer of France, Count Marsin Marishal of France, Prince County Governour of Provence, and Conde himself Plenipotentiary of the general peace. The Court would have yielded willingly to the first two nor would the Cardinal have opposed it much; since it only concerned Titles. But the Government of Provence, and the Plenipotentiariship were totally rejected; for the Cardinal de|clared he would never suffer his Majesties Authority should be prejudiced, for his particular interest. This Deputation did much injure the Princes; for it was made in a time when the Parliament, and Parisians were most in|censed against the Cardinal, and when all the chief Companies had resolved to desire he might be sent away; when the Commonalty of Paris began to be of the same mind; and when the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince had declared in Parliament, that they demanded no other satisfaction, but that the Cardinal might be sent away; wherefore they began to suspect them, when they saw them act contrary to their former express declarations; and many that were very well inclined to them grew cooler in the business: which as shall be seen was one of their chiefest ruins.
After the Gentlemen were gone to Court from the Princes, the Parlia|ment Commissioners came thither, with Remonstrances to their Majesties, for sending away the Cardinal; against whom President Nesmond spoke very freely. The King listned unto them very graciously, and told them, that he was very well informed of his Parliaments good meaning, and wished that they were so of him; that he would confer with his Privy Council, and would declare himself within three days thus with these general answers, which were no ways positive, did the Commissioners re|turn to Paris. They likewise that were sent from the Chamber of ac|counts, and from the Court de Aides had audience the same day, and had

the like answer. The Provost, the Merchants, the Sheriffs, Procurator General, the Communalties Notary, and other Parisians, came also to his Majesty, representing unto him the miserable condition of his subjects; and what necessity there was to send away the Cardinal, who was the sole cause of all the mischiefs, and misunderstandings. The Guarde de Seaux answered, that his Majesty was very certain of the love of his good City of Paris; for whose further satisfaction, he promised to return thi|ther as soon as the passages should be open. This he did to flout them, for that at the same time, when they made these representations to him, they indeavored to hinder his journey by breaking the Bridges of Seene and Marne.
The Chambers were already met, to know what answer their Com|missioners brought from the Court, and Orleans, Conde and all the chief of the faction were there, when news was brought, that the Kings Forces assaulted the Bridge of S. Clow, which was guarded by a small Fort; whereupon the Prince got presently on Horsback, crying aloud, as he rid along the Streets, Let us go to relieve our Friends. This caused such a hubbub in Paris, as above Eight thousand Armed Men ran on Foot towards the Wood of Bullonia, not far from S. Clow, with such fervor, and readi|ness, as if they had been old Soldiers; and it was observed, that there were Counsellors, and Officers of Justice amongst them. The Prince ap|peared at the Head of the Bridge, accompanied with about Three hundred Voluntiers, amongst which, was the Count di Rieux, the Dukes of Rohan, Rochefaucolt and Sully; Prince Marsilliack, and other of the Gentry; and the Cannon shot which the Kings men made at them, shewed, that they themselves were not come to conquer, but rather to retreat, as they did. The day was fair, and the Parisians very glad to see themselves under the famous Conde, and their welbeloved Beaufort, who drew them forth into Squadrons, with no less delight for the novelty, then labor for their un|skilfulness. The Kings men being retreated from S. Clow, the Prince went to Madrid, (this is a Palace built by Francis the First, King of France, to keep his word to the King of Spain, That he would not go from Ma|drid, when being taken Prisoner, his Ransom was in Treaty.) And here he resolved to fall upon S. Dennis, a league from Paris, begirt with weak and ill composed Walls, and kept by Two hundred of the Switzers Guard. But before he went about it, he sent to know the Duke of Or|leans opinion, who having consented thereunto, he marched with all those Horse, and with about Five thousand Armed Parisians, backed by Six hundred Soldiers of Fortune, which were newly raised to recruit Condes Brigade, and that of Burgondy. Beaufort went with some Horse to the Highway, from whence relief might be brought from S. Germans; and Conde came by night to certain unperfected Earth-works, from whence he sent to the Switzers, to yield, and march out: But they answering by the Mouths of their Muskets, those who were with him, were so struck with such a panick fear, (though they were experienced Men, and had shewn their courage in a thousand other Incounters) as they all began to flie; none staying with the Prince, but Duke Rochefaucolt, Prince Marsilliack, Messieurs Berset, Guitaut, S. Ibar, Gurville, and Fontrailles: So as if but twenty Horse had then come out of the Town, they might easily have taken the Prince, and the Seven that were with him prisoners. But this fear being over, and the Prince have rallied his men which were run away, he went himself on Horsback on the Head of his Men, and lighting at the same time, got upon the Wall, which was there broken down; and enter|ing in, overcame two or three Baracadoes, and made himself master of

the place, charging Duke Rochefaucolt to see no abuse done to the Citizens Houses, nor to the Monasteries. The Switzers retreated into the Abbey, and after having defended themselves half an hour, they rendered them|selves prisoners of War, and were led in triumph into Paris with their colours displayed. The Prince left Three hundred Foot in Guard there, and entered gloriously into Paris; but Marishal Turenne sent some of his For|ces the next day from the Camp, which was at Palaisseau, commanded by Monsieur Renville, a Colonel of Horse, who recovered the Town; and the Garison retreated to the same Abbey, and yielded upon composition. At this news the Parisians went out with Beaufort to relieve the Town: But all mens skill in Arms not being alike, the few Forces of the King chased them to the Suburbs of Paris, and put them to some loss; but the King being likewise unable to maintain that Town, without more men, it was agreed, that it should be left Neutral, and the Princes were to quit S. Clow, Neully, Charenton, and S. Maure, which they did. After the re|covery of S. Dennis, Illeadam, seated upon the River Oyse, near Pontois, and which was Garisoned by the Princes men, was retaken by the same Renville. After this, the Parliament having heard the report made by President Nesmond, resolved to send him again to S. Germans, to receive the answer promised by the King. But since it made for the Court, that all things should be proceeded in maturely, and with deliberation, the Duke of Anville; one whom the King esteemed well, and who was ge|nerally well beloved, went several times from the Court to Paris, treat|ing of agreement between the King and Princes. Conde, who was natural|ly warily wise, as well as valiant, finding the sickleness of his party, was inclined to make his peace, yea, without the removal of the Cardinal; thinking it better to treat with him, who did at least give all men good words, then with others who were naturally violent, as was the Cardinal of Rets. But the Duke of Orleans being solicited by Rets, who wished Condes ruine, as well as that of Mazarine, was by ingenious ways still disswaded: So as Rets his presuming to get the supream Administration by the Prince his banishment, and by the remove of Mazarine, was, that which did chiefly divert the agreement. For Orleans being in a manner be|witched by Rets, did always oppose it.
Whilest things went thus in these parts, Count Harcourt was not idle in Guienne; but finding, that his men needed some rest, took up his Quar|ters beyond the Garomne, in the Condomise, and lay himself at Gondrine, intending to bring the Neighboring parts to give contribution, as he did. He tarried here, not doing any thing of much weight, save, that he re|duced the City of Condonne, and Port S. Mary, to the Kings obedience, driving the Prince his Men, out of their Quarters, and pursuing them to beyond the Garomne. But the Inhabitants of Agen, being exasperated to find that Conde would put a Garison there, thought it better to have re|course to the Kings clemency, then to throw themselves blindly into a party that could not subsist. They therefore treated with Harcourt, and in three days came to an agreement: The Count was honorably received into the City. This example drew after it the like of Marmanda, Clairack, and of Aiguilon, which all sent Commissioners to him, with Protestation of their Loyalty and Obedience. Harcourt sent his Nephew Bougy after|wards, with commanded Men to take Mas d' Agenois, a place advantagi|ously seated upon the Garomne, wherein was a Garison of above Five hundred Soldiers; towards which, the Kings men approaching quietly, and holding intelligence with the Prior of Pihon, and with a Consul of the Town, took it by Scalado, killing about One hundred of the Enemy, and

taking Four hundred; amongst which, were Lieutenant Colonel Lusignan, Marsigniack, Dilebert, and divers other Officers. After the Success of Agen, Harcourt went thither himself, and took an Oath of Loyalty from the Inhabitants of Montsegeure, and S. Basil, who willingly submitted. By these happy Successes, he thought to advance with all his Horse, to try whether the Burdelois might not peradventure have changed their resolu|tion of Disobedience; to which end, going from Mas d' Agenois to Brede, he sent a Trumpet with a Letter to the Giurati, and several other In|habitants of the City full of gracious Expressions, if they would return to their Obedience. But the Prince of County being there, with all the chiefest of his faction; the Trumpet was not let in, nor was the Letter re|ceived. The Royalists approached the Walls, and those within coming out, a great skirmish was had: But Harcourt not intending to tarry there, began to return; which the Burdelois believing to be done out of necessi|ty, and not of choice, they Sallied out with more Forces, and chased Savebeauss, and Coudry Monpeisiers Squadrons: But being repulsed with some loss, they returned to Burdeaux, and Harcourt continuing his march, and having also reduced Rious, he went to Marmanda, and there by means of a Bridge, which he caused S. Colombe to cast over, he past over his Horse into the Countrey, between the Seas to refresh them, and to con|tinue Contribution in that Countrey: Where Castilialouse was besieged, and taken by the Royalists, under the command of Count Marin.
More Corn being found to be in Estampes then vvas believed; and the Court not vvillingly induring the length of such a business, by vvhich the Spaniards made so great advantage; they resolved to fall upon the Army of the Princes, who being berest of this leaning stock, their whole designs were likewise to be ruined. They therefore bent all their thoughts upon the taking of Estampes. The King to this purpose went from S. Ger|mans to Melune; which being upon the Seene, and nearer Estampes, the Kings Camp might more easily receive aid, and be recruited from thence, and might at the same time obstruct the carriage of Victuals which were conveyed from those fruitful parts to Paris.
General Turenne, who after the aforesaid action, commanded solely the Kings Army, for Oquincourt was gone, as you have heard, into Picardy, went before Estampes; the Army appeared, partly on the right hand over against the Suburbs of S. Martin, and part on the left hand upon the Hills on this side the River; where he drew a Line, and placed his Batteries, to hinder their Sallying out, and to beat down a great Town. Which find|ing to be too strong he threw over a Bridge to the Capuchins Church, pass|ing Captain Segaime, with divers Muskettiers, into the Church, whereby the Enemies Foragers were hindred, and continual skirmishes hapned with reciprocal Fortune: For the Defendants were little less then equal; both for number and valor, to the Assailants. The Kings men being after|ward, by means of a Wall that was thrown down, gotten to an Earth|work which was raised in midst of a Courtein, they assaulted the Half-Moon of S. Martins Suburbs, which was taken, and retaken thrice, with loss of much blood. And here was Monsieur Shombert wounded by two Musket shot, near to the Duke of York, Brother to the King of England, who served as a Voluntier; as also Monsieur de Niaville, Son to the super|intendant of the Financiers, who died. Marquess Vardis, and Mancini, Mazarines Nephew, had their Horses shot under them; Monsieur Sorvia, being shot in the Foot, had his Leg afterwards cut off General Turenne hearing the noise came in with his own Regiment, and those of Naivales and Picardy, commanded by Monsieur Berbese. But the store of fire which

the besieged gave, made them retreat with some loss; whereupon Berbese advancing, drove the Enemy at last away, took the work, and planted his Banner upon the Parapet. The besieged indeavoured again to beat them out, but in vain. The next morning they sallied out upon the Pioniers, who were working in the Trenches, slew many of them, and beat the Troops which backed them, and kill'd a Lieutenant of the Gens de Armes Turenne coming in seasonably with some Voluntiers, withstood the Enemy who would have past the line, beat them back, and made the station good. So as the Kings men having gotten the said work, they got into the ditch, and fell to undermine the Walls of the Town, which they would certain|ly have won, had their mines plaid well; and what shall be related had not hapned; for the Princes finding that their Army could not subsist long in Estampes, by reason of their continual loss of Soldiers, prevailed with the Spaniards, that the Army of Duke Charles of Lorrain should come to succor them.
This Duke had wont every year Di far un tratto di Campagnia, to draw out into the field; for the which he received some monies, and was bound to serve them; they had ingaged him this year to go into France, to relieve the Princes, in order whereunto he marched with 4000 Foot, 500 Horse, and some pieces of Artillery, through Champagnia towards the Seene, to raise the siege of Estampes; and leaving his Forces at Lagni, he came to Paris, and was met without the Town, by Orleans, Conde, and all those of that party; whereupon the Court fearing Corveile, which was then an im|portant place, sent Monsieur Almerat presently away, with 500 Foot, 200 Horse, and six pieces of Canon, to guard that Town, and provided for all other Towns which were worth preserving.
Here the Duke of Lorrain visited divers great ones, and amongst the rest, the Dutchess of Chevereux, who was allied to his Family; who being a wise Woman, and of a great reach, making use of the jealousie which is always between the Princes of the blood, and the Dukes of Lorrain, and particularly against Conde, who was more considerable to the Spaniards than all the rest; told him it would be ill for him to assist them. The Duke embraced the Counsel willingly, that he might find a pretence, to perform his undertakings to the Spaniards, whom he had promised to relieve Estampes; thereupon Chasteauneuf writ to the Court, and received Autho|rity to negotiate with the Duke: wherefore they secretly agreed, that to disingage himself of his promise, and keep unblamed by the Spaniards, the siege of Estampes should be raised; making it appear that the conditi|on of the Kings Army required it; and that the next day after Turenne should be retreated from Estampes, Lorrain should promise to withdraw from the Frontiers of the Kingdom, to which purpose he should be furni|shed with Victuals and pay. The Princes knew by his guidance of affairs, that he held intelligence with the Court, and it may be they were adver|tised thereof by some private friend. They therefore went to his Camp to perswade him to pass over the Seene; but he told them they were to rest satisfied if the siege of Estampes were raised; and that there being hopes that the Court would be perswaded thereunto, it was needless for him to ingage himself any further. Conde told him the siege of Estampes would easily be raised, if he would afford them means of putting their men that were there in safety; for they could no longer subsist in a ruined place; so as after much discourse Lorrain was insensibly perswaded to make a Declaration in writing to Orleans, and Conde, wherein he ingaged himself to tarry a while in his quarters upon the Seene, in which time the Princes might withdraw their Forces from Estampes, and bring them nearer

Paris. The Kings Army being disingaged from the siege before Estampes, and the Court finding that Lorrain failed in performing his secret treaty with Chasteauneuf; Turenne marched speedily with his Army towards Cor|beille, intending to fight the Lorrainers, before they should pass the River and joyn with the Princes Forces; and when he came to face them, they being astonished, and affraid to be ingaged in a battle, retreated presently, and sheltred themselves by a little River, which falls there into the Seene. As the Kings Cavalry came towards Corbeille, they took divers Prisoners, which made Duke Charle's desire Beaueiu, who negotiated the agreement with him, to tell him why the Army marched against him, whilst he was in treaty with the Court. Turenne made him be answered, that he thought there was no more treaty with him, since he had failed in effecting his pro|mise, which if he would yet faithfully perform, he would advance no fur|ther allowing him four hours space for answer; which being past he waited an answer no longer, but marched presently without baggage a|gainst a Castle which the Duke held upon the River, within half a league of his quarters; which he took, and throwing a Bridg over the River, he past most of his Foot, and his Canon over, making the rest of his Army ford over a little higher, and came within shot of the Lorrainers, which Lorrain perceiving, he sent my Lord German, a near servant to the King of England, and who had interessed himself in the agreement to Turenne to let him know he was ready to make his word good. Turenne answered, that this had been good the day before, but that now being ready to fight, and he not having kept his word, there were no more words to be made of any preceeding treaty, for the face of affairs was changed. But he sent Monsieur Varennes back with my Lord Germain to find the Duke out, and to tell him he would not forbear falling on, unless the Duke would give him the Bridg of Boats which he had upon the Seene, unless he would also forbear to fortifie, and return presently by the way that he would appoint him, and get out of France within fifteen days, and give him Hostages hereupon. The Duke after having made some difficulty, was again threatned by Turenne; whereupon he consented to all that was desired, upon condition that Turenne should not make use of the Boats which he gave him, to go against the Princes Army, and that the Princes Forces that were with him, might have a pass to return to Paris: that conduct money might be given him for his march, and fifteen days allowed him to get out of the Kingdom. That Marcouse, and Vaubecourt should be given for Hostages on the Kings behalf; and Count Linville, and the Ge|neral of the Artillery, on the Dukes with promise that no Hostility should be committed in his march; the treaty was thus stipulated by Turenne, much to his glory; which being concluded in the face of both Armies, the Lorrainers began presently to march towards Bria.
Whilst things went thus in these parts, the Parliament who now that Lorrain was come, thought they had hit the nail on the head, raising their pretensions still higher, sent President Nesmond again to the Court to insist upon sending the Cardinal away; the Commissioners being come to Melune, made the Parliaments desire known, adding that it was a small business for a King to deprive himself of a Servant, whereby he was to re|gain the obedience of so many, who had withdrawn themselves from it, only out of that respect. The King returned his answer in writing;
That having often heard the Remonstrances made by his Parliament, where|in they still asserted their intentions to maintain regal Authority, and that they would always contribute their chiefest power to the advantage of his service;

and that finding the wound did now begin to Gangrene without speedy remedy, he desired that their Commissioners might meet with his Privy Council, to the end that they might joyntly find some remedy for the threatning mischief: and to keep his people from the apparent ruine, whereinto they were ready to fall, through the capricious unquietness, and ambition of some sew; and that his Majesty indeavoured nothing more than how to restore his Kingdom to its for|mer splendor.
When Nesmond had read this answer, he reply'd, That the only way to satisfie all, was to send away the Cardinal; The King thus interrupted him, and with a serious aspect said, You have heard my pleasure; no more words.
The Commissioners returned to Paris, where they gave an exact account to their Companions of what had past. Many were for accepting the propounded Conferences; but Brussels, with an appearing zeal to the com|mon welfare, was firm that there needed no other Conference, or negotia|tion, since all was reduced to one sole head, which was the sending away the Cardinal, who being the sole occasion of all resentments, they must stand upon it; for this being had, all controversies would be ended. And the more averse he found the King to part with him, the more he prest it; not for that he cared much for it, but that knowing how difficult a busi|ness it would be, he might nourish the diffidences, and maintain discord. For it was apparent, that if the Parliament had believed that the King would have parted with the Cardinal, and with that re-unite the Princes to his service, he would never have pretended thereunto, but would have underhand indeavoured his tarrying; for it did not make for him, that the Kings Authority should be the more fortified by the joyning of the Prin|ces with his Majesty, and that consequently the pretences of the Parlia|ment should languish. Brussels opinion being adhered unto, it was decreed that the Commissioners without any delay should return again to the King, and tell his Majesty, that they had nothing to add, nor to propose, but the effectual dismissing of the Cardinal, in conformity to the decrees, and Declarations made by his Majesty, and to the protestation made by the Princes, who were ready to lay down Arms as soon as the Cardinal should be gon out of the Kingdom. Letters written from the Queen of Sweeden to the Parliament, were given to the Commissioners, to be delivered to the King, the content whereof was, her offering her self to interpose as a friend and confederate to the Crown of France, in agreeing all parties. The Commissioners came to Melune the 12th. of Iune, and had Audience two days after, they represented the desolation of the State by the Cardi|nals return, which they said was the only cause of all the disturbances of the Kingdom. The business was referred to the Council of State, and the answers examined; the Cardinal renued his many former desires, that he might be dismist, saying it was not fit that the peace of the Kingdom should be confounded merely for him. This the King denyed, saying, that he was master, and was to be served by whom he pleased, and that none but God could prescribe laws to him. The next Sunday the Commissio|ners had Audience again, wherein the King gave them a writing, saying, that thereby they should know his pleasure. Monsieur Vrilliere read it, and gave it to President Nesmond, wherewith he went to Paris; the con|tents of the Letter were these;
That the King did very much wonder, seeing there were so many wise and well advised Subjects in the Parliament, that they should not know the desire of dismissing the Cardinal, was but a specious and nice pretence, since the true cause

of all the troubles appeared to be the interest, and ambition of those who had took up Arms and waged War when the Cardinal was in Germany, dismist from the Court and Government, which made it clearly appear that the maladies of a State are not cured, whilst pretences are stood upon, the roots whereof produce as many mischiefs as by those pretences are desired to be cut off; so there was no remedy that would do good, but to pluck up the chiefest and deepest evil by the Root. That if his Majesty should permit the Cardinal to withdraw himself into some forreign imployment, with due respect to his honour, how should he be secured that the Male-contents would be quieted, since his departure in the be|ginning of the last year, had rather augmented, than moderated the troubles; so as it was not to be hoped it should fall out otherwise, when he should be gone again, unless the cause which produced the effect were presently taken away. That his Majesty did desire speedy and permanent quiet to his Subjects, that they might not fall into the former inconveniences; the rather for that he knew well, that at the same time when the Princes declared they were ready to lay down Arms, if the Cardinal were sent away, they provided for the contrary by strengthning their party with Forreigners, and by seducing other of his Ma|jesties Subjects from their obedience; that what the Duke of Orleans had said some days before to the Commonalty of Paris, touching his having no power over the Duke of Lorrains men, which he had boasted to have brought, was not like to that which he had affirmed in Parliament; that the treaty made with the Spaniards by the Prince of Conde, mentioned not laying down of Arms, if the Cardinal were sent away, nor indeed could it be spoken of, since he was in Germany when it was made. That therefore the Princes were to give real, and positive security for performing what they promised; wherefore he desired to know whether they renounced all leagues, and associations made with Forreig|ners, and all particular treaties had, and made with his Majesties Subjects against his Royal service; whether they would not pretend to somewhat else, when the Cardinal should be gone, and whether they would come to his Majesty and serve him as they ought, if the Cardinal should be gone; whether or no they would send the Forreigners out of the Kingdom which they had called in, and would promise that the Spanish and Lorrain Forces should retire, without giving them that which they might pretend to, to the prejudice of the State. Whether those who in their names made War with his Majesty in divers parts of his Kingdom, should be dismist? Whether the Spaniards who were in Stenay, Bourg, Guienne, and in other parts would retire or no, and in case they would not, how Conde could force them to go? Whether the Prince of County, and the Dutchess of Longueville would do their Devoirs? and whether Conde had power or no to promise for them? Whether County would forego all pre|tentions? Whether they had all of them joyntly Authority from those of condi|tion who had followed them, to answer for their obedience; and that they should renounce all the leagues and confederacies, which they had made against him? Whether the Cities, and places fortified, and guarded in the name of the Prince of Conde, would put themselves into the same condition they were before? Whether Burdeaux would submit to do its duty? and whether the decrees made against his Majesties service, since these present Commotions, should be revoked; and all things put into the same posture they ought to be, according to the Articles of his Majesties Declaration in December, 1649. which things when he should be assured they should be done without any Cavils, or new pretences, it might easily be believed that the remedy should be found out to cure the malady under which the Kingdom laboured.

When this Letter was read in Parliament, the Duke of Orleans said it was wholly dictated by the Cardinal, and that not being well informed of the Customs of France, he questioned the Princes of the Blood, by way of Interrogatories; which was not a thing usually practised. And that since they had often declared, as they did now at this present, That they would lay down Arms as soon as the Cardinal should be gone out of France there was no need of further security: All things being done in sincerity, and without equivocation. Yet this was long argued in the Assembly, wherein it was proposed by those of the Kings party, that Commissioners should be sent again to his Majesty, with authority to treat of Peace, which was so necessary to the State. Counsellor Brussels was still fixt to his resolution of refusing all Conferences, and that they were only to exe|cute their Declaration. Other Counsellors not speaking of such affairs, said, That it was necessary to think upon some means how to maintain so many poor people. The Provost added, Who will give me Bread? Coun|sellor Betault answered, That one who had Three thousand five hundred pounds sterling a year, ought not fear to die of Famine. Thus some sharp words past between them.
The One and twentieth of Iune, the Chambers met again, where two Propositions were made, the one, How to maintain the poor; the other, To raise Fifty thousand Crowns as a reward for the Cardinals Head; if any would undertake the business. But this was for that time laid aside, and it was only resolved to raise One hundred thousand Crowns for re|lief of the poor, every Counsellor being to pay Ten pound sterling there|unto; there being many of them paid purposely, that they might come and exclaim at the Parliament door, and make a tumult which might ob|lige the Assembly to joyn with the Princes, which was apparently their design; to the end, that they might necessitate Paris to raise moneys, and other things for the maintenance of the War, by crying when the Coun|sellors went out of the Palace, Bread, Peace, and a fig for Mazarine. They shut the doors upon some of the Parliament, insulted over President Bail|leule, and evilly treated many others, amongst which, Monsieur Vassan, and the Sons of Monsieur Emery were kept four hours in a private shop, but were afterward set free by Beaufort, who went thither himself in person; and as he returned to the Palace, said aloud, That this was not the right way, but that they were to meet in some place, and think how they might demand right from the Mazarinians. He therefore wished them to come to the Palace Royal that night, where he vvould be, where every one might propound their opinions. Thither came four or five thousand of them, vvhere Beaufort told them, They did not vvell to go bavvling be|fore the Palace, and pretend to force Justice, oppressing as vvell the good, as the bad. But that they vvere to distinguish, and that Tvventy four of them ought to desire the Counsellors to declare vvho vvere Mazarinians, and vvho not, vvhereby they might knovv the Mazarinians, and fall up|on them in all places. He found the common people ready to follovv his advice, and disposed them all easily to fury and sedition; so ending his discourse, He said he vvould expect them the next morning at the Palace. The Provost des Merchants hearing this, acquainted all the Quarters, and Colonels vvith it, ordering them to have their Chains ready; and that the Inhabitants should be prepared to come forth Armed upon the first Summons.
Nothing vvas spoken of the Streets, but of assaulting the Parliament, vvherein they said, there vvere many Mazarinians, vvho vvould declare themselves. The people cried aloud to Conde as he entred the Palace,

That they would have Peace; to whom he said, He desired the same, and that he indeavored it, but without Mazarine. The Parliament fearing sedition, met not on the Twenty second of Iuly, as they ought to have done; but the Frondeurs appeared there; the Presidents met in Ballieules house, to re|solve what to do, which the Prince hearing, he went to intreat them in his own name, and in the name of Orleans, to come to the Palace after dinner. Which they refused to do, saying, That there was a conspiracy against them, and that they could not be their safe. Conde treated Ballieule spightfully at first, threatning, That if he came not to the Palace, Orleans and he would deal with him little to his liking. But when he saw the other Presidents were of the same opinion, and that they valued not his threats, he fell to intreaties. He desired the President to speak with Orleans, which he refused to do, saying, That all was but Beauforts cheats, whose designs he well knew. He again desired him, and assured him he should re|ceive no wrong; so as at last he prevailed with him.
Orleans prest him very much, that the Parliament might meet that day. Ballieule answered, That the Assembly was resolved not to meet, unless their safety might be provided for; that the Duke of Beaufort had discovered his bad opinion: And that though the Presidents and Counsellors should be assu|red not to meet with any offence, they could not come together before the Twen|ty fifth of that Moneth. Whilest they were upon this discourse, Beaufort came in, who appeared much astonished, that he should be blamed for the last days sedition; and that a Soldier should be imprisoned that swore against him. But the Duke of Orleans was not well satisfied with Ballieule, that the meeting of the Parliament should be denied. The same night, whilest President Maison was going to L'Hostelle d'Orleans, as he came out, he was followed by many Plebeians, who cried, A Mazarinian, and kill him. He got into the next House, the door whereof was assaulted, that they might have him out; but Beaufort and Conde coming in, kept him from danger, and brought him to L'Hostelle d'Orleans, assuring the people, That he was no Mazarinian. At last, on the Twenty fifth of Iune, the Assemblies met, being assured by the Princes, that they should not be injured by the people. And here Orleans and Conde declared, That if the King would send the Cardinal away, according to his Decla|ration of the Sixth of September last, they would readily do what was de|sired inthe Kings Letter, which was brought by their Commissioners. After this, there was no more rubs in the business; only, whether this De|claration should be sent by the Kings men, or by the Commissioners of Parliament, who had been imployed formerly, or by others that should be chosen out of each Chamber, whereunto all the Princes consented, excepting Nesmond, whom they suspected to have brought Moneys in his late imployments from the Court; and that he held secret Conference with Mazarines friends.
This clause caused no little confusion in the Assembly; all the Coun|sellors holding it very strange, that they should be guided by the will of the Princes, where their Votes ought to be free, and independent. This business was argued three hours, and the wiser sort thinking the Princes pretentions, to be unsupportable, bewailed the misfortune of the times: And finding palpably, that to shun obedience to the King, they fell into the subjection of the Princes, they found, that they must use the Princes, as the Court had done the Parliament, refusing all things that might pro|ceed from another authority. For in such cases, by degrees desires turn to commands; and he who would not be forced to obey, ought not suffer commands. They therefore resolved to send back the same Nesmond, and

the other Commissioners, to tell the King, That if the Cardinal were sent away according to the Declaration of the Sixth of September, the Princes would lay down Arms, and do all that his Majesty demanded of the Parlia|ment.
Thus the Assembly ended, and at the coming forth, the Counsellors were kept back by a croud of people, crying out, Peace and union with the Princes; whereby it appeared, that their design was to make the Parlia|ment, and the City declare; for many of the Soldiers of the Army were got among the Plebeians, which caused a dangerous commotion against the whole Parliament, many of the Counsellors whereof, were pursued into the Neighboring Houses, not without danger of life, for many shot were made at them. Many men were slain, and many wounded; Presi|dent Noion had great fortune to escape, for he was pursued by the people thorough two or three Streets. The Lieutenant of Civil Causes got into the Castle with some Counsellors, where he was beset by the rout, who thought to fire it; not being able to get in by reason of the number of Guard that defended it, and they had fired it, had it not been for Mon|sieur Mitton, Colonel of that Quarter, who with his Company made them retreat. Other Counsellors and Presidents shifted for themselves the best they could; the sedition lasted till night drew on, with much hor|ror and confusion. It was mightily declaimed against, not only in Par|liament, but in the Town-house, and it was resolved to provide for the common safety.
When the Parliament met, Monsieur Champrond was ordered to make process against the chief Authors of the Sedition; as also against those that had printed and published infamous Libels against the Court and Parliament; moreover, a Monatorio Ecclesiastico, a De|claration of the Clergy was given out against the Complices of the a|foresaid things; and the Provost des Merchants, Consuls, and Sheriffs, and other chief Citizens, resolved, That the Captains and Colonels of each quarter, should have their Guards in readiness, and should place a Corps de Guard about the publick Palace, to keep off further insolen|ces, and preserve the freedom of Parliament. But sufficient provision not being had for the desired quiet, there being more that followed the party of the Princes, then of the Parliament, and Council of the City, it was concluded, That the most expedient means for the indempnity of Paris, and the Parliament, should be taken in a General Assembly of all the In|habitants on the Fourth of Iuly.
The Duke of Lorrain being this mean while, dis-incamped from Villa Nova, he went on the Seventeenth of Iune, to Briacomte Rubert; from thence by Columniere to Secana, and so by degrees, till he got out of the Kingdom, which caused apprehensions, that he had betrayed the Princes, and which caused great trepidations in those that were of the contrary faction to the Court. It being thought, that the Kings Army being free from the Lorrainers, should incamp before Paris, and that the Princes should be forced to comply; but when the truth was known, the Duke was justified, and it was known, that all was caused by the Spaniards, who were afraid, That if the Duke of Lorrain should stay in France, and joyn with the Princes, the King would be forced to make peace; and the Car|dinal would be dismissed. Wherefore they sent for him back, to the end, That the Court being strengthned by his retreat, might not moderate her pretentions, but maintain those divisions, which it made for them, to soment.

The Kings Army being gone from Estampes, where there was no more Corn, and the place much infected by the dead bodies of Men, and Horses which lay unburied, the rest of the Forces were made to remove, and abandon that Town, which was more then half distroyed; when through the news that was given out, that Lorrain had betrayed the Princes, whose Army was thereby exposed to the iujuries of the Kings Forces, who might pass over the Seene upon the Bridge of Boats, which was surrendred by the Lorrainers. The Prince went out with only twenty Horse, amongst which, were the Dukes of Rochefaucolt, and Nemeurs, and Prince Marilliack, and went, not without danger of being taken, to joyn with his men, who were marching towards Paris, and came with them to the Seene, over against Villanova S. George, where the Kings Army lay. And the next day hearing, what had past in treaty with Duke Charles, he came to between S. Clow and Surenne, within two leagues of Paris, on the River side, and upon the way to S. Germans, whither those few For|ces that they had in Paris, were also sent, wherewith they made a Camp of about Five thousand men. Which Army was provided of all things ne|cessary from Paris: All which was done at the expence of the Princes; for they could never get money, nor any thing else from the Parisians: But only free commerce, popular affection, and a receptacle upon need. Wherefore the Prince knowing he could not long subsist, unless that the City, and Parliament, would publickly declare for him, he used all means to make them both second his designs, and at last used vio|lence, by which he became odious, and overthrew all his concern|ments.
The Castle of S. Vincent being in these emergencies, a place of no small consideration, it was recruited with One hundred Soldiers by Count Chavigny, Captain thereof, who was then in Paris, a great Confident of Condes, and a prime Adviser of the Anti-Cardinalists. Many other pro|visions were likewise had for the common concernment; and the Spani|ards were solicited by many Messengers for assistance; and to enter France from Flanders, with a powerful Army, to drive the Kings Forces from about Paris: But the Catholick Agents not intending to assist the Princes more then to maintain their pretences, that by the troubles in France they might work their advantage in Flanders, Italy, and Catalonia, they fed their hopes now and then with moneys, not thinking that affairs were yet brought to such straits, as that they were to neglect their own occasions, to suppress strangers; nor did the Princes and Frondeurs omit to foment such Burdelois as were desirous of novelties. And here it must needs be pleasant to hear how divisions arose amongst those of the same party.
It is a known truth, that one fault committed draws on another, and that he who cannot indure lawful Dominion, will not tolerate unjust usur|pation. The Frondeurs of Burdeaux divided themselves into two factions, one whereof was called the Little Fronda, whose Chief was Monsieur Mirate, with whom the President Dasis and Pichon, Todiasport and Fonte|nele, all of them friends to Conde, and who called him into Burdeaux. These divided the Province amongst them, that they might get the Kings Taxes. Monsieur Guionet went towards Tolouse, to Count Marsin, where|at the Parliament of Languedock took such offence, as those who were the Kings friends, took occasion thereby to keep the people in obedience to his Majesty. Monsieur Mousuiere went to the Haganoise; and La Roche to S. Onge, as superintendent of Condes Army. Fryard and Halen were made superintendents of the Sea Coast. So as this Little Fronda took upon them|selves the managing of all the moneys for War, which they themselves

had for that end raised; moreover in the Princes their Council, were the Presidents Dasis and Pichon, and Messieurs Tarang, Mirat, and Grimart, these were of the great Fronda. In the same Council President Gourges, Blanck, Movesine, and Espenet. The great Fronda were very jealous of the confi|dence which those of the lesser had in the Princes. Divers Parliamenta|rians were of the grand Fronda, who met in the same Gourges his house, where making use of the peoples murmuring against the arrogancy, and greediness of the petite Frondeurs, who made merry with the present miseries to that excess, that Guionet having invited his friends one day to Dinner, bid them eat chearfully, for all that was before them was the blood of the people; so as by this and such extravagant proceedings they soon turn'd patience into fury, so as the grand Frondeurs had a plausible pretence to accuse those of the lesser Fronda as Authors of all the disor|ders, which did afterwards ruine the Princes affairs; wherefore to satisfie them, it was agreed that, Remont one of the grand Fronda, and de Due, and Espenet should be imploy'd also in gathering the aforesaid Taxes. It was also ordered that the Council of the Olmiera should be govern'd by the lesser Fronda, who to please the fury of the Olmiera, did Sacrifice as Vi|ctims, divers of the Kings faithful Subjects; and in an extraordinary as|sembly did declare Salamon the Father and Son, Bernet, Montisquiou, and de Aribe, to be suspected persons. The Advocate brought in a bill con|taining their names; and the names of the Atturny General Pontack, Mas|quedet, and Doctor Roche; who though they were adjudged by the Par|liament, to be suspected persons, and therefore to be sent out of the City, they were notwithstanding exempted, for having been zealous for the pub|lick in the former War, and only the first three were banished. They also prohibited the meeting of the Olmiera, but it was continued under the protection of the Prince of County, and Dutchess of Longueville, who were desirous to lessen the Parliaments power, for that it would predomi|nate over all things, especially since the Prince of Conde was parted from Paris. Wherefore it was resolved on the 14th. of May, that a decree should be made against the Olmiera, and that it should be proclaimed by the Hussieri, Ushers; but those who undertook it were beaten by the Olmi|risti; then being invited by Monsieur Tarang, who threatned to hang them, they went in great numbers to the Parliament, in a tumultuous manner, desiring that the decree might be repeal'd, and in a threatning manner forbidding them to proceed any further; and their rage increasing, they took up Arms, and drove out fourteen of the Parliament, whereof President Pion was one, though he was a Pensioner of Spain, and more a friend to Conde than the rest. Count Marsin, and Leuet advertised Conde of this, blaming the Prince of County, and Dutchess Longueville, as those who were the Authors of all novelties for their peculiar interests; to ballance which Marsin and Lenet were to weaken the faction of the Olmiera, by means of the Parliament.
The Prince answered these Letters, that he intended the Olmiera should be put down; which being ill taken by the Olmerists, they went that very night to Cornet Mercatante's House, with whom Monsieur Giurato Fon|tinelle supped, who being surprised at the Audaciousness of these seditious men, suddenly assembled the quarter of le Chappreaux, who falling upon them and shooting at them from the Windowes, slew Monsieur Lort, who was their chief, and wounded four more mortally: the Parliament being highly incensed at this popular insolence, met the next day, where the Giurati declared what mischief had happened, and Conde's Letters were read, upon which a general Amnesty was resolved upon for all the sediti|ons;

but they were prohibited meeting together. The fourteen that were lately banished were re called; but not those that were first expell'd; as being thought too partial to the Court. The Olmerists were hereat migh|tily scandalized; they met again at the Abby of St. Croix, pretending to provide for the defence of certain Towns upon the Garomne, which if they should fall into the Kings hands, would block up the way for coming to buy Victuals. Monsieur Guiraute, one of the Giurati having notice of their meeting, indeavoured to separate them, which not being able to do neither by fair words nor foul, he went to the quarter of the Chappeaux Rouge where were the exil'd Officers, and the rest of the lesser Fronda, who with their adherents made about 300, and dividing them went in Squadrons to meet the Olmeristi, who by Blanck, the Procurators direction had taken the publick Palace; he fell valiantly upon them, and broke some of their Barracadoes; but not being backed by Fontenella's Squa|dron, he could not perfect his design. The Dutchess of Longueville by her fair words, and by her Majestical aspect, made them face about, and the Princess of Conde, as one who strove with her Husband for glory and ap|plause, came into a Street next to the publick market, and by her Authori|ty, kept the Olmerists from assaulting the Parliament; whereof two or three were slain by shot out of the Windowes. The confusion being thus ceased, and the parties parted by these two Princesses; The Olmerists, being fomented by the Dutchess of Longueville were still resolved not to be supprest by the Parliament; but as Inhabitants of the City, pretended to be the chief directors thereof; for having forgon their obedience to the King they thought it not fit to be subject to the Parliament which was full of interessed people, and govern'd by ambition: being thus perswaded they possest themselves of all the principal stations. That very night, those who were in the quarter of the Chappreaux Rouge remaining there, fomented by Lenet, and by the Princess of Conde, to moderate the power of County, and of Dutchess Longueville. Lenet having assigned over the publick house of Convoy, to a particular assembly of some Counsellors of the lesser Fronda, but finding many Citizens of the faction of Chappreaux Rouge who were well vvishers to the King, and unconcern'd in their par|ty; as also that the Parliament too proud of their successes vvould quell all superiour Authority, or those vvho they vvere jealous off, and conside|ring moreover that the greatest part, if not all the Olmerists vvere mean people, easie to be corrupted by monies; Lenet joyned vvith the Dutchess of Longueville, and they caused the alteration vvhich happened on the 24th. of Iune, vvherefore the Olmerists the next day, being assisted by some Giurati, and Captains of the Wards, vvith many Officers of the Troops mingled amongst them, met armed in good order, vvith Drums beating, giving out that Harcourt drevv near the City, and demanded that Monsieur Belgarde Montaspau, and of the Advocate General Saut, that Fountenelle, and Giraut, who were Giurati, should be delivered up unto them, and made the same desire to Monsieur Chavignack who was come some few days before to Burdeaux with orders from the Prince to appease them; and the meaner sort of people impatient of not being speedily re|solved by the Princesses; having assembled the field Corporals of both the Fronda's, and the other prime Officers and Citizens came out of the Palace publickly with two pieces of Canon, and about 2000 armed men, commanded by some of Conde's Captains, and with an Elm and other Wood in a Cart, to fire the quarter of the Chappreaux Rouge, and threatning to plunder it; at the noise whereof the two Princesses desired Pichon, and Dasis, and others of the lesser Fronda, to un-arm their houses, to the

end that the people meeting with no resistance, and finding the doors open, might want pretence to vent their fury: but they continuing their opini|on, that the people being naturally poorly spirited would be quell'd by vigorous resolutions, began to shoot at them out at the Windowes; whereat the people being more incens'd, they brought their Canon to be|fore the House of Pay Paulin, where they were received with a shower of shot from Pichon's house, and from another house where la Roche, Guionet, and Vrest were with Ten of their friends who did so valiantly defend themselves, as above One hundred of the Olmerists being hurt, they set fire on both the houses, and barbarously plunder'd Pichon's house, who by chance was then in the Princess her house. The fire was violentest in the house where la Roche was, which was totally burnt, and he himself had much ado to escape. Other houses were likewise plundered; the facti|ouspeople would have committed greater disorders, had not the Princess and Dutchess of Longueville interposed, who caused the Hostia to be car|ried, which was conducted by Tobias Giurato, who labour'd much for his friends the Frondeurs, some of which were gotten into Counsellor Thiebauts house, imploring the Princesses protection, and obtain'd that the whole Company of the grand Fronda might come along with them, who with Bows of Elms in their Hats counselled the people who were their friends to retire; which they did, and carried back the three pieces of Artillery into the publick Palace. The next day they set three great Elms upon the Steples of St. Michael, St. Eulalia, and St. Remigio, mixing red Standerds with them, which was ill taken by the good French, as if it had denoted favour to Spain. The Prince of County being returned from Libourn, found the City in such a condition, as he was glad to make use of the Olmi|era as of a Theater wherein the peoples fury, and Princes interests were acted.
A certain Priest who was a melancholy Astrologer, imagined that City might be made a Commonwealth; which he Communicated to President Hosteime, and held intelligence with the English, to whom the Olmiera writ their design; but the Prince of County being acquainted with this Caballe, and that a certain English man, called Edward Sigisby treated hereupon incognito in Burdeaux; he forthwith assembled the Olmiera, and made a discreet speech unto them, wherein he caused them to resolve never to talk any more of a Commonwealth, nor of any thing else with Forreigners without the Princes their express consent. A month after Hosteime and the Astrologian Priest were expell'd the Town, which had like to have occa|sioned some uprore, had it not been for the Duke of Guise, who was then come from Spain as you shall hear hereafter: whilst the Prince of County and Dutchess of Longueville were sick, the Olmiera met daily in the com|mon Palace, to the number of Thirty Counsellors and Four Presidents, which were every month changed. These treated of the civil Govern|ment of the City, whilst the other Twelve judged Criminals; but nothing was binding, save in the general assembly or the Lords day: wherein all those whose names were written in the Catalogue of the Olmiera, which were about 1000 mean base people, who concluded articles of Union, under the title of serving the King, Country, and Princes, vowing to de|fend the meanest of them that had any deliberative vote in the publick meetings of Citizens, even to death.
For other things, little of remark was done by the Armies in these parts: for both sides were equally weak. Their happened only two con|siderable actions; the one near Roche Shirles, where the Count Mora be|ing advanced with some of the Prince his Troops, to surprise Monsieur

de Folevilles Quarter: Foleville repulsed him, and took many prisoners, amongst which, were La Mora himself, who was wounded in the head, Count Chatelus, who commanded the Prince his Gens d' Armes; and Mon|sieur Fourville. The other incounter was made by Colonel Baltazar, near the Castle Montiresi; who foarding over a River with his Horse, fell so vigorously upon the Kings Troops, that they abandoned the Marquess of Montousie; who being wounded in the Arm, was forced to retreat, the rest were all routed, many of the Nobles wounded and slain. Baron Mon|tendre was taken prisoner; Monsieur Nieull was killed; Baltazar took the Kings Baggage, and took also the Castles of Montanse and Bordoilles, wherein he took much Stuff, and put a Garrison into the White Tower.
Some Tumults hapned in Provence, but they were soon pacified by Duke Mercures vigilancy.
All this while the Court ceased not to treat of peace with the Princes, and particularly with Conde; nor had it been impossible to reduce him, had he not been diverted by the Cardinal de Retz, and others, for whom Quiet was not good. Retz kept Orleans continually of a contrary mind; wherefore Conde being unwilling to countervene the Duke, with whom he had so often faithfully promised to joyn, all Proposals met with difficul|ties, and were interrupted. The Court used the best means it could to render these machinations invalid. The best way was thought to make the Parisians aware of their error; which when they should be, it would not be hard to stave them from off the rest, and the Princes wanting the aid of Paris, would soon have all their machinations destroyed.
Upon these considerations, the Court went from Melune about the end of May, and came to S. Dennis, within a league of Paris, to incourage what was undertaken by the Kings friends there: The King used univer|sal clemency, treating them all, as if they had been all equally affection|ate. And to let them see it was not his intention to block them up, as the Princes gave out, he kept commerce open: The Kings Army which was conducted by Marishal Turenne, followed the King, and being recruited with Three thousand men by Marishal dela Ferte Senetre, who was joyned with Turenne, in command of the Army, incamped near S. Dennis, on the left hand, near the Seene toward Paris which was invironed beyond the River, on the West side by the Kings Forces; who might at their pleasure block up the River, and reduce the City to greater straits of Victuals then it was yet in. This was taken by the Kings Council to be the best expedi|ent: For the people, unable to indure Famine, and the Citizens being de|barred Traffick, which was their sustenance; and finally, being annoyed by the ruine which was daily made in their Territories, as well by Friends as Foes, they would resolve to free themselves from so long slavery. But for all these inconveniences suffered by Paris, yet were the Inhabitants so obstinate, trusting to the Princes and Frondeurs, as hoping soon to see all the Mazarinians destroyed (for so they called all the Kings party) they thought not of their own undoing, which made them the more willingly undergo their sufferings. The King not being able by these ways to re|duce the people who were backed by the Army, and by the Princes, in|deavored to destroy the Forces of the Princes; which not being thought to be hard, their Camp not being fortified, nor well seated, and not half so many as the Kings: Order was taken for all things fitting for the enter|prise, before the Spaniards should come with their promised recruits. On the Twenty ninth of Iune, Turenne came to the River to cast a Bridge of Boats over, beneath spenay, where passing over the Seene, he might As|sault

the Camp at S. Clow. Which giving an Alarm to the Princes Army, Count Tavannes dispatched away One hundred and fifty commanded Foot, and as many Horse, under Camp master Goville, that he might in|terrupt the Kings Works, till he might be ready to march thither with the rest of the Forces. Goville went, and finding the Bridge already ad|vanced to the Island in the midst of the River between Argenteule and E|pivalle, and that the Artillery was carried to the opposite Bank, sent word presently to Tavannes, who was ready to get on Horsback; and hastning his march came to the Bridge, accompanied by several Officers, and sent to acquaint Conde with it. Tavannes retreated to a Village near the River; and hearing that the Kings men past over returned to the opposit shore to hinder their landing: Who finding the attempt not feasible, was content to quit it. Then leaving Fifty Foot, and One hundred and fifty Horse, to Guard the Station, he returned to his Quarter at S. Clow, the Prince of Conde having this mean while gathered together as many of his Friends as he could in Paris, gallopped to that place, and calling Tavennes and his Horse to him, he fell upon the Kings Forces which were drawn up upon the Rivers Bank, seeming, as if they would perfect the Bridge, and pass over to entertain the Prince, whilest the rest should pass over beneath Poissy. But Conde discovering the design, and fearing least the Kings Army would pass at Espeney, and Assault him, he called a Council of War, and resolved to remove his Camp from S. Clow, and carry it to Charenton, as a safer place, where he had the Marne on his back, and was flanked by the Seene. He therefore on the first Munday of Iuly, went from S. Clow two hours before Sunset, past over the Seene upon the Stone-bridge; and upon another Bridge of Boats, and marched towards Paris. But finding Orders given at all the Gates, that no Soldiers whatsoever should be suffer|ed to pass, he made his Army march along the Ditch Richelieu, and con|tinued his march towards Charenton. About half an hour after midnight, the Cardinal had news hereof from a Confident of his, that lay concealed in Paris; who made his servant be let down over the Wall, and sent word thereof speedily to Marishal Turenne; who, without loss of time, Horsed his men, and about five of the clock the next morning, met the Prince his Rear, as they were entring S. Dennis, and were so briskly charged by Count Navailes, las County his Regiment suffered very much; and a Squa|dron of Conde which was with him, fared no better.
Conde being come to Paris, went to L'Hostelle d'Orleans to confer with the Duke, and went presently again out of Le Porte S. Martine, running like Lightning through his whole Army, and sending divers paies to|wards S. Dennis, to inquire after the Kings men; he ordered Cot Ta|vannes to continue his march, and sent Monsieur di Foruemont again with some Horse, to discover the number of the Enemy; whom he discovered from the top of Mountmarter, to be putting themselves into Battle Array. The Prince finding his design discovered, and that consequently, whether he should advance or retreat, his loss would be irreparable, ordered Monsieur Beaean to send a Squadron of men to the top of Mountsaucon, to observe the Kings proceeding; and that the rest of his men should go to Pickepuses, and to the Suburbs of S. Antoine, thinking to defend him|self there; and the rather, for that he found part of: the same Suburbs al|ready fortified by Baracadoes made formerly by the inhabitants, for fear of the Lorrainers. The Kings Camp, and all the Court, was already on Horsback, being resolved either to conquer that day, or to end the War; not only in respect of the superiority of their men, but by reason of the long way the Prince was to go with his Baggage.

The Cardinal was so confident of this, as having given fitting orders to Turenne, he brought the King to the top of Sarone, that he might be an eye witness of so famous an action; and being upon the point of having the Prince either dead or alive, he sent to his friends in Paris, wishing them to be of good courage; and that they should by all means take care, that the Gates might not be opened for the Enemy to retreat; nor for succor to be sent them from the City. The Kings Army being come to Vilette, within half a league of Paris, and knowing that the Army of the Princes was gone; from whence, if they could have light upon them, they would undoubtedly have routed them. Marishal Turenne going on the left hand, past by the Hills of Sarone, and came into the Plain; the Fauxburg, S. An|toyne and Charenton, drawing all his Troops out in order, whilest the rest stayed on the right hand with Marishal Ferte Senetre. And though the Prince being got to underneath the Walls of Paris, had the advantage of place; yet the Kings men knowing that he could not withstand them, and the Court being assured that the Princes their Forces, should not be re|ceived back into Paris, they having been kept out the night before, they resolved to advance boldly, and to fall upon some Squadrons which were advanced into the Suburbs, and who were pursued even into the Houses. Here the Prince, who with unparalleld valor bore the whole weight of that important fight, made use of his wit where his Forces failed; and gallopping on all sides, divided all his Men in form following.
His Highness Brigade was placed on the left hand of the Suburbs, those of Languedock, Vallois, and Ligueron, on the right; Conde and Bur|gondes Brigades on the right hand; that of Languedock and that of Pel|leins, at the Baracado, in the way which leads to the Castle of Vin|cennes. And wanting Foot to furnish all the stations, he ordered some of the Cavalry to back the Foot: The Artillery was placed at the Heads of the Streets of the Suburbs; and all the Avenues were Trenched and Bara|cadoed.
General Turenne having drawn out his Majesties Army in good order, designed the French Guards to Assault his Highness, and Languedock, and the Brigades of Picardy; and Marine to Assault the Vallois. Two Bat|teries were placed against the Baracado which was Guarded by Tavannes: One plaid upon the High-street of the Suburbs, and the other on the Street which answers to the great Market.
Things being thus ordered, whilest the Prince was ordering his men how to defend themselves, the Kings men came on furiously, charging the Ene in two places, and were valiantly withstood, and for a while re|puls: But the Brigades of Languedock, Vallois, and Langueron, not being able to resist longer, leaned with some loss towards the Market|place; to whose relief, the Prince himself came in the Head of his Horse Regiment; and of that of Anguie, accompanied by Nemeurs, Taranth, and Vallon: And here the fight grew hot, the Prince gave high proofs of his skill in War, and of his incomparable courage, he thrust himself, is he had been a Common-Soldier into the midst of the Enemy, killed many with his own hands; and with his Sword repulsed many. To his eternal glory, those who were formerly affrighted, were incouraged; and those Brigades replaced in their former stations who were driven away; Ma|rine having lost, together with some that were wounded, forty men; here was Monsieur Goville slain; but Tavannes and Languis did not play their parts so well. For here Marquess S. Magrin gave on furiously on the Head of some Voluntiers, and others, upon the Princes Forces, which he did much indamage, and was likely to have utterly routed them, had not

the death of the sid St. Magrine cooled the courage of his men: he being slain, the Kings Forces were repulsed, but not without much blood of the Princes men, who received here their greatest loss; Marquess Roche|caufolt, and Count Bossue, a Dutch Colonel of Horse, were there slain; and Count Tavanes, the Marquess of Ierse, Cavaliere la Force, Marquess Cogna, Count Melune, Baron Lorese, with others of good quality were there slain. In this interim the Count Navailes had taken the Street Rambulliet, with some houses and two Barracadoes, though they were vigorously defended by the adversary; to whose succour came Monsieur de Laudes with a Dutch Brigade, the Prince of Conde made good the Street which leads from the Gate to a large Piazza, where the Kings men had seized upon some houses; the Dukes of Nemeurs, and Beaufort came just then to the Prince, and these two, who were not upon very good terms, resolved to attack the Barracado which was taken by Navailes, rather out of Emula|tion, than Military wisdom, though it were hard to take it, (which was well sheltered) with weary and worsted men. Yet Conde, who though he foresaw the mischief, did never forbear any hazardous bickering, was perswaded by reason, that though things should not sort according to his desire, he should by so generous an action afford the Enemy matter to think upon, and spin on the business, which made most for his safety; so as Rochefaucolt, Marsilliack, Flammarin, and many others of the Nobles coming in unto him; Rochefaucolt, who saw Beaufort, and Nemeurs for|wardness, joyn'd with them and fell to the assault, but the Soldiers being weary, and timorous to attack the Barracado, marched along the Wall to shelter themselves from the Enemies shot; and would advance no fur|ther; this mean while a Squadron of German Horse being got into the Gardens, where they were much incommodated by shot from the neigh|bouring houses, retreated in disorder; the Prince taking them to be the Enemy, who were come to take that place, and to charge him on the Flank; and his Genreals finding that their Foot fell not upon the Barraca|do, advanced to charge the same Squadron; but finding them to be their own men, they forbare any further attempt: they, and those Horse being exposed to a shower of shot which came from the houses and Barracado; and here were Flemmerin, Count Castres, Monsieur Forneau, and others of quality slain. Which when the Generals saw, they thought of themselves to assault that Barracado; and though they went to ingage themselves in an eminent danger, of desperate event; yet excited by heat of blood, and glory, they considered nothing but their own boldness.
Thus did the Three Dukes and Prince Marsilliack, themselves alone, unassisted by the Foot which staid behind, light from Horse-back, and with their Swords in hand advanced against the Barracado, with such bold|ness (not to call it rashness) as the Kings men being astonished (were it either fatality, or that the presence of great Personages have out of some hidden cause great prerogative in difficult undertakings) did abandon it, and the Princes who did so gallantly take it, would have kept it, had not the Enemy continually fired upon them from both sides the Street, that it was impossible for them to tarry there. The Duke of Nemeurs received Thirteen Musquet shot on his Armor, and two on his right hand; Rochefaucolt was wounded between the eyes; and Beaufort and Marsilliack being bound to help the wounded, were forced to quit the place; which when the Kings men saw, they made hast to take those that were wounded Prisoners, which they would suddenly and safely have done, had not Conde with his wonted undauntedness come in on the head of some Gentlemen

that followed him, whereby he afforded them time and opportunity to retreat, as they did with much wonder and applause.
Guitaut, Bercenet, Lullery and Martiniere were wounded; all the rest witnessed what danger they had run by the shot which they received in their Armor and by having their Horses slain under them.
At the same time that they were fighting without, the Parisians were at as much strife in words within the Walls; some were for the going out of such Citizens as had Arms to help the assaulted, and for opening the Gates that they might retreat; others said that by suffering Conde to be lost, who was the occasion of all their misfortune, there would be an end of their misery, and the City would be put into her former quiet condition; but at last amongst all these differences, wherein nothing was concluded in favour of the Princes, Madamoselle came forth into the Streets, accompa|nied by the Dutchesses of Rohan, Monbason, and Chastilion, and by the young Countess of Fiesco; and went to the Town-house, where she told the Citizens, that without any more dispute or loss of time, the people were to take up Arms, and to assist the Princes, suffering the Baggage and Forces of their friends to come into the Town. The pressures of this couragious and generous Princess were so perswasive, as the sad and horrid spectacle of so many Lords of high condition, who ever and anon came into the Town half dead, wounded and besmeared with blood; amongst which that of Rochefaucolt was most compassionate, whose eyes were well nigh shot out: as it was resolved the Gates should be opened, and they should be received into the Town, and every one with tears cryed out that the Prince must be relieved, who put his life, and the lives of many good French men into apparent, and almost inevitable danger, for the pub|lick cause: whereupon about 300 Inhabitants went out, who by the Prince were put to Guard some stations; and then Rohan causing some of the baggage to march by the Temple Gate, and Beaufort bringing in the rest by that of St. Antoine; the Prince was told that the Kings Army being divided into two parts, went by the way of Soronne, and Neully; wherefore thinking that this might be with design to keep his men out between the Suburbs, and the Gate, he placed Count Hollack with his German Regiment, at the entrance of the Street of Saronne to assist the retreat which was begun, and sent word to Monsieur Lovieres, who then commanded the Bastile, instead of his Father Brussels, to let the Canon play upon the Kings men, which being forborn as a thing unbecoming a Subject, Madamoselle came instantly thither, and getting upon the Walls, with more than a man-like spirit, and as if she her self would share in the glory, and danger, commanding that in her presence the Guns might be fired against the Kings Forces; it was done. Then orders being gi|ven for the retreat, the Horse and Foot marched speedily with the Canon, the Burgundian Brigade keeping in the Reer, commanded by Marquess Sasse whose Horse Regiment was then govern'd by Monsieur St. Mars. When the Canon plaid first from the Battile, it was thought they plaid upon the Princes Forces; for the Kings friends in Paris had promised as much; but being found to play upon the Kings men, and that the Inhabitants falling of their promise, the baggage was already got in, and the Troops began to enter Paris, those of the Kings party were astonished, as were also the Kings General, being somewhat blamed for their slovvness and negligence, and for being defrauded of their hopes in the very nick of Victory; so as they returned tovvards St. Denis, not less sad for the loss of so many gallant Subjects, vvhereof besides St. Magrine, Marquess Nantalliet vvas one; and Count Maipos, and Mancini the Cardinals Nephevv vvere so

mortally wounded, as they soon after died; and Count di Tre, with divers others of quality was taken prisoners.
The King did very graciously visit Mancini often, as he did also S. Ma|grins afflicted Widow. The Princes Army, not without wonder, past through Paris, it being unusual to see an Army with Baggage pass through those Streets. These lodged in the Countrey about Tury, without the Suburbs of S. Marseilles, and in two days plundered all the Villages and Houses that were within three leagues; and brought what they had so gotten, to the Camp, where the Soldiers sold all things, as if it had been in a Fair. Madamoiselle would see them pass, and caused moneys be gi|ven to the wounded. Count Chavigny gave them store of Victuals, not so much out of charity, as policy: And because it hath always been a custom in Military Actions to have some sign whereby to discern Friends from Enemies: Madamoiselle put a straw upon her head, wherein being fol|lowed by all that would not be accountred Mazarinians, you might in a moment see, not only all the Inhabitants, but Foreigners of every Nation, yea, even the Fryers, and Agents of stranger Princes, do the same, to shun the insolencies which were done by the common people to those that bore not this Badge.
Thus ended the memorable Action of S. Antoines Suburbs, on the Se|cond of Iuly; wherein the quality was more considerable then the num|ber of those that were slain. The Prince of Conde, not valuing his own life, but running like Lightning, sometimes to one place, sometimes to an|other, where the business was most bloody, and his men in most danger, performed the office of a private Soldier, as well as of a Captain, was oft|times upon the very edge of the Grave, being miraculously perserved by Fortune, his Horse vvas killed under him, his Cloaths shot thorow in divers places, his Feathers and his Hair burnt; and yet was he miraculously kept unhurt. Marquess Turenne behaved himself no less valiantly; who by his presence gave great proof of his valor, and experience every where. And he was heard to say, That he had met with above six Princes of Conde; for wheresoever he turned himself, he found the Prince in the Head of the Enemy with his Sword in hand. All other Generals and Captains behaved them|selves undauntedly, and with extraordinary courage. This was numbred as one of the noblest, and most worthy Actions that ever hapned in any whatsoever age.
Conde having won more reputation in Arms, betook himself to think how he might make Paris declare openly against the King, without which, he found he should be too weak; for he wanted moneys, and other neces|saries to maintain War: But finding how little good he had hitherto got therein by fair means, he resolved to use force, having failed of making the Parliament be assaulted in their own House (as you have heard) he bethought himself, how to force the Citizens to second his intents. The Members of Parliament, by reason of what was done on the Twenty sixth of Iune last, had desired Le Marishal de l'Hospitalle, with the Common Coun|cil of the City, to provide so for them, as they might sit with safety, and follow their business. A General Assembly met to this purpose in the pub|lick Palace on the Twelfth of Iuly, to consider how they might put the City in safety, as was desired. The Princes, and their party, resolved to Assault the Assembly, and to force them to comply with them. When they were met in the Town-house by all the Officers of the Commons, which make up a Body of about Four hundred of the best Men in the City: The Duke of Orleans sent Marishal d'Estampes, to the Marishal de l'Hospitalle, who sat there as Governor of Paris, to assure him, That no disorder should

be committed that morning; the Marishal answered, his Highness should be satisfied. So the Assembly began, where the Duke came about half an hour after four in the afternoon; where the Piazza of the Greve, where the Assembly sat, was full of seditious Armed Men with straws in their Hats, an evident sign of some extraordinary disorder, and of a preludium to the fatal Tragedy which followed. When Orleans was come into the Assembly, the Marishal de l'Hospitalle, gave him his place, and sat himself on the Bench of the Provost des Merchants and Sheriffs. But it is to be observed, that the said Marishal who went to receive the Duke at the Stair-foot, when he saw the Duke with a wreath of straw about his Hat; said boldly, What means this Sir, does your Highness come with a Badge of Seditiou into the Kings House? The Duke answered, That he had re|ceived that wreath, but that he did not approve thereof. They went up Stairs, and when Orleans had taken his place, he thanked the City for hav|ing suffered his Forces to pass; asking, if upon the like occasion, they would do so again. The Prince was there likewise, and spoke to the same purpose; the Marishal answered, That they would always be ready to serve them; and that when they should be gone out, the business should be taken into consideration. This mean while a Letter came from the King, wherein he willed them to adjourn the Assembly till the Eight of that Moneth. The Marishal caused the Letter to be read, and then ask|ed the Princes, and the rest, if they would obey it; the Princes said no|thing, but went out, not thinking their faction strong enough to effect their desires. And as they went out to wait upon the Princes, an imper|tinent fellow presented the Marishal de l'Hospitalle with a wisp of straw; who being touched to the quick with that affront, told him, That were it not for the respect he bore to his Highness, he should presently be thrown out of the Window and hanged. The Princes as they went out said, that the Palace was full of Mazarinians, who sought to spin out time, which caused so great a commotion, as divers Soldiers and seditious people began instantly to shoot in at the Windows.
The Princes to incourage this business, had set on divers Soldiers, but in vain, to raise a tumult in some other part of the City. At this time, one of the Populacy hapned to be with a Musket slain, which did more in|cite their fury; for they all cried out, it was done by some Mazarinian; and that therefore they must all be slain, pointing, that they were in that Palace, and some were hard to say, Union, union, and down with the Mazarinians. So all of them running with straws in their Hats, like so many Bacchanalians, they fell to such insolencies, as are usually committed by the rabble rout. Those who guarded the Palace ran all away; whereat the factious people growing more incensed, got wood and set the great Gate on fire, striving to get in: Admist this danger, the Marishal, who was Governor, President Charton, Colonel Miron, Vedo, and Barantine, with divers others, resolved rather to die gloriously, then weakly to yield. They therefore prepared to defend themselves; the Marishal ordered Mar|quess Franes to make a Baracado of great Rafters on high, at the entry into the great Hall, which opens upon the Yard, which was speedily done, and was so well defended by the Marishals Guards particularly by Mon|sieur Berry, as the Assailants surprised with the opposition, ceased their fury. The Marishal commanded to spare Powder till night, that the means while they should defend themselves with great stones; but the great Gate being at this instant burnt down, they got upon the Baracado; where Blanchart, Commissary General of Condes Army was slain, and some other of the Prince his Soldiers. The people applied fire also to burn

down the back Gate. The Marishal knowing that the same fire would keep the seditious people from coming in, made more Wood be applied thereunto, so to hinder the ingress of the furious people. Whilst these things were doing, the Prince was in L'Hostelle de Orleans; where hearing that affairs went otherwise than he intended; which was to infuse fear, but not to bring things to extremity; he would have gone to the place, and by appeasing the business by his own presence, would have ob|liged the assaulted, to have acknowledged their lives, and safety from him. But Orleans, who thought it not convenient, that the Prince should ha|zard his person amongst that inraged rable, were it either that he would not have the Prince to gain the peoples love, and that he alone should be hated, by force with-held him, and would not suffer him to go out of his house; where much against his will he was compell'd to suit himself to the Dukes will. Many the mean while, seeing the danger, and excited by fear, would have saved themselves by making way through the rabble; but many of them were slain, amongst which Monsieur Miron, though well esteemed by the people, as being a Frondeur, Monsieur Gras, Master of the requests, Monsieur Ferrand, Counsellor of Parliament, six or seven noble Citizens, besides many that were wounded; yet some escaped, as President Charton, the Curate of St. Iohns, whom the Priests of his Church met with the Hostia, to make way for him. Monsieur de Ponset, Master of the requests, Monsieur Barantine, Beaufort, and Marquess Bella, who were in a neighbouring house, came forth and calling out aloud to some of the Assembly by name, said, They would cause peace, and save the assaulted. The Marishal de L'Hospitalle thinking this to be but a trick to save such as were of the Princes party, and to leave the rest to the fury of the people, caused them to be asked whether there were safety in it or no? saying, that they would all perish, or all be saved; the assault lasted from Five after Dinner, till Ten at night, and now at last the Marishal being come to the Barracado, found it free, and his Guards gone, upon a false report that he had saved himself. The people entred, plundered, and robbed all they met, who willingly permitted them, so to save their lives. The Marishal not knowing how to get out unknown, mingled himself amongst them, and went along with them into the next Chamber. He had wisely given his order of the St. Esprite to his Page to keep, and changed Hats with him, and casting a dark colour'd cloth Cloke about him, stood in the midst of them, who raging for anger sought for him: This his safety must be at|tributed to divine providence, who would for his great integrity, save him amidst his Enemies; in this Emergency came Three persons, one of which was Monsieur Noblet, who bearing the name of his friend Monsieur Croiset Mirebeau called upon by many, stept to the Marishal, and said Sir  you may do well to answer to the name of Croiset, which being agreed on, he turned to him, and said you injure your self Monsieur Croiset, not to answer when you are so often called upon, Duke Beaufort stays for you, let us go; he said further to the contrary who knew not the Marishal, you shall each of you have a Hundred Ducaoons, if you will help me to save this my friend; which being heard by the seditious people, they thought he might be some suspected person, saying, they saved a Mazarinia. Noblet reply'd, You mock, we have been long seeking for this man on Beaufonti behalf, saying still alloun, allouns, make hast. These Four past through the crowd, not without much danger to the Marishal, least he might be known, particularly by a Butcher called Hon, who of all the rest had been the most insolent that day, and whom Beaufort imploy'd. Croiset, whom these men seem'd to seek, lay in St. Iohns Cloister near the Greve;

which made for the Marishals safety, who entring into Croiset's house, one of the house said, This is not Croist, who are you? he answered in his ear, I am the Marishal de L'Hospitalle: whereat the other had like to have Reve|renced him; for he and his vvhole Family had been brought up for above Thirty years in the house of St. Mesmes, vvhich is la Maison de L'Hospitalle; some came to the house, asking vvho it vvas that had got in thither, for sure it vvas not Croiset; it vvas ansvvered, they vvere in the right, for he vvas a Rogue vvhom they had driven out; the Marishal not being yet secure of life, Monsieur Barratine, a Counsellor of Parliament, and Colo|nel of that quarter, came thither vvith a Squadron of his Soldiers, took him out of that house, and not making him knovvn to any of his Soldiers, brought him safe to his ovvn house, passing by above Forty Barracadoes, and armed places, without any opposal, of such credit was Barratine with the people. At last Madamoselle moved at this Massacre; though it were Three a Clock at night, and that the horror and noise did confound even the most man-like spirits, went with her accustomed courage to the Town|house, and taking Beaufort with her, appeased the uproar, and much to her praise sent all away unhurt. The Marishal staid two days in his own house, not being able to get out of the City: but the third day he went in a Coach of the Duke of Orleans, waited upon by a Lieutenant of his Guard who was sent to that purpose, to a Villa of his own called Beneis, and from thence to Court, from whence he was sent into Champagnia, where he was Lieutenant General to serve his Majesty with his wonted fidelity.
The confusion, and cruelty committed in this Riot, made Conde be held cruel, and violent. So that as his Triumph and height of glory in Paris was on the Second of Iuly, so was the 4th. day after the impulsive occasion of his downfall, for the City could never be brought to lend monies, nor come to open breach with the Court. The Parisians did commonly com|plain of the Princes; they therefore to moderate any sinister opinion, and to make it appear as much as they could that they had no hand in what had happened, made two complices of the sedition be imprison'd, and who were after executed, though one of them was a particular servant of Conde's, whom he would not protect, that he might not seem to approve of what he denied he had plotted, it may be because it did not succede well. Six days after the Assembly met at the common hall, but a few went thi|ther, and for all the intreaties and desires that Orleans could make, who sent his Guard of Switzer to the Town-house, none came thither but some few who dependend upon the Princes.
The Provost de Merchants declared, that he would come no more to their publick meetings, till the Kings Authority should be there first esta|blished: wherefore Orleans, and Conde caused the Counsellor Brussels to be chosen in his place, making him take the accustomed Oath, and the Marishal de L'Hospitalle not being to exercise the place of Governor of the City any more, they confer'd that dignity upon Beaufort, this was the first effect of the aforesaid Riot, and the first step by which the Princes mounted to attain their ends.
The Parliament being afterwards called, though none of the Presidents thereof came thither, the Duke of Orleans proposed Four things, which he said must be speedily provided for. The first was to take order for Victuals, and particularly for Bread, which was grown to an excessive rate; the second, the safety of the City and Parliament, seeming much discontent at what had happened at the publick house; the third, how to detain those who went out of the City, whereof were some of the Par|liaments

Officers, contrary to the decree which inhibited parting from the Assembly. The fourth, that the Commissioners having now tarried long at Court, not having received any answer, it behoved them to resolve of what was to be done; upon which it was voted. That the decree of the 4th. of that Month, and of others touching Victuals should be punctually ob|served, that the Officers should be inhibited going out of Paris, and that the Counsellors should be desired to assist in their charges; that Lisne, and Gilbert, both of them being Parliament men, should draw up Process against those that had attempted the publick Palace the preceeding days; that no publick nor private Conventicles should be made or had upon pain of life; and because the disorders of the Princes their Militia was intollerable, who plunder'd all the neighbouring parts, and all Passengers, it was likewise ordered that Process should be made not only against such as should cut, or sell grain of the fields, but also against those who had any hand therein, or did buy any, which decrees were strengthned by an Ec|clesiastical Monitory against those that were Authors, or accessaries of the said Riot, these things were done to appease the Parisians incensed with the said violences, whereat they seemed all to be offended, there being few but were concerned either in their alliance or friends.
Wherefore the Prince having but small hopes to subsist with his own Forces, and that speedy remedy was requisite, he dispatched an express to Baron Battevile at St. Sebastians, acquainting him with what had happened, and of his great need of help, without which he could subsist no longer. Batteville sent these Letters into Spain, which came thither in so happy a conjuncture, as the Spaniards might easily assist him with some ready Mo|nies, whereby to accomplish those enterprises, which could not be done without Mony. The Spanish Gallions came on the eighth of Iuly that year from the Indies, which brought 250000 pieces of Eight for the Kings share, besides what came for particular men.
Conde sent also to acquaint the Spanish Agents in Flanders with his con|dition, who finding the party of the Princes weakned much, since the Duke of Lorrain departed out of France, fed the Prince again with large promises, resolving to send him 6000 men under Vlderick of Wirtemberg, General of the German Horse in Flanders; to which purpose Count Fuenseldaglia marched into the Field, and passing between the Rivers of Some, and Owse, came to before Ethouny a Walled Town upon the River, but not fortified, where he found the Duke de Elbeus, Governour of Picardy, who had raised many men in the neighbouring parts to keep the Spaniards out of France, but not being provided for defence, he articled to go out himself, and Monsieur de Maincampe his Lieutenant General, on the 24th. of Iuly, with some other chief Officers, all the rest remaining Prisoners of War, amongst which there were above a Hundred Gentlemen Voluntiers, and about 500 Soldiers and Officers, with some Horse. Here the Spaniards staid some days, as well to injoy that fruitful Country, as to expect opportunity to advance towards Paris; they notvvithstanding neglected the performance of assisting the Princes, and Parliament, not meaning to strengthen them so as they might force the Court to grant all they demanded, in vvhich case, in stead of adding fuel to the fire of civil War, they vvould have extinguished it vvith the ruine of themselves.
From the second till the Twentieth of Iuly, the Kings Army kept near S. Dennis; and that of the Princes, without the Suburbs of S. Victoire, spending all that time in Treaties of Peace on both sides; the substance whereof, was, that the King did finally declare, That though he had al|ways believed, and did so still, that their desires of having the Cardinal

sent away, were only pretences wherewith to colour their ends; yet his Majesty, who desired nothing more then his Kingdoms Peace, was per|swaded to gratifie the Cardinal, by giving him leave to go from the Court, which he had long desired to do; but not till the affairs of France were better established: To which purpose, he wished the Commissioners to ac|quaint the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, that they might send to negotiate the main points on their part; and that they should tarry the mean while at Court, expecting the Princes their answer from Paris. And because some doubt might arise, Whether the Cardinal should be effectually retreated before, or after the establishment of affairs; his Ma|jesty declared, That he should be gone as soon as they had agreed upon the manner; before the business were effected. The Parliament discoursed variously hereupon. Orleans said the Answer was cunning, and ambigu|ous, to draw them to a Conference, and spin out the business; that if the Cardinal did really intend to be gone, he needed not have made their Commissioners wait fifteen days for an Answer; and in the interim fall upon violent means, as was that of the second of that Moneth, in the Suburbs of S. Antoyne, to destroy the Army, and afterwards to put all the Inhabitants of Paris to the Sword. That if he intended to be gone, there was no need of any Conference, for nothing but his absence was required; and that then the Princes would render all due respect and obedience to his Majesty, That as touching sending of Commissioners in his name, it was superfluous; since the Parliaments Commissioners being there, on whom he totally did relie, he intended to do nothing without the inter|position of the Assembly: To which purpose, he would have written his mind to President Nesmond; but he would not, nor could not send any other Commissioners on his behalf. The Prince of Conde was of the same mind, and said, That he would write his mind to Nesmond. It was then resolved, That they should thank his Majesty for his gracious Message, desiring him to make good his promise, of sending away the Cardinal as soon as he could: That the Princes would write to Nesmond, or to some other of the Commissioners, that he might insist upon the Declaration which they had made; that as soon as the Cardinal should be gone out of the Kingdom, they would perform what they had promised; and would give order to the same Commissioners to receive his Majesties com|mands. It was observed, that the Prince did not now speak with that sweetness he was wont, but somewhat more rigidly, as if he were offend|ed, that his desires were not followed. Monsieur de Boust did discreetly move, that new Commissioners might be chosen, to find out the best means how to dispose of the Soldiers, and to use all possible means to have peace; and that when this should be agreed upon, nothing should be done therein till the Cardinal were sent away.
Hereupon the Parliament ordered their Commissioners who were at Court, humbly to thank his Majesty, for his promise of dismissing the Cardinal, to solicite the effecting of it, and to intreat the Duke of Orleans and the Prince, to write to President Nesmond, That as they had declared in the Assembly, they were ready to lay down Arms, and to render all due obedience to his Majesty, when the Cardinal should be gone. Orleans writ, that the Courts desire, that he and Conde should send Commissioners to the King, could be understood no otherwise, (the long time consider|ed, that Audience was forborn to be given to the Parliaments Commissi|oners) then as an usual trick of the Cardinals, to keep the King from send|ing him away, and giving Peace to his Subjects; for his sole desire was to agree with his Majesty, and obey him, as he should always do with all

respect and submission, according as by birth he was bound. The Prince writ to the same effect, and charged Nesmond to give any assurance there|of; who being brought to have audience before the King, spoke as fol|loweth.



Sir, Your Majesties assurance given us, that you will send Cardinal Maza|rine away, hath rejoyced the hearts of all your Majesties vassals. Your Parlia|ment hath charged us to thank your Majesty for it, and to desire the perform|ance, beseeching you to consider, That the evils of France increasing daily, so as they can admit of no delay; Your Majesty will be very gracious in not de|ferring, to make us injoy a good so much desired. The Duke of Orleans, and the Prince, have commanded us to confirm their former Declarations to you, and to tell you, That they cannot satisfie you otherwise by Commissioners of their own, but will obey your Commands, as soon as the Cardinal shall have obeyed your Majesties Declarations. It now lies in your Majesty, Sir, to abbreviate all these evils, by dismissing the Cardinal. We can say no more to express the grief which doth even suffocate our words.



The King answered, That he would advise with his Council, and would give them his Answer, as he did the next day in writing; as was read unto them by Count Brien to this effect.
That the King had granted their desire of sending away the Cardinal, though he clearly foresaw it was nothing but a pretence to trouble the State. But if his Majesty did believe that this answer would occasion another Decree in Parlia|ment, he would not have given it, knowing, that in the condition the Parlia|ment now was, by the absence of so many of their leading Members, and by the violent Authority usurped by the prime Rebels, they could do nothing but execute their wills; since by their own Decree of the first of this present July, they had resolved not to treat or resolve of any thing touching publick affairs, till Iustice and the City might be secured. But that instead of providing for such security, when the Assembly were met for that purpose, Iustice, and the City, were opprest with fire, violence, and slaughter: So as his Majesty could not build upon the resolutions of those, whose Votes were not in their own free power.
The Kings intention in this Answer, was to afford means to the Princes to send some with Authority, to receive orders concerning the Articles which they had accepted of, and to agree upon the time, manner, and security of their being performed.
The King for several Reasons, resolved to go from S. Dennis to Pontois, on the Sixteenth of Iuly, the Cardinal remaining still in his Administration by the Kings express command, though he still desired to be gone; but affairs were so well governed by his Council, as the good effects which you shall hear hereafter insued thereupon: But the Princes and their party complaining still upon the Actions of the Court, saying, That it sought only to delude the people, and that it had no mind to have Peace, which depended solely upon dismissing the Cardinal, they redoubled their de|tractions, both in private and in publick against the Cardinal, and other Court Officers.
When the Court went from S. Dennis, the Parliament Commissioners were ordered by the King, to tarry there, to expect what word his Majesty would send unto them; for they refused to follow his Majesty, pretending, That they were not in equipage, and that they must needs return to Paris,

to discharge their duties. The King lay in Pontois, and his Army was quartered about the River, to watch over the proceedings of the Spani|ards, who overrun those parts, to the great prejudice of those who had any goods there. The news of the King and Armies, being gone from S. Dennis, coming to Paris, it was whispered, that the Commissioners were detained Prisoners, which made Conde get on Horsback with Four hun|dred Cavaliers, and go speedily thitherward to inform himself of the truth. He found the Commissioners free, and offered to carry them back to Paris; but they excused themselves, saying, They had given their word to Monsieur S. Tor to stay at S. Dennis, till they should receive further or|ders from the King. But when the Parliament met, which was the next day, they resolved to send for them back. Wherefore Orleans, Conde, and Beaufort, with above Two hundred thousand common people went thither, and brought them back to the Parliament, with as much applause, as if it had been a glorious triumph, notwithstanding, that the King sent express order for them to come to Pontois, for affairs of great consequence which had hapned since his going from S. Dennis: Yet they gave out, that this was but a Court trick, which useth to weary with delay, when it means not to comfort with effects, and to spin out time; wherein they thought they might reap advantage by the sufferings of the Parisians, who are ac|customed peacefully to injoy their rich Traffick.
To provide against all which, the King and his Council of State did Decree on the Eighteenth of Iuly, after a long debate of all that had been done; that Information should be taken of the horrible and scandalous attempt that was made upon the publick Palace, upon the Fourth of the present Moneth; and that the circumstances should be sought into, and the Authors and abettors of the massacres, and violences committed, should be proceeded against according to the rigor of Law; and in the mean while revoked, and nullified the pretended Election of Brussels to be Provost de Merchants: And the King forbad him upon pain of life, to act any thing therein, saying, That he and his posterity should give an account of the disorders which had hapned, and which should happen after his pretended administration. He declared also, all the resolutions void and null which were made in Parliament on the first of Iuly; as also in the Common Hall, concerning publick Affairs, till such time as the Governor of the City; and the lawful Provost de Merchants, and the other Magistrates which were forced to absent themselves, were taken in again; and that sufficient provision might be given for the security of Justice, and of the City. And the King did further expresly inhibite all the other Cities of his Kingdom, and all his Subjects and servants, to take notice of any thing that should be written to them, or ordered from Paris, since it was tyrannically possess'd by Rebels; and to the end, that the Moneys which were intended to pay the Rent of the Communalty, might not be disposed of by the Enemy to make War, and pay the Spaniards whom they had called in; he ordered, that they should be brought to the place of his abode, to be put into the hands of those that were to pay the Rents, whom he commanded to come to Court, with all other Consuls and Sheriffs of the City, within three days after this Decree should be pub|lished.
The Princes, Parliament, and Frondeurs, were mightily troubled at this departure, believing, that the Court laughed at their pretentions. Count Servient had told the former Commissioners in his Majesties name, That if Orleans and Conde would not name new Commissioners, but would imploy the former; the King would be contented, and would agree with

them, touching the Propositions contained in the aforesaid answer; pro|mising to send away the Cardinal before the Princes should perform their part, when they had agreed with their Commissioners, or with those of the Parliament. But the Princes, instead of accepting this offer, not suf|fering the Commissioners to stay at S. Dennis, and expect an Answer brought them back, as hath been said where continuing to say, The Court made merry with them; they resolved, the Cardinal should be dismist be|fore they would do any thing. The Parliament seeking how to make va|lid their pretended authority, chose the Duke of Orleans to be Lieutenant General of the Crown, and Conde to be General of the Forces under him; but this was to little purpose, for the other Parliaments of the Kingdom refused to do it, and reprehended them for it. But Orleans, thought how he and Cardinal Rets, who managed the whole business, should be able at last to drive away Mazarine, without ruinating the Court; which Rets did, least the Court being too much abased, his irreconcileable Enemy Conde should be exalted too high. Thus Rets his particular interest, who longed to be the sole Administrator of Government, by Mazarines expulsion, and then by Condes ruine, through the Union of the Queen and Orleans, was judged the true cause of the ruine of that whole party; and finally, of his own imprisonment. The Parliament did further Decree, that the sale of the movables, and of all things that belonged to Mazarine, should go on; and Fifty thousand Crowns (as hath been said) was set upon his head.
The Duke of Orleans went the next day to Parliament, and accepted of the place of Lieutenant General of the Crown, as long as the King was ruled by the Cardinal, and desired he might have a Council chosen by the Parliament: To which, reply was made, that they referred it wholly to his Royal Highness. He went afterwards to the Exchequer, where he made the same request, and had the same answer. He took for his Council of State, Conde, Chancellor Segniere, Count Chavigny, Nesmond, and Longuevile, Aubry, and Archiere, Presidents of the Exchequer; and of the Court des Aydes, Dorieux, and le Noire; and all the Dukes and Peers of that faction, which were the Dukes of Rohan, Rochefaucolt, Brisack, and Sully; their first Consultation was had on the third of August: But all this vanished into smoak, for the whole Kingdom, and even Paris it self, being well wishers to the King; there was not any that would obey the Lieute|nant General: Nay, the Parliament of Tolouse, which was the Metropolis of Languedock, Orleans his proper Government, though it professed much de|votion to him, declared, The Decree of the Parliament of Paris, to be null and void, all which things proving contrary to the expectation of the Princes, Conde grew almost desperate. Wherefore not caring to please others, since he was almost ruined for want of Moneys, he assembled some of the Inhabitants, by means of some of his adherents, and per|swaded them to furnish him with some Monies, and though other means might be used to get Moneys from the people with less noise; yet this was made use of, which seemed more specious and feasible, but in re|ality harder. A Tax was laid upon all Gates of Houses wherein a Cart or Coach might enter, of Twenty five Crowns; upon the middle sort, and Shops ten, and upon lesser five. This Imposition caused great rumor and aversion: So as not above Twenty five thousand Crowns were gotten by it. The Prince foresaw the unsuccessfulness of this and divers others; but he failed of his design, which was to make the Court believe, that he could command Paris at his pleasure. But this did little good at Court, aad less in Paris: For instead of disbursing Moneys, the Parisians they broke forth into great complaints against his violence, which did much increase the

hatred of the Inhabitants against him, and his adherents, and caused the alterations which insued; and not only the Prince but Beaufort began to grow less in the peoples good opinion, for behaving himself too arrogant|ly in this Tax, and the Parliament lost Reputation also.
Conde inlarged his quarters in the Village Iouise, Four leagues from Paris, since the King's were gone to Pontoise, but wanting Victuals, and forage there, he brought part of them to Charinton, and part to St. Clow. Emulation and hatred continued all this while between Nemeurs and his Sisters Husband Beaufort, not only for what had formerly past between them, but through other disgusts occasioned by Ladies jealousies; upon oc|casion of the sitting in the new Council which was contrived by the Duke of Orleans, wherein Beaufort strove for precedency before Nemeurs, no remedy being to be found, and the business growing hotter, Nemeurs chal|lenged Beaufort, who accepted the defiance. They went towards Eve|ning to the Horse market on the 30th. of Iuly on foot with Sword and Pistol, having each of them four seconds. Count Burny, Messieurs Ris, Herecourt, and Brillet were for Beaufort; and Marquess Vallars who carried the challenge, Messieurs Champ, Vseck, and Chasse for Nemeurs, Nemeurs discharged his Pistol, which missing, Beaufort discharged his, which hit and kill'd Nemeurs. Beaufort went to part the seconds who were wounded already, and ran half mad to his Brother in laws house, bewailing bitterly what had happened; Herecourt dyed of his wounds, as did also Ri. Orleans and Conde were much troubled at this sad accident.
Conde, whose great friend, and confident Nemeurs was, would not see Beaufort in many days: nor would his Sister, Wife to him that was slain, see him; but complaining bitterly on her Brother, went from Paris, to be|wail her self at her Country house. Nemeurs was a young Prince, of an high spirit, and extraordinarily valiant, of a courteous, affable, and gene|rous nature; as are all those of the house of Savoy, which is reckoned amongst the antientest, and Noblest of all the Families of Christendom; he dyed without Heirs male, there remained no more of that house but the Duke of Omale Archbishop of Reims, who was his only Brother. Touching precedence in this unfortunate Council of State, another dis|pute arose between the Prince of Conde, and Count Rieux of the house of Lorrain, second Son to Duke de Elbeus. For Rieux disputing with the Prince Taranto, eldest Son to the Duke of Tremaglia, Kinsman to Conde, Conde would have appeased the difference; but Rieux thinking that he leaned too much to Taranto, did by injurious words provoke him, to give him a blow with his hand, whereupon Rieux drew his Sword, and worse would have happened, had not the Duke of Rohan, and President Viola parted them; and because Rieux in this action transgressed the terms due to a Prince of the blood, Orleans sent him Prisoner to the Bastile, not so much for punishment, as to keep them asunder till his anger was over; from whence he was set free the next year at the desire of the Duke of Lorrain, and went to the Duke his Father, having past his word that he would forget what was past.
The King tarried at Pontoise from the 17th. of Iuly, till the 19th. of August, in which time great sickness grew there by reason of the straitness of the Town, and the scarcity of all things. Many dyed, amongst which the Duke of Bullions death was lamented; and this malignant influence dilated it self even unto Paris, where a great many men of all sorts dyed in a few days; the Duke of Vallois, the only Son to the Duke of Orleans, being about two years old dyed also this September, to the great grief of his Father and Mother, by his death Conde returned to be the first Prince of

the blood, as he was before the other was born, for the Sons, nor Brothers of the King, are not called Princes of the blood, but Sons of France.
Whilst affairs went thus in these parts, Count Harcourt keeping still with his Army in Guienne, to observe what the Princes Forces did, went to besiege Villaneus upon the River Lot, which was fortified only with old Wals and Towers; but well garrison'd under Marquess Theubon; where|fore he was forced to raise his siege after two months attempt.
The Kings men had ill fortune also in Flanders, for want growing hourly greater in Dunkirk, the Plague, and dysentery grew so violent amonst the Soldiers, as above a thousand of them dyed in eleven days; and the rest were so weakned by continual watching, as the Archduke resolved to approach it with 8000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, and Ten pieces of Canon, there were not above 700 Foot in the City who were fit for service; of which 200 of the Inhabitants who wished well to Spain, did still keep Guard, and the rest defended the Fortifications, who were continually in Arms without being misled; whereat there was such murmuring, as they were thrice ready to revolt, had not the Governor by hopes of speedy succor, and by his much reverenced Authority detained them. The Spa|niards fell upon the Counterscarp on the sixth of September, upon three sides with a Thousand men on each part, the Spaniards and Italians won it, and lost it again with some prejudice: but being assaulted a second time with fresh men, they won it, wherefore Monsieur de Estrades, finding that his men had given back, and that the Enemy began to lodge upon the same Counterscarp, fell upon them with 500 Foot, and 40 Officers, and charged them so furiously, as after a bitter, and bloody bickering, he re|covered the Counterscarp, losing Seven Officers, and Twenty five Soldiers, and he himself was shot with an Harquebuse on the Thigh. After this unfortunate, but glorious accident, followed treachery framed by three Soldiers who were bribed by the Enemy, which being discovered cost them their lives; and the Governor was commended for discovering, and punishing it, for six weeks past the Soldiers had but six ounces of Bread the day, wherefore Estrades, and all the chief of the Garrison thought it fit to yield to necessity, and to parly; wherein it was concluded on the 12th. of September, that if they were not relieved within six days, the place should be surrendered; that in the interim there should be a cessati|on of Arms, and that the besieged should be permitted to send two Cap|tains, one to Callis to the Marishal de Aumount, and another to the Duke of Vandosme at Diepe, to acquaint them with the condition of the place, and in what need they stood of speedy succor. Rivilliers went to Callis, Rouvie to Diepe, and they arrived so luckily, as Marishal de Aumount be|gan the same day to lade six months Victuals in several Barks, and 1500 Foot at Callis, to attend the Fleet which was gone from Diepe, wherein they were to go to Dunkirk, which being block'd up by some few Spa|nish Vessels, it had not been hard to have fought them, and to have made way through them.
But before we speak of the going of the Fleet, we must acquaint you with what past in the Seas of Britanny: before it went from thence the Duke of Vandosme, vvho vvas Lord High Admiral of France, vvas gone into that Province, and had armed some Frigats about Rochel, against Count de Ognons Fleet, which was re-inforced with some Ships from Spain, which threatned Rochel not a little. When he had gathered together Twelve Ships, Three Frigats, one Gally, and some other Vessels in Brest; he went from thence on the 19th. of Iuly, and coasting along Eiavet, and other places, some other Ships and Gallies joyned with him; so as being

about Twenty Ships and Frigates, Four Gallies, and Twelve fire Boats; he went towards Olone, and from thence to the Strand of Pallisse, over|against the Fort Preda, where Monsieur Souches, Commander of the Isle of Rhe, furnished him with some French Foot.
The Spanish Fleet consisted of Seventeen Frigates commanded by Ad|miral Antonio Misnell, and by Antonio Dies, who being drown'd between Blavet and Grois, Cornelius Meigne succeeded him; to this Fleet was joyn'd Twenty five Vessels, and five fire Ships; when news came of the Arrival of the French on the Ninth of August two hours after Sunrising, they were at a competent distance to begin battle with their Canon, which roared on all sides; they advanced warily, not to ingage themselves in danger; a brisk wind blowing a little before night, the Fleets were severed The Nativity a Spanish Ship was burnt, and taken, Commanded by Antonio Gonsales a Dunkirker, a Ship of the Neapolitan Squadron vvas sunk after|vvards; Vandosme vvould have done more, but vvanting necessary pro|visions, and monies, he vvas contented to have driven them avvay, sent his Ships into Haven, and he landed at Rochel, vvent tovvards the Court, vvhich vvas then at Campagne, vvhither he came on the Fourth of Septem|ber, from vvhence he vvas suddenly sent vvith orders to relieve Dunkirk; to vvhich purpose expresses vvere sent into Britanny, and the neighbouring Provinces; at the nevvs brought by Monsieur Rorur of Dunkirks capitula|ting, the Commanders of the Fleet made that vvays presently, hoping to relieve the Tovvn; But the Parliament of England at the desire of the Spanish Ambassador in London, and the rather for that they liked not that that important Haven so near the Thames mouth should remain in the French mens hands; they apply'd themselves to divert their succor; vvherefore that Kingdom being strong at Sea, by reason of the War de|clared against the Hollanders, vvhen the French Ships appeared before Cal|lis to receive in provisions and necessaries for the relief of Dunkirk; assoon as they had cast Anchor, Blake, the English General fell upon them vvith many of his Fleet, vvith such fury, as they prepared rather to fly, than fight, though in vain; for unless it vvere Three Ships vvhich held out at Sea, and got into Flushing, all the rest were taken, but that the Parliament of England might not appear an open Enemy to France; now that they were at War with the Hollanders, they sent all the people that were in the French Ships to Callis (for they were not free from some new convulsion amongst the people) and detained only the Ships and Goods in lieu of the Reprisal made by the French Pirats, of Shipping, and goods belonging to their Merchants; whereby they had much prejudiced the Nation upon the Mediterranean. The preparations made at Callis, remaining thus of no use, Dunkirk wanted its expected succor; and the Court of France be|ing much troubled at this unexpected accident, fearing least England might break peace with them; when it learnt what was true, was aware that not only the reprisals, but the loss of Dunkirk was that which they intended. Thus in performance of the Treaty of the 18th. of September, Monsieur de Estrades marched out with 600 wounded, and sick men, and with but only 500 that vvere whole, and in health, vvith every one of them a course Loaf in their hand, vvhich vvas all the livelyhood that vvas left them, in the time allotted them to go to Callis, which was but two days, above 300 sick Soldiers dyed; they marched out with Arms, and baggage, Four great Guns, and one Morter piece; and a years time was allowed to the French that inhabited there to alienate any goods they had gotten there, or to remove them with safety.
The Archduke having reposed his Army till the 27th. of September,

sent some of them toward Terrowan, seeming as if he would enter into the Bolognese, but went elsewhere; and the Prince of Ligne, with 4000 fighting men, advanced towards the Frontiers of France, to second the Princes their interests, whose Forces lay about Paris: where such as were better minded than the rest to the Kings service, remembred how they had been used on the Six and twentieth of Iune last, as they went out of Parliament; and how unsafe they were in Paris, where the burning of the Commons House, taught them how violent the Malecontents designs were.
Monsieur Fouchet, the Kings Attorney General, who had long before desired, that the Parliament might be removed from Paris, making use of the present favorable time, was one of the chief that occasioned his Ma|jesty to remove the Parliament to Pontois, by a Decree of the Sixth of August, wherein he declared why he did it, and made void all the Decrees made in Parliament; as also in the Town-house of Paris, particularly those of the Twenty and twenty fourth of that Moneth; prohibiting all men to acknowledge Orleans as Lieutenant General of the Crown, or Conde as General of the Forces. He also charged the Counsellors, and Officers of Parliament to come to Pontois; whereupon, most of the Presidents came thither, and five or six Masters of the Requests, and about twenty Counsel|lors; whereunto divers honorable Counsellors, and Dukes, and Peers of France, who were at Court, being added, an Assembly was made, able to overthrow the Princes their factions. When this new Parliament met, the Cardinal bethought himself of retiring, since his tarrying was the only pretence of the Princes and Frondeurs; so as when he should be gone, they would lay down Arms, and do their duty. So the King would be absolute Master; or, if they should continue their disobedience, the World would know their leud intentions; all good men would be weary of ad|hering to them: And the Parliament of Pontois, which was already ac|knowledged lawful by the other Parliaments of the Kingdom, would give our Decrees against the Princes and Rebels: And when their Majesties should have made it clearly appear, that the Cardinal served only as a meer pretence to the Enemies of the Commonwealth, they might when they pleased recal him, and the people would be satisfied.
The Cardinal declared his sole endeavors were to serve the King, and with much willing zeal prepared to be gone, contrary to the opinion of most of his Friends, and of the King himself: It was added, that at this the Cardinals retreat, the Parisians were for receiving the King, and driving out Conde; in the management whereof, Father Forts, Bishop of Amiens, Father Bertaut, a Franciscan, and Counsellor Pevost, imployed much af|fection and fidelity. And the wisdom of this advice prospered, for the people who did not discern so much, did verily believe he would return no more thither.
Upon these Reasons, their Majesties were perswaded to let the Cardi|nal go, though they needed his presence then, more then his departure: But before we pass further, it must not be forgot, that the Privy Council being much troubled at the Parliaments rash resolution in chusing Orleans for the Lieutenant General of the Crown; and for their declaring the King to be a prisoner to the Cardinal, they declared not only all that till then was done in Parliament, to be void and null, but whatsoever else they should do; and that no Parliament should be acknowledged but that which was lawfully removed to Pontois.
Upon which, the greatest part of the Counsellors, who remained in Paris, debating, (amongst which were the most seditious) divers Decla|rations

were made contrary to those of the King: As that the transferring the Parliament to Pontois was unvalid, and illegitimate, protesting against it, and maintaining, that the Parliament was never kept out of Paris; though Charles the Seventh, did for some occasions of his own, remove it once to Montargis; they also damned all that was done in the Privy Coun|cil, touching the prohibiting of Taxes upon the Gates of Houses in Paris: They farther ordered, that the Salt-Farmers should make their payments to the Parliament, and that the goods of such Presidents and Counsellors, as were gone to Pontois, should be confiscated, if they should not forth|with return to Paris to do their service: And they would have proceeded further, had their power been equal to their will; but that failing, all their determinations were ridiculous. The day before the Cardinal went, he caused the King to give Patents of Dukedom and Peerage of France to Monsieur de Crequi, first Gentleman of his Majesties Bed-chamber, Son to Monsieur de Canaples, who was Son to Marishal Crequi; as also to the Marquess of Mortmar, of the House of Rochefaucolt, Knight of the Order, and Gentleman of the Bed-chamber, and to Marquess Rochelaure, Master of the Wardrobe.
The Cardinal did afterward give unto his Majesty in writing, parti|cular instructions touching Government; and amongst the rest, that he should never agree with the Parliament of Paris, unless it should first ren|der obedience by coming to Pontois; which was impossible, since all would never consent thereunto, which proved the welfare of the Kings party. For those that remained in Paris, wanting means to maintain War, and to hinder this removal to Pontois, they were forced to give way to all condi|tions that were prescribed them by the Court. He left Prince Tomaso of Savoy, Count Servient, Count Tillier, Secretary of State, to succeed him as chief Ministers of State. Moreover, he left with the Queen for Di|rector in her most important and private interest, Abbat Vndedey.
Thus taking leave of their Majesties, he went from Pontois towards Sedam on the Ninteenth of August, passing first by Turennes Army, which advanced from Lagny towards Brie; and pursuing his journey he came to Bedam, and from thence to Bovillon, where he stayed. Conde hearing that he was gone, whereby all pretence of War ceased, sent Marquess Ierze to the Lorraine Army, whither was come the Succor which Wirtem|berg brought the Princes, with orders to fall upon the Cardinal in his jour|ney, and take him prisoner: But the Spaniards, who liked it not, acquaint|ed him with it, so he escaped the danger. The very same day the King went from Pontois, and that he might win the more upon the Parisians, when he came to Campaigne, he published an Act of Amnesty; wherein after a short account of all that had past from One thousand six hundred forty and eight till then, he granted a General Pardon and Abolition of all that had been done against his Majesties service, nulling whatsoever had been done by his decrees upon occasion of the present troubles, from the first of February, One thousand six hundred fifty and one till then; as also his Majesties Declarations of September, and the eight of October that year; upon condition that Orleans, Conde, County, and their whole party, should lay down Arms within three days after the publication of the said Amnesty, and to that purpose Orleans should within three days send a writing to his Majesty subscribed by himself, wherein he should renounce all Treaties, Confederacies and Leagues, with any whatsoever without the Kings leave; and that Conde and County should do the like; and that they within the same time should put necessary orders into the Kings hands, to make the Spaniards who were in Stenay, Burg, or in any other places, to

go from thence; as also to make the Enemies Ships depart from the Coasts of France: that Orleans and Conde should cause the Foreign Forces which were about Paris, to march directly towards the Coast of Flanders, and join their Forces to them of Turenne and Ferte Senetre; and also all For|ces that were farther off within fifteen days, declaring that who should not do what was contained in this Amnesty within three days, should not partake thereof, wherein the King did only except such faults as had been committed between particular people of the same party, which he left to the due course of Law.
This Amnesty with this bundle at its breech, seemed a piece of cunning to those who liked it not, saying that those not being therein comprehen|ded who had fought Duels, or assaulted the publick Pallace on the fourth of Iuly; the King might punish whom he would, under colour of this Riot. It did not withstanding make impression upon those who liked not the cavil of the Princes, and Frondeurs, but had thought that when the Cardinal should be gone, the Princes and Parliament would throw them|selves at the Kings feet: But though neither the Princes nor Frondeurs had any thought of accepting the Amnesty; yet they appeared zealous of the general good, seeming very well pleased that the Cardinal was gone. Orleans and Conde went to the Parliament, where it was decreed that thanks should be sent to his Majesty for dismissing Mazarine, all the chief Com|panies, and the whole body of the City did the like. And soon after the Parliament resolved to intreat the King to return to Paris, and the Princes declared they were ready to lay down arms, when a good Amnesty should be granted. Orleans sent an express to the Duke Anville, who was a friend of his, and one whom the King loved, and who was very faithfull to the Queen, to get Pasports from his Majesty for such Commissioners as were to negotiate a final Peace: But Anville having detained the Messenger three days, sent him back without an answer, for it seemed not decent that the King should enter into other Treaties, having supplyed all things with an Amnesty, and intended that the Princes should presently lay down arms, (as they had offered to do) when the Cardinal was gone from Court. An|ville writ therefore back to the Duke of Orleans, telling him that he thought his request would be granted, if his desire were made directly to the King; which being done, Marishal de Estampes had a Pass sent him to come to Court, not as a Commissioner, but as a Courtier; and at the same time certain private Treaties were renued between Secretary Goulas, Mar|quis Chasteaneuse, and the Dutchess of Aguillon, the contents whereof was to slave Orleans off from joyning with Conde, whose declarations made in Parliament, and to the Court, were clearly found not to be real, since at the same time that he said he was ready for Peace, he protested at Madrid and Brussels, that he would alwaies join with the Crown of Spain and con|tinue war, and did negotiate in England for assistance in his designs; that therefore all assistance in France should be taken from him, without which he would be but a bare Captain of the King of Spain, and would be able to do but little against so powerfull a Kingdom, when it should be wholly obedient to the King.
The Prince his Forces lay this mean while behind the River between Su|rene and St. Clou, expecting Recruits from Flanders, and those fruitfull hills being full of Vineyards, and grapes beginning then to grow ripe, the Soldiers did very much prejudice the people in these parts, at whose requests they were sent to St. Victoire, where some Soldiers quarreling with the Ci|tizens upon the Guard, five or six of the inhabitants were slain, and twenty of the Soldiers, which seemed to set them at variance.

But because the Cardinal knew that the welfare of the Royal party consi|sted in reducing the Parisians to a necessity of Peace, which they began to wish, the people, Merchants, and all others being weary of the ruines which they underwent, he advised the King to go Campaigne, as being more com|modious for the Court than Pontoise, and that he should never be allured to go to Paris, without undoubted security of not being once more detain|ed there; and this was one of the chiefest Maxims which he recommended to the Queen in his absence, which he gave in precise charge to Abbat Vnde|dei; he added, that the Kings Forces should go to oppose those of Flanders which were marching to assist the Princes, and that if they should be too weak, they should go to Villeneufe, upon the Seene, and fortifie themselves, and have Provisions from Corbeile, Melune, and other neighbouring parts, by means of the River, where, whilst they should tarry, the Enemies For|ces would be necessitated to keep there abouts also, so as the Country be|ing sack't, and plundered by the Soldiery, and Travellers slain, the Pa|risians would without an open breach, be in a manner besieged, whereby the Princes would become odious, as thought the chief occasion thereof, that thus keeping corrispondency with their friends that were faithfull to them in Paris, the Parisians might easily be brought to resolve upon fitting means to free themselves of their miseries which could not be done with|out a King whilst there was a King. This was the best thing the Cardinal could do; for this Maxime well observed, fomented the Prince his ruine, since not being able to free the Parisians from the ruine wherewith they were threatned, without his withdrawing, he would be undoubtedly un|done, for by staying there he would increase their miseries, whereby he would draw on the peoples hatred; and if he should go away he would loose the assistance of so rich and powerfull a City, and would be forced to retire to his Towns upon the Maax, forsake the Kingdom, and cast him|self into the Spaniards hands.
The Spaniards were much confused when they heard the Cardinal was gone from France, for they foresaw that by his removal, all pretences which did any ways cloak the Male-contents reasons, ceased, and wisely weighing how they might maintain, but not advance the Princes party, two ways were thought upon; the one to advance with their whole Army, and drive the King from about Paris, and so keep the Citizens true to the Princes: the other to feed the Princes, and Parisians with hopes, but with|out effects, to the end that by appearance of their aid they might keep fast to their pretentions, and redoubling their disobedience, might at last be necessitated to declare against the King; and becoming unworthy of pardon, and afraid to be punished, they might strive to continue their usurped Authority. The first was gain-said by suspicion, that the Court being reduced to straits, should grant the pretentions of the Princes, which were still hotly pursued by their well-wishers. The other seemed not fit for the present conjunctures; for when the Princes, and Parliament should be void of all hope, and promise made by the Spaniard, they must be ruled by necessity, and be contented with such terms as they could get. They therefore chose a third way; which was to cause their Troops to advance, that they might thereby soment Conde's unquiet thoughts, who making War in France; as first Prince of the blood, and one of the vali|antest, and best esteemed Commanders of the age, was likely to disturb the whole Kingdom long. Wherefore after having staid a while at Fimes, and thereabouts; and having changed Fuenseldaglia's Forces, for those of the Duke of Lorrain, who had again taken pay for his Army for two months from the Spaniard, they marched towards the Seene; it was thought better-to send the Lorrainer, then Fuenseldaglia, for that they had

rather put Forreigners to hazard and sufferings than their own Soldiers, as also because if Spaniards, and Italians who differ so much both in habit, and face, from the French should come into France, they would rather provoke the hatred and aversion than civilities of the French towards them, who do naturally abhor Nations of another Climate. This Army consisted of 3000 Horse, the most part Germans, under the Duke of Wi|temberg, of Six Regiments of Horse, paid by the Country of Leige, and the parts adjacent, in the name of the Princes, commanded by the Che|valliere de Guise, and Count Pas; and of 6000 Lorrainers, which in all made between Ten and Eleven thousand good fighting men, and well in or|der. This Army being come on the first of September, almost without any obstacle to Sessene, a little Town in Brie, Fourteen leagues from Paris, thought to approach the Seene, and to come to Villeneuf St. George, in the same place where some months before the Duke of Lorrain lay when he came to relieve Estampes; but he was prevented by Turenne, whose Army being much lessened by their continual labour intrenched his Army there, and threw two Bridges upon Boats over the River, to succor the other side, and to provide forrage for the Horse. Lorrain kept therefore higher up, and falling down afterwards into the Plane, incamped on the East side of the River; the Army of the Princes going the next day from St. Victoire, past over the Seene at the Pontneuf of Paris, and over the Marne at Charin|ton, and joyned with Lorrain; the Princes Forces consisted of about 3500, what Horse, what Foot, the one commanded by Baron Cleinchamp, which were the remainders, which came from Flanders with Nemeurs; the second was Orlean's own Forces Commanded by General Beaufort; the third were Conde's men, under Prince Taranto the General, and the Lieute|nant General Tavanes. For Rochefaucolt was not yet cured of his wounds; These three bodies of Armies, and the other two of Lorrain, Wirtemberg, and Duke Charles, having assigned over their Spanish Forces to Conde, Lorrain declared he was no Enemy to France, nor to the King thereof, but that he was only obliged by the Spaniards to bring those men to Conde, which being done he was free. He went the same day, being the Sixth of September, to Paris, where consulting with Orleans in Orleans his own Palace (wherein he was lodged) with Conde, and the rest of the party, they resolved to draw near the Kings Camp with all their Forces, and ei|ther to fight them, as occasion should serve, or to incommodate them, chief|ly in their forrage, in performance whereof they made divers quarters about Villeneuf St. George in safe places, and well fortified, from whence sending out great parties of Horse to plunder, and get Victuals, their past several skirmishes between them and Turens men, with Reciprocal success, but of little moment; the Soldiers being thus incamped all about, Paris was besieged by its own Friends; the King was desired daily to come to Paris, who answered he vvas vvilling to do so, but that the Parisians must first get Orleans to cause Conde to return to his Government of Guienne, and Beaufort to Annet, a Castle of his Fathers, and all Forreigners out of France.
The Cardinal of Rets, Dutchess of Chevereux, and Chasteauneuf, who were all three Condes Enemies, made use of these favourable conjunctures, and were not wanting to stave Orleans off from joyning with Conde; and to re-unite him to the Court, for the reasons already alledged.
Notwithstanding all these troubles of the Court, the siege of Montrond continued; and Count Palau, who commanded there in chief, knowing how few the besieged were, and what scarcity they had of Victuals, re|solved to open his Trenches and hasten the taking thereof, but meeting

with more opposition than he expected, he fell to finish his line, the cir|cumvallation whereof being but small, it might the more easily be kept. Marquess Persau who commanded therein for the Prince, to keep from be|ing reduced to such necessity, as he must surrender upon discretion, articled on the 22th. of August, that if he were not relieved by the 30th. of that moneth, he would deliver up the Castle to the King, and would match out on the first of September with Arms, and Baggage. That Hostility should cease on both sides, and that daily Victuals should be given by the King's men to the Soldiers and Inhabitants, they being paid for it; that no Forti|fications should be made on neither side, and that if relief should come, Persau and his men should be Newters, and do nothing whilst the Line was fought for; that all lives should be saved; that Tallon, la Coste, Ballet, and Marselly, who were come thither from Dunkirk to serve the Prince should injoy the same articles; but as for the Officers, and their places, they should be at the King's disposal, to whom Count Paluau would write in their behalf; that those that came out should be convoy'd to the Princes Camp near Paris, and that Pasports should be given to those that would return to their own homes. That an Inventory should be made of all the Prince his goods, part whereof should be safely convey'd to Chasteaureux, and delivered to the Governour thereof, and that the rest which could not be convey'd, should remain in the hands of the Prince his Agent, who was to have leave to tarry there, and have a care of them, that Monsieur Hau|taeville should keep in his place of Farmer as all the rest of Conde's Far|mers in Berry.
The Prince hearing in what danger this important place was, sent Count Briole from his Camp on the 19th. of August with 500 choice Horse, orde|ring him to pass over the Loire suddenly in Boats over against Sully, and to joyn with the Marquess Levy, and Count Colligny in Berry with 300 Horse.
Briole past over the Loire, but not finding his friends so provided as he was made to be believe, and the line not to be mastered, he retreated speedily to Paris; for Count Maipas marching towards him with 800 of Turenne's Horse, traced him; but Briole got safe to the Prince his Camp, and Montrond according to articles remain'd in the King's hands.
The Kings affairs beginning to better, and all wise men knowing that affairs would at last prove favourable to the King, the Lord Chancellor be|ing sent for by his Majesty, went to Court; who by leave from the King had staid in Paris as a private Gentleman; but the Princes desiring to Au|thorise, and give Reputation to the new Council, Orleans sent to him to come and assist therein, as had been intimated to him by Parlia|ment, threatning that in case of refusal, he should be forced to come upon worser terms; the Chancellor being thus necessitated to come to that Council, did undauntedly, and with such wariness behave himself, as not at all wavering from the King's service, but moderating those who were swai'd by passion, and interest, did by his wisdom much advantage the Court-affairs; but though it was known he did the King good service there, yet it was not thought fit that the unlawful Authority usurped by Male-contents should be authenticated by one that was honoured with so conspicuous a charge; he was therefore sent for back by a Capuchine Fryar, whom he presently obeyed, going out of Paris in a Priests habit, and came to their Majesties the Third of September at Campaign, where he was very much welcomed; but the seals remained with the first Presi|dent.
A novelty worth the relating happened in Brisack, for the better knowledg whereof we must take the business a little higher, and search

the beginning. In the beginning of the year 1650, did Monsieur Eclack Governour of Brisack dye, a man of great fidelity, and honour. Mon|sieur Charlevois, who commanded a Regiment of Ten Companies there, and was the Kings Lieutenant, sent the Major of his Regiment to acquaint the Court with it, and assured their Majesties that no novelty should suc|cede in the Fort, till they should send another Governour, which he did believing that the Court would send none. But about the end of next February, the King chose Monsieur Tiliadet, Camp-master, and Governour of Beaupames to be Governour of Brisack, which when Charlevois heard, who hoped to have been chief Commander there himself, he treated with Colonel Eclack, Nephew to the dead Governour, who Commanded a Brigade of Germans in that Town, by which treaty they bound themselves to joyn together, and not to admit of any Governour. They forthwith sent Monsieur de Blois le Shelle, one of Charlevois Captains, and Cousins, to tell Tillier, the Secretary of State, and Tilliadet, that he should not be received into that Government, the Cardinal, who about the same time was with the Court in Burgundy, hearing this, sent Messieurs Bausant Fruart, and Millet to Brisack, to wish Charlevois to obey the King, and to receive Tilliadet, and writ to the Marishalless Guebrian, who had great power with Charlevois to will him to obey. Charlevois listned to these Gentle|men, and to the Marishals Wife, and resolved to receive the said Gover|nour: upon promise that he would not innovate any thing in the Garrison, and that he would keep his Brigade in the same condition it was in; which was granted him by Letter from the King. Colonel Eclack finding that Charlevois had confer'd with the said Gentlemen, contrary to agreement, was displeased; Charlevois, that he might be of greater power in that Fort, perswaded Eclack to go to the Switzers, for which he had a Thou|sand pound sterling paid him. Soon after, Tilliadet went from Paris, and came to Brisack in May; Charlevois received him with all the Regalities due to a Governour, they lived Four or Five Moneths very well together. At last Tiliadet proposing to reduce Charlevoi's Brigade from Ten to Five Companies, intending to put the other Five into his own Brigade, and so to be stronger than he; Charlevois laughed at the proposal, and shewed the King's promise, that no innovation should be made; but Tilliadet per|sisting in his design, Charlevois acquainted his friends at Court, wishing them to acquaint the Cardinal therewith. Charlevois, who thought the Cardinals pleasure had been not to innovate any thing (though the truth is he intended to reduce them from a Thousand to 750 Foot, and to add the overplus to Tilliadet's Brigade, so to keep them equal) took courage, and declared he would not yield to the Governours desire; whilst things went thus, the Cardinal withdrew from Court; wherefore Charlevois sus|pecting that Tilliadet might conspire his ruine, by making him be detain'd by the first Troops that should come into Alsatia, resolved to secure him|self from surprize, and acquainted his friends with it who were at Court, desiring them to preserve his concernments with the Queen, assu|ring her of his fidelity, and desiring her to withdraw Tilliadet. Her Majesty finding that Charlevois his Authority in Brisack was greater than Tiliadets, resolved to remove the Governour, as she did, to Besanzon in Burgundy; but Charlevois knowing that some Officers of his Brigade ad|hered to Tilliadets interest, put them out of the Fort, together with some of Tilliadets particular friends, and kindred, amongst which his Nephew the Baron of Serigliack.
Wherefore the Queen knowing that Charlevois was a Creature of Ma|rishal Guebrians Wife, wished her to admonish him of the respect, and loy|alty

Loyalty he ought unto the King, which she did, sending Monsieur Rotra to him to acquaint him with their Majesties minds. Charlevois seeming to correspond to the good opinion which was had of him, writ to the Queen that he would keep within the bounds of duty, and that the Marishas wife, his Patroness and Benefactrix should be his caution. He also writ to the Marishals wife to assure her of his fidelity and obedience, desiring her to answer for him. But the Court considering afterwards that Brisack was not safe during the troubles of France, they went about to make it secure. Wherefore knowing what the Marishaless was able to do, the Queen sent her to Brisack to content Charlevois with 10000 Crowns sterling, and every Captain with a thousand Crowns, besides a whole pay to all the Garrison. Charlevois had no mind to quit that Place, hoping by means of the troubles of France to fix himself there, wherefore he forgot his promise, and his gratitude to the Marishals wife, finding out cavils to retract the agreement; and at the same time that he sent to assure the Court of his fidelity, and to desire the Marishaless to ingage for him; he sent also treat with Conde. The Marishals wife went from Paris to see these orders performed, and sent Rotra before to dispose Charlevois to accept of the proposals, who when he came to Brisack, found his mind altered, and not answerable to what he had said in his last Letters; wherefore he returned to acquaint the Marishaless with it in Montebilliarde, who not discouraged, went to the Fort, where he met her with all obsequionsness two Leagues out of the Town, she in|deavoured to reduce him to his Devoire; he seemed to be willing to se|cure her, and to depend upon her; but in effect was averse, and found difficulties in all the proposals: But that he might not appear contumacious to the Court, nor make that Lady suspect collusion, he said he would ne|ver accept of any Governour, unless he were of the house of Guebrian, or her self, in which case he would be ready to submit, and to receive all her commands: she who desired only to secure the King, proposed the Ma|rishal de l' Hospitall for Governour, who was void of all exception, but Charlevois stood firm to have one of her family, or else her self: so as find|ing him inflexible, and that he went about to thrust her out, she went to Moret near Fontenbleau, where she spoke with Monsicon, who travelled to and fro for the Cardinal, by whose means she informed Mazarine of all that had passed. The Court was at this time at Poictiers; and the Car|dinal, who though he were now out of the Kingdom, minded still the Kings service, writ to the Queen, that she might rely upon the Marishaless, whom he knew to be affectionately zealous to the Kings service: wherefore full authority being given her, she returned to Brisack she found Charlevois ready to render her all due respect, but having advised with his Officers, he cavild at the Kings Letters, saying, those were not convenient provisions for a government, and added that his confidents would not give way that the Marshaless should enter upon that charge, but that for his own part he was her eternally obliged servant, and alwaies ready to obey hr commands; yet at the same time sought how to be rid of her.
The Marshaless discovering Charlevois bad meaning, advertised the Car|dinal therewith by Monsier Le Toache, who presently detained Le Coste, and Heruart two of Charlevois Captains, whom he had sent to the Cardinal to negotiate about the affairs of that Government, which he did to pro|long time, and that these men might not return to Erisack, to counsel Charle|vois amiss, the Court sent orders then to the Marisheless to take Charleuois Prisoner, and seise upon him dead or alive, wherefore she making use of the love which he bore to one of her Gentlewomen, feigned to go recre|ate her self out of the Town, and agreed wich Siron, who was then at

Brisack, to be at an appointed place, and to arrest him, the hour being come when they were to take Coach, the Lady seemed somewhat ill dis|posed, and wisht them to go without her. Charlevois went out in the La|dies Coach, with the said Gentlewoman, which Ferneut and la Toach, thinking upon nothing but his amours. Sicon made him Prisoner, and not being able to bring him to Nancy, as was designed, being the Lorraigners were beyond the Rhine, he carried him to Philipsburgh, which proved pre|judicial as shall be said.
This the Ladies blow, was not only remarkable for it self, but for other consequences; for had not he been taken, that important place would have been lost for Charlevois had agreed with the Duke of Orleans; the Arch-Duke of Flanders, and the Prince of Conde, to sell it to the Duke of Lorrain for 100000 Crowns to himself, and 10000 sterling to the Garrison, for performance whereof, Fuges the Dukes General, staid only for mony to disburse.
The news of Charlevois his imprisonment being divulged, his friends and family in Brisack began to rage; the Garrison rose, running through the Streets, the Lady ran hazard of life; nor hab she escaped, had it not been for the love which many of the Soldiers, and inhabitants bore to the me|mory of her late Husband Marishal Guebrian, being told that they meant to detain her there, to exchange her for Charlevois: Wherefore having ta|ken fitting orders, and brought the Kings affairs to such a posture as she should be able to do his Majesty more service elsewhere. She went to Basil, a Canton of the Switzers, and sent la Touch to Court to let them know what was done; wherefore the Cardinal sent his Nephew Count Moret to her with Letters Patents to the Governess; whilst the Lady was in Basill, a con|spiracy was made against the seditious Officers, to put the Fort into the Kings hands, by three Italians, which being discovered by a Frenchman, they were executed.
Charlevois being come to Philipsburg, instead of being kept safe, where|by he might have been brought to treat with the Marishaless upon the first propositions; he was suffered to walk freely up and down the Streets; for being in Alsatia, where Count Harcourt was Governor, and who had often desired the Government of Brisack, but had still been denyed it, Monsieur Moireux, a servant of his, thinking this a fit opportunity to make his Patron obtain what he so much desired, treated of himself with Charle|vois, that if he would promise him to put Brisack into Harcourts hands, he would set him at liberty, and Harcourt should protect his interests. Char|levois agreed hereunto; so as the aforesaid Moret, and Monsieur Besemaux going to Philipsburg to treat of an agreement, they were denied entrance, as if they were the Kings Enemies. Count Lermy, who commanded that Town, and who together with Moirous had treated with Charlevois, went to Brisack, whether he came just as the aforesaid three Italians were execu|ted. The treaty being thus broke which was introduced by the Mari|shaless, she made War against that Garrison, with the Kings Forces that were in Alsatia, under Lieutenant General Rosa, re-inforced by 1500 Foot, and 200 Horse sent by Marishal de la Ferte Senetre by order from the Car|dinal, and by 600 Horse more which the Marishaless had raised; where|fore those of Brisack being straitned, offer'd to come to composition so as the Forces might retreat from those parts.
The Cout which was then troubled with Civil Wars in Guienne, and being to provide against that which was kindling about Loire, and in Parish least the Garrison of Brisack, might bring in the Lorrainers, or Spaniards; dissembled, and gave way to the agreement, set Charlevois at liberty, and

re-placed him in that Government. Harcourt was this mean while in Gui|enne, more intent than ever according to his wonted valor and fidelity, to the War in those parts. The report that what Count Lermy, and Moirous had done, was by his consent, occasioned those who sought to bereave the King of so gallant a Commander, to give out, that he being disgusted for having been denyed that Government, and the Title of Marishal General of the Armies; knew of the treaty, and had approved of Charlevois his articles; insinuating into him, that the Court not being well pleased with his proceedings, had ordered to have him made Prisoner. Though this was false, yet the least shadow of suspicion prevailing in so nice a business, the Count feared some hard measure; Wherefore when he had setled the King's Authority in Guienne, he by their Majesties leave went for the Court, where he would have appeared, had he not received advertisement again, that orders were given out to stop him on his way? Wherefore he changed his course, and went to Brisack with only Five of his followers, protesting that he did it only to secure himself, and that he might the bet|ter justifie his actions; but the Cardinal knowing him to be a Prince who was infinitely jealous of his honour, knew he would never do any thing that should blur the Reputation which he had wone by so much valor and fidelity; and that he would do whatsoever his Majesty should command him, wherefore he applyed himself not too hotly to the business, and the treaties were proceeded in leasurely, as shall be said in the insuing Book.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The NINTH BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The Parisians begin to resent the Miseries of War; wish the King's Return; have divers Meetings in the Pallace-Royal, and Town House. They send seve|ral times to his Majesty, to desire him to return to Paris. Mareschal Turenne removes his Camp from Ville Neuse St. George, and goes towards the Mar|ne. The Duke of Guise being freed from Imprisonment in Spain, comes to Paris. Conde and Lorrain with their Troops march  a Campagne; their Proceedings. The King returns to Paris, with general Applause. Re-unites the Two Parliaments; passes some Decrees, and banisheth divers Councellours. The Duke of Orleans will not see the King; he goes to Limburs, and from thence to Blois: Uproars continue still in Bourdeaux: where the Olmiere pre|dominates. The Spaniards continue the Siege of Barcellona: The French make many attempts to relieve it, but in vain. Marquess St. Andrea's For|ces revots, and goes towards France: The Proceeding of the Kings Army in Guyenne. Marquess Plessis Belliere sent by the Court to Catalonia; his Attempts, and Proceedings in Guyenne. Barcellona Capitulates with Don John of Austria, and Surrenders. Cassall is threatned by the Spaniards: The Duke of Mantua presseth the Court of France for Assistance: He Nego|tiates with the Spaniards and agrees. Count d' Argenson indeavours to de|sturb him, but in vain; Forces are brought before the Town, the French are driven away, and the Town is put into the hands of the Duke its Master. The Courts resentment for the loss of this place. A Treaty between Poland and Sweden in Lubeck. Count Quince is sent into Piemont: Treaties with the Dutchess of Savoy, whose Embassadour is received in France, as those of Crowned Kings. Cardinal Retz is Imprisoned. Mazarine returns to France. The rise of the Wars between the English and the Hollanders; and what occur'd between those two Nations.

THE Armies this mean while faced one another neer Ville Neufe St. George; the Princes intended to straighten the Kings Camp so as they might force it to rise, and might fight it; and being more in number might destroy it. The Kings men stay there though they suffer much, thinking to weary out the Parisians, to reduce them to their duties, and to make them drive all Forreigners out of the City; yet nothing of moment is done, for both sides proceed warily. So as the Coun|try

try being over-run on all sides by the Souldiery, Paris is the only place which is incommodated, none being sure to Traffick without the Gates, though with Guides or Pasports, without danger of being plundered or slain.
It was resolved on the First of September in the Town-house, to send to their Majesties the two Sheriffs, six Common-Councellors, three Quateri|neri, four Citizens of every Quarter, and two of every one of the six Corporations of Merchants, whereupon Monsieur Pierre the Kings Solici|tor was sent to Court, to procure Pasports for the said Commissioners. The Clergy of Paris were also desired to send Commissioners to Court, to desire his Majesty to return to his Metropolis, and Mazarine being gone, Cardinal Retz took that occasion, to receive the Cardinals Cap from his Majesty, and caused himself to be chosen the Clergy's chief Commissio|ner; the Commissioners were twelve Canons of the Church of Nostre Dame, four of St. Chapelle, many Curats, and two of every Church-Com|monalty. He arrived at Compiegne on the 10th of September, with a great Attendance; he made an Eloquent Oration to his Majesty, exhorting him to return to Paris; but the true Motive of his going, was said to be, to gratifie the Parisians in their desire of his Majesties return, and to be the mediator thereof himself, so to win the merit of so universal a good; and making advantage of Mazarine's absence, renders himself necessary to the Court; but in a particular Audience with the Queen, he strove to excuse and justifie himself, that he never had any thought of being chief Mini|ster of State, as had been laid to his charge: Her Majesty after having ci|villy received him, replyed, That she held him to be of too high a spirit and understanding, not to have had such an intention; that she had never listned to those popular Speeches, since that Imployment depending only upon the King, and her, neither of them had ever had any such thought, there was therefore no need of his justification on that behalf. The Cardinal being sufficiently an|swer'd, and finding himself to be thought a cunning companion, sought by all means how to become considerable; to which purpose he applyed himself chiefly to two things, the one to insinuate himself more into the favour of Orleans, that he might rule him as he lifted; the other to marr all secret Treaties of the Prince of Conde with the Court, which was pri|vately manag'd by Monsieur Goucourt, and Aiselin, by intelligence with Marquess Mortmar, working it so as that Conde might abandon Paris, and Orleans be the sole head of that party; whereby he thought to keep Ma|zarine away, or to reap his ends, which were to put himself into such a posture, as that he might keep his Imployment, and reimburse the Mo|nies which he had spent in these Troubles, whereby he had incurr'd a great Debt.
The Kings Answer was generall as formerly, That he was ready to come to Paris, when the Enemies to the common good were driven out. This was the Courts Maxime, to excite the City against the Princes, who though they laboured to make men believe that the Amnesty at Pontois was but a piece of cunning, it was notwithstanding accepted of by the gene|rality, not only in Paris, but in Bourdeaux, though the Court being far of, and the Princess of Condy, Prince of Conti, Dutchess of Longueville and others being in Bourdeaux prevailed by their presence, and authority in that City. The new Councel of the Olmiere resolved, That the Parliament should not accept thereof, without the Prince of Conde's consent.
The Burdelois were the more obstinate herein, because the Kings Army wanted a General in Guyenne when Harcourt was gone from thence, ho|ping according to the intimation given them by Marsine, to recover the

Towns lost by Condy's, especially since the King's Forces were grown so luke-warm, as they suffer'd Marsine to do what he would. Wherefore it being requisite to provide a new Chieftain; the Command of that Pro|vince was committed to the Duke of Candale, the only Son to the Duke of Espernone, a young, lively, and generous Prince, and very valiant. Mar|sine advanc't in the mean while to take the Castle of Ieloux in the Province of Albret, within three Leagues of Bazas, and entring the Town, which had neither Walls nor Garrison, he assaulted the Castle, which was yiel|ded up unto him the first day, upon Discretion, Monsieur di Carbonsieux re|maining Prisoner there. He left a Garrison there Commanded by Monsieur de la Magdalene, Captain of Conty's Brigade, who holding Intelligence af|terwards with Monsieur Trassy the King's Commissary, was discovered by his Lieutenant, and wounded twice by him as he sought to escape through a Window, and was shot to Death by order from Marsine: He then be|sieged the Castle of Chasteau di Masnes in the Sandas, wherein the Mistriss being absent who was Wife to the Marquess of Villa frank, it was notwith|standing for some dayes defended by Monsieur Trajane, till having no hope of relief, he was forced to yield. Here was much good Houshold-stuff of Espernouns, and above 10000 Sacks of Corn; Monsieur St. Micant, Go|vernour of Bazas was left Commander thereof; Marsine went then to take Mas d' Agenois, a City seated upon the Garomne, above la Reolle, not far from Marmanda, begirt with Walls and Towers after the ancient fashion, he assaulted it bravely, but it was stoutly defended by Monsieur de la Barre, till not being able to sustain a second assault for want of Men, it was taken by force, many of the Souldiers and Citizens being slain, and not a few of the Prince his Men, amongst which Monsieur Ligier, a Guiarate of Bourde|aux. Being puft up by these prosperous Successes, Marsine past over the Garomne, took St. Basile, and hearing that Marmanda, and Agen were rea|dy to compound, (for after Harcourt was gone, all the people thereabouts were at their wits end) he advanced thitherward: Monsieur Galapian shew'd him how easie it was to prevent the King's Men, by taking the aforesaid two Cities; but this Opinion was not followed; but that of Monsieur Ba|vias prevailed, or rather particular interest, which invited him towards Perigont, a rich Country, and not ruin'd by War: He came before Sarlat, a Town in the bottom between two Mountains, one League distant from Dorgona a great River, where having made a breach in the Walls, he could not notwithstanding make an assault, being hindred by a subterranean Cave; from whence several Soldiers sallying out the Enemy was repulst, and the place would have been preserved, had not the Citizens been di|vided among themselves, but many of them inclining unto the Prince's party, they forc't the others to come to an Agreement, and receive their Garrison, which Marsine left there under Monsieur Lavagniack Onderdieu: He advanc't from thence with his Horse, and got good Contribution from the neighbouring parts. When Candal was come with the King's Forces, he repulst the Enemy, Marsine being gone towards Perigord, so as the For|ces being divided were the more easily destroy'd. This Prince made much progress, wan many of his Father's Enemies by his generosity, and got esti|mation at Court.
At this time Duke Mercure kept in Provence, as Governor thereof, but without Angolesme's dismission, who was the true Governor, who by Order from the King was made Prisoner in Bern by Monsieur Guialotiera, and brought to the King's Camp before Montrond. The Duke had promis'd the King to go no more to Provence without his Majestie's leave, and to stay at Paris; but pretending to go to his own lands, he was detein'd by the way,

it being thought that he meant to go to Tolon, the chief Haven of that Pro|vince, to foment the Sedition which was begun there; which imprison|ment, joyn'd to the diligence used by Mercure, reduced Tolon to obedience, and rendred the whole Province peaceful. Angolesme was Prisoner about three Months, but the Queen being assured by the Dutchess his Wife, and by Duke Ioyeuse, of his good intentions, he was set at liberty in the begin|ning of October, and was by his Majesty permitted to tarry at Paris, and at the Court, keeping still the Letters Patents of Governor of Provence.
When Cardinal de Retz, and the rest of the Clergy's Commissioners had delivered their Message to their Majesties at Champaigne, the aforesaid Pierre was sent back with the Answer, which was this:
That his Majesty bearing still a good affection to his good Town of Pa|ris, and being well assured of its sincerity, was exceedingly grieved to hear how it had been opprest, particularly on the 4th of Iuly last, when all things were perverted which he had applied to make his good intentions known; Firing, Massacres, and other strange things being practised to di|vert his faithful Subjects from their duties, lawful Officers and Magistrates being banished, the Governor Provost of Merchants, and others forc'd to flee for safety of their lives; in whose Places the Authors of these Outrages were put; that new Sheriffs were chosen contrary to the King's Prohibiti|on; Taxes laid upon the People, whilst those of the Country-Towns were barbarously plunder'd; that his Majesty had done what was possible, yea, many things to the prejudice of his Dignity, to restore them to their for|mer Liberty, and to preserve them from the miseries of War; affording the Princes honourable means to lay down their Arms, and to return to their due Obedience; instead whereof they had made an Assembly of the City (the Chief Magistrates whereof had neither lawful Title nor Character) under a specious pretence of demanding Peace to delude the People, when they themselves refused it, and declared they could not accept thereof, though the Conditions were the same that they desired: that thinking of nothing less than of laying down Arms, they had called a Spanish Army to Paris. with which they joyn'd theirs, intending to maintain their violent usurped Authority, and to divide the poor Subjects Substance amongst them|selves: that they had given a sinister Interpretation to what he had done, and did do for preserving the Lives and Liberties of his Officers, and Magi|strates; that he long'd to see that noble City in that splendor, and abundance it was in the first years of his Reign; to re-establish Commerce, and his Par|liament, and to honour it with his Presence, not only for his own content, but for that of all his good Subjects; that the mean while his Majesty would be well satisfied to see a good many Officers, and Inhabitants visit him: but considering that the Body of the City was then commanded, guided, and composed by the Adherents of those Princes, who contrary to Custome, were come into the said Assembly, to hinder any thing that might not make for War: That he ought not to Authenticate any thing that was done in their presence, specially in that of Beaufort and Broussell, who were the chief Authors of all the present Disorders, that therefore he declared that Assem|bly to be null, invalid, and unlawful, and consequently he could not grant the desired Pasports; but that he would grant Passes for any particular men that were desirous to see him, were they either lawfully chosen Magistrates, or other publick Officers, Merchants or Citizens, who should be gratiously listned unto in any thing they should represent.
Pierre returning with this Answer to Paris, where all things grew worse, not only in Commerce, but in Damage suffer'd by the Neighbouring parts by the depredations of both Armies, now that the season of sowing Corn,

and planting Vines came on, wherefore they began more openly, and with more fervour to resume treating with the Court by means of the Cardinal de Retz, Chasteaneuf, and other persons who desired Conde's ruine, no less than Mazarine's.
The Duke of Orleans seeming to have the same sense; and weary of these Combustions, reiterated his desire of quiet to Anville and others; and on the 20th of Sept. writ to the Queen, That having to his great joy by Marquess Ioyeuse Sambert understood, how gratiously his Majesty was minded to Peace, he thought himself bound to assure her by these Lines, that he and Conde did passionately desire it also: But that though the first Object of his Prayers to Heaven ought to be the welfare of the State, yet he protested that the in|clination which he always had perfectly to honour her Majesty, was one of the chief Reasons thereof, and that nothing could ever happen, should alter the zeal and respect, whereby he declared himself her most obedient Ser|vant.
At this time la Corte d' Aydes resolved to go to Pontois, in conformity to his Majestie's Orders; and his Majestie's other good Servants sought how to withdraw themselves out of the slavery of the Frondeure: At last the Bishop of Amiens, Father Bertaut a Franciscan, and divers others who shall be here|after named, held an Assembly on the 24th of September, consisting of about four or five hundred men in the Palace-Royal, where the Counsellor Charles Preuost appear'd, who was totally upon good terms with the Court, and presented the Assembly with a Letter from the King, wherein his Majesty said, He had a great desire to return to Paris, but that he could not do it so long as its seditious Masters were there; wherefore he propounded, that all faithful Citi|zens should take up Arms, should throw straw away, put Paper in their Hats, go into the Streets, and cry, Vive le Roy, and joyntly possess themselves of all the Chief Places of the City, drive out the Disturbers, and fall upon as many as should oppose their Design, which being done, he would then return. The Chief Authors of this Assembly, after the aforesaid Bishop of Amiens, Father Bertaut, and Coun|cellor Preuost, who had the whole management of the Business, were, Mon|sieur Barby the King's Maistre d' Hostella; Luines, Councellor of the Parlia|ment of Mets; Monsr. Borgon; Monsr. de Fay; Messieurs Bidal, and Villars, both of them great Silk-Merchants; Monsr. Brun, Merchant of Tapistry; Monsr. Farin, the King's Secretary; Monsr. la Mare; Monsr. St. Michael, all which had many who sided with them. All these declared, that they had no other design in this their Assembly, than to find out the best means how to bring the King back to his Metropolis, which was upon the brink of ruine, without his Majestie's presence: They took a Solemn Oath to observe religiously all resolutions that should be taken, and therein if occasion should serve, spend their lives and livelihoods; taking upon them to defend, each of them in particular, and all in general, who should be injured by the con|trary Party. The same Oath concluded, that they had no other end in this their meeting, but the Glory of God, and the Re-establishment of the King's lawful Authority after the manner of his Predecessors.
Though not above four or five hundred men met in this Assembly, yet had they many Adherents, and the six Corporations of Merchants concur'd with them, most of the Colonels of Quarters, with almost all the Commissio|ners of the Town-house, their true end was to let the people see that there was in Paris a strong Faction for the King; and to oblige the Duke of Or|leans to grant Passes to the Commissioners of Merchants, and of the Colo|nels to go to Court, and treat with his Majesty, which was refused as pre|judicial to the Interests of the Princes. This Solemn Oath being taken, some one proposed the Cardinal of Retz for the Head of this new Party; but those

who considered that this was proposed only to make him necessary at Court, and to bring him by degrees into the chief Administration of Government, opposed it mainly, saying, That they ought to receive no other Head, but he who should be sent and chosen by his Majesty.
The Princes, and all their Faction were much astonish't at this News, fore-seeing the down-fall of their Designs, and began to think how to re|duce disorders, and how to keep off the currant which was coming upon them. Mareschal d' Estampes went with Orders from the Duke of Orleans to the Palace Royal to dissolve the Assembly, but in vain. Madamoselle thought to go thither her self in person, to break off these Negotiations, by her presence, and authority; but when she considered that her Reputation might be concerned therein, she forbore doing it; and she was wise therein, for the Assembly had prepared a bunch of white Ribbon for her, instead of Straw which she wore.
Thus the Morning of the 24th of September was spent; the Assembly was adjourned till the next day, when every one was charged to bring with him as many friends as he could get. The same day Monsieur de Pois, one of St. Mark's Knights, (an Honour which he received at Venice, for some Service done to that State) was sent to acquaint their Majesties how the Loyal Inhabitants were affected, touching their return to Paris; he fol|lowed the Court, which was then gone from Marine to Mantcs; from whence he was sent back with such Instructions as shall be said here|after.
The first good Effect which this Assembly produced was, That Councel|lour Broussell knowing that the place of Provest di Merchants, which was conferr'd upon him by the violence and fury of the people, was unsubsist|ant, resolved voluntarily to lay it down, lest he might be forc't to do so: He declared that since this was a Reason which kept the King from return|ing to Paris, he parted the more willingly with it; the two Sheriffs, Gervas and Otry, who were put into the place of the others by Orleans, were ad|vised to follow Broussell's Example, but would not, saying, They were law|fully chosen, being loath to lose that Honour; but upon second thoughts, finding that they must be forc't to relinquish it, said, They were ready to for|go it, wher they should know it to be the King's Pleasure.
The nxt day Monsieur Vieux, the first Sheriff, and Pierre the Kings At|tourny, were sent from the Town-House to the Court, to keep the busi|ness on foot, and to manage their Majesties return; which these in the name of the Publick, beseeched them to do, the more to authorise and au|thenticate their Resolutions. The Parliament of Pontois Decreed in fa|vour of the aforesaid Provost, and of the whole Assembly in the Palace|Royal, taking all those that were come, or that were to come into the said Assembly into the King's protection; prohibiting all Men of what condition soever, to acknowledge Beaufort for Governour of Paris, Broussells for Provost di Merchants, or Gervas and Otry for Sheriffs; and ordered these up|on pain of Rebellion not to exercise their Offices: It commanded moreover, That no Victuals, or Ammunition should be brought to those who served under the Princes against the King.
This Decree was read, and published in Paris on the 27th of September: And a Manifesto of the said Assembly was also fixt upon every Corner of the Streets, the Contents whereof were, That the good Subjects and Servants of his Majestie assembled in the Palace-Royal, had no other end, but to re|establish the Peace of the City, which could no wayes be had but by the presence of their lawful Lord, and by driving away Forreigners, and the disturbers of publick Peace. To this Manifesto was annext an Edict made

by the King at Compeigne on the 7th of the said Month, which contained, That his Majesty being informed that his good Subjects in his good Town of Paris, did continue their good Intentions to his Service, he did permit all, and every of the said Inhabitants, and in case of need, did command them, to take up Arms, joyn together, and possess themselves of such pla|ces as they should think fit; fight those that should oppose them, imprison the seditious, and to do whatever they should think fit, to establish quiet, and intire obedience to the King; and to cause the said City to be gover|ned according to antient manner by lawful Magistrates, under his Ma|jesties Authority, who granted them full Authority to that purpose.
In pursuance of these good Intentions, it was agreed by the six Corpo|rations of Merchants, to choose ten out of every Company, which were Clothiers, Grocers, Mercers, Skinners, Goldsmiths, and Bakers; and to send them to the Court, not only to witness their faithful Service to the King, but to desire his Majesty to return to Paris. The Assembly met again on the 26th at the Pallace-Royal, wherein the Resolution of the aforesaid Mer|chants being represented, they Treated of nothing but how to Guard the City, that no more Forreigners might be admitted thereinto; nor that no Victuals or Ammunition should be sent out to the Confederates Camp, whereunto the Collonels were desired to look; and the Assembly was ad|journed till the said Merchants Commissioners should be returned from Court, whereby they hoped they should acquire Peace. The same day Cava|lier Pois returned from Court, with a new Amnesty granted by the King only to the Parisians, excluding the Parliament and Princes, who by sinister Inter|pretations had abused the former.
He also brought a Letter from the King to the Collonels, with express Orders to guard the Gates well, not to let any of the Spanish, Lorrain, or Princes Armies enter, nor to suffer any Victuals or Ammunition to be sent out to them; to search all Towns where any of the adverse Souldiers might be lodged, and to put them out of the City, to the end that every one doing their duties, nothing might be left which might keep his Majesty from returning; assuring them, that he would particularly consider what they should do herein.
The Princes, and Parliament, hearing of all these Proceedings, the very day that they met to Treat of the Duke of Beaufort's Duel with deceased Ne|meur's, they were not a little troubled, and the more for that there was no answer yet come to the Letter which Orleans sent to the Queen; though Duke Anuile had sent word it was well received, and that it should sudden|ly receive a gratious Answer. They Treated upon the prejudice which their Party might receive by these publick and secret Conventicles, tend|ing to Sedition, and how they might be remedied. But all things meet|ing with many difficulties, they pitcht upon sending Talone, the Advocate General to Court, to reassume the Treaty of Peace, and all Meetings were forbidden, and the carrying of Paper or Straw about people. And Mesi|eurs, Manyere, and Lesne, were deputed Commissioners, to inquire who were the Authours of the Assembly in the Palace-Royal; some were of Opinion to send for the Provost to give an account to the Parliament, for ha|ving assisted in the said Assembly, but it took not, the major part thinking that it was too nice a thing to be toucht upon.
This mean while Monsieur de Veaux and Pierre, came to the King at Mantes, whither it was removed from Champeyny, as well for the incon|veniencies which the Court began to feel there, as that it might be nearer Paris, for the better incouragement of Treaties: The Deputies delivered their Commission, shewing the universal good will to his Majestie's Service, and to the re-establishment of and restoring of his Authority. They were

gratiously received by his Majesty, and were sent back on the 28th of Septem|ber to Paris with this Answer:
That his Majesty approved the Resolution taken by the Commonalty to establish the antient Orders, and of bringing every one to their due Obedi|ence; He praised the Decree made in conformity to his Commands, of not suffering any Victuals, Arms, or Ammunition to be carryed out to the Ene|mies Camp; and of not permitting any of the adverse Forces to come into the City: He said also, He was very well pleased to hear that Brussels had wil|lingly laid down the Provost de Merchants Place, whereinto he had intru|ded against Law, and to the prejudice of the Legitimate Possessor; but as for the pretended Sheriffs, who made it still lawful to execute those Offices, pretending to quit them when they should know his Majesties pleasure to the contrary; they could not but know; that their Election was greatly dis|pleasing to him: wherefore he again commanded them to forgoe the said Places immediately, upon pain of such punishment as was due to Rebels, and disturbers of the Publick Peace. As for his return to Paris, the pith of his Answer was; That when his Enemies should be gone out, he would sudden|ly return thither: He concluded, That as he was much satisfied with the Expulsion made by the Commons House of those who were entred thereinto unduly, and contrary to his Majesties intention; so he could not approve, but did annul whatsoever should be done in the said Assembly, whilst the Re|bels and their Adherents should be there.
Whilst things went thus at Court, they forbare not to solicit the effecting of their intents at Paris, and the Parisians troubles encreasing still, by the continuance of the Spanish Forces about that City; part of the Duke of Wirteberg's Baggage was sackt in the Street St. Honore, whilst the Condu|ctors of them were busie in carrying Vine Muscade, and Spanish-wine from the Taverns to the Confederates Camp; and strickt Order was taken that no more of the Army should enter; whereat the Parliament and Princes were much astonished, finding that their power grew less and less; and they were yet more amazed, when they saw their straw out-done by the white Hatbands, and Girdles which were worn by many of the King's Friends.
The Assembly at the Palace-Royal being advertised that Beaufort's Guards were to convey Bread, du Pois wisht Gandry Captain of the Guard at Paris, to throw away his straw, as a mark of Sedition, and to take white Ribbon, the Loyal Colour, and threatned that he should be assaulted if he did not, for the Assembly had resolved to attack those who wore no white Ribbons, or Paper, and this was to begin at St. Martins Gate, where his Guard was to be: These words prevailed, so as not only this Captain, but all his Souldi|ers put on white, and drunk the King's Health, and Mazarine's, and made Monsieur Vaugrimaux and Beaufort's Guards do the like; who as they would have gone out at the Gate were hindred by Chassan, Ligny, and du Pois, who told them, they were not to pass without Pasports from the King, or his Ge|nerals; and that they might be known to be the King's Servants by wear|ing white. Vaugrimaux answered, That he had the Princes Pass: Answer was made, They doubted not that, but that they must drink the King's health, and return back; which they did in their Hats, for want of Bowls. Beaufort hearing this, got on Horse-back to hinder it; but understanding the other Gentlemens resolution, he forbare. This beginning was follow|ed by great and happy advantages to the King's Party, many others vying who should follow the Example. The King being satisfied with these de|monstrations, Commanded on the 29th of September, that passage should be open for carriage of Corn, Wine, Wood, and all other Necessaries for the livelihood of so numerous a People. The Answer that he afterwards gave to the Merchants Commissioners was:

That his Majesty was very sensible of the new testimonies of Affection and Fi|delity shew'd by his beloved City of Paris; that for his return to Paris, he would say no more to them than he had done to the Commissioners of the Town-House, a Copy whereof he gave them. He only added, That they needed to send no more to him for Peace, since he had already granted it by his Amnesty, declared in his Par|liament at Pontois. The Form or Words whereof were, It became not Subjects to censure, since the most Guilty found therein Pardon for all their Faults; but that they were to apply themselves to those who caused the War to continue; be|cause they thereby reaped advantage; that they were only to complain of them, since his Majesty had without any condition granted what was desired; yet they, going from their words so solemnly given, disposed still of the Royal Authority to the great prejudice of his Majesty, and of his State; keeping themselves joyn'd in Arms to the declared Enemies of the Crown, contrary to their promise: keeping the Chief City of the Kingdom in continual apprehension, by continuing Violence and Sedition, whereby the French were sackt and ruin'd by Strangers. Wherefore all men being concern'd in putting an end to such disorders, He hoped they would use their endeavours to put Paris into her former condition, notwithstading the Ene|mies to Peace. He ended his Answer with a desire of a Testimony of their good intentions, and as that which was more necessary than any thing else, that they would re-establish the Provost de Merchants, and the Sheriffs who were driven away, to their Places; which when it should be done, he would send such Orders as he intend|ed should be observed by the Town-House; assuring the Merchants of his satisfacti|on, goodwill, and Patronage.
The Chief of this Commission was Monsieur Pratin, Ancient Consul of the City; who spoke first of sending the Soldiers away, desiring his Maje|sty to favour Paris with his presence, and to give Peace unto his Kingdom; assuring his Majesty of the Parisians Loyalty and Obedience. When Pratin had done, Monsr, Brun, a Mercer, declared the affection of his heart, ming|ling tears and sighs with his words, protesting that he was ready to sacrifice his life for his Majestie's Service, and that he spoke for a hundred thousand men that were of the same mind: Yea, turning to the Queen who was pre|sent, he desired her to move the King to satisfie his People with Peace.
The King appeared very well disposed thereunto, and to give his Sub|jects all the satisfaction they could desire. Then Monsienr Perichon, a Mer|cer, and a Master of L' Hostella de Dieu, represented the publick Miseries, the great number of sick people, the small Revenue, that the Houses in the Countries were plunder'd, the Farmers ruin'd; that there was no re|medy for all these evils but his Majesties presence at Paris: All the rest spoke to the same purpose. The King reply'd, He would shortly give them all satisfa|ction: and Monsieur St. Tot wisht them all to withdraw; and they were conducted by Count Nogent to the Convent of the Franciscan Friers, where they were lodged and defray'd.
These passages did greatly move the Princes, Parliament, and all that Fa|ction; and finding that Paris was alter'd, and desired Peace, which de|stroy'd their designes, they apply'd themselves to think how they might beat the King's Army, and become Masters of the Field; which was thought to be the only means for them to keep in Paris.
The Duke of Guise labour'd his freedom in the Spanish Court, and after several Treaties it was offered, That if the Queen Regent of France would change all the Prisoners she had upon the account of Spain, they would set the Duke at liberty. Guise acquainted the Christian Queen herewith, hum|bly desiring this favour from her Majesty; who, though the number of the other Prisoners were above 4000, whereof were some of Quality, willing|lingly exchanged them all for the Duke; and would have exchanged as ma|ny

more, had she had them, to ransome a Prince, who had with such hazard of life, and at so vast expence, done so great Service to the Crown. Reci|procal promises passing; by Order from the Queen, the Duke of Orleans sent the Baron Verdirone, Gentleman of his Bed-chamber, with power to make the Exchange; or else to offer the 500000 Crowns, which the Spaniards owed France, for other Treaties concerning Prisoners: but the Business be|ing delay'd some months by reason of the long way, and the abovesaid No|velties hapning the mean while, as also the freedom of Conde, Conti, and Longueville, the Spaniards went from their words, thinking it not fit to send back the Chief of the House of Guise, who was so obliged to the Queen: Wherefore they declared, that Conde being at liberty, they would proceed no further therein, unless he were first acquainted with it, and should like it.
This was cunningly done, to free the Duke from Obligation to the Queen, and to make him side with Conde, who began then to Treat privately with Spain; and the Spaniards thought it better for them, that the Duke should have his freedome without any Obligation to the Court, and should turn to Conde's party, then the exchange of so many Prisoners.
Conde, who at that time had got the exchange of the Government of Guienne for that of Burgundy, indeavoured also to get the Government of Champagnia, held by Conti, for the Government of Provenze; found that no man could be well established there, without winning the good will of the friends of the house of Guise, who having formerly had that Govern|ment had won so much upon those Inhabitants, as no other Governour could ever please them. Conde making use of this occasion, sought to make the Duke favour him in working this his desire, by making him hope for li|berty, if he would be a means that his friends in Provenze should declare for him.
The Duke soon found the trick, which was, That Conde might make use of this present conjuncture, to work his own ends, which when he should have obtained, he would mind his liberty no longer; wherefore he dexte|rously made his friends and servants be desired, not to declare for the Prince, till he were at liberty. To which purpose all the Dukes friends desired Conde to beseech his Catholick Majesty, to declare that he would free Guise if Conde should desire it.
In this interim the aforesaid accidents happened; and the Prince going to Bourdeaux, sent Monsieur Lenet into Spain to Treat of joyning his Interests with those of the Catholick King, which Conde did much desire; and upon this occasion Lenet had leave to go Segovia, and to see, and speak with the Duke.
Many Proposals were made between them, at last Conde was perswaded out of meer honour, wherein he thought he should suffer much, if he should refuse a favour to a Prince, who was his friend, which would cost him but a word.
The Prince being thus resolved, beg'd the Dukes liberty of the Catholick King; and yet he retarded it for some Months, to see if when it should be known, Guise his friends in Provenze would do his brothers business; but failing therein, for they all resolved they would first see the Duke at liber|ty, he indevor'd it in earnest. The Spaniards being allured by the same hopes, easily granted it; and resolved to deliver up the Duke into Conde's hands, and sent him with usual Guards to St. Sebastian in Biscay, where he stay'd a while, according to the Spaniards Custom, who alwayes spin out time, when they think they may get any good by delay.
The Duke, though a Prisoner, and not likely to acknowledge his Liberty

from any but Conde, forgot not his gratitude to the Queens good Intentions towards him; and therefore told Mareschal Grammont freely (who was Go|vernour of Bearne, and Bayonne,) That he might assure their Majesties of his Fidelity, and that he would never upon any whatsoever consideration undertake any Service, which should linke him to the Spaniard; with whom he was ill satisfied, as having broken their word, and that they would free him only for their own Interest.
He was afterwards brought from St. Sebastian to Bourg, where he was de|liver'd over to the Prince; he resolved to go streight for Paris, intending to recompence the Prince by interposing with their Majesties in making his Peace at Court; but to the misfortune of all men, he found the Court so far advanc't in Treaties with the Parisians, and Conde so ingaged with the Spaniards, as he soon failed in his hopes.
He declared himself eternally bound to the Prince, and that he would serve him in any thing, if he would forego the Interests of Spain, refusing (much to his praise,) whatsoever was offer'd him by the Spaniards, or by the Prince who affectionately imbraced him.
The Court seeing him in Paris, and that he convers'd much with the Prince, feared least he might ingage on the Prince's side, as the Chevalliere his brother had done. Abbate Oudedei indeavor'd to keep the Duke from do|ing so, which was needless, for he found him wholly devoted to the Kings Service. He went afterwards to St. Germains, where he was grati|ously received by their Majesties, and made one of his Majesties Privy|Councel.
But to return to Mazarine, and to the Court: When Mazarine was come to Sedan, and gone from thence to Bovillion, three Leagues out of France, there were those, who indeavor'd Orleans his reconcilement to the Court. Cardinal Retz, and Chasteuneufe were perswaded, that if his Highness were once with the King, he might by degrees get into his favour, and reassuming his place in Councel, they should not be left out; wherefore by the consent also of the Duke of Lorrain, Marquess Lambert, of the House of Ioyeuse, was sent to Court, to introduce the Treaty.
The Queen, and Court, who apply'd themselves not only to Mazarine's return, but also to provide for their own safety, could not consent that Or|leans, who was altogether a friend to Conde, now joyn'd with the Spaniards, should have any thing to do in the Government. Conde who was ingaged with Orleans by promise of Marriage between his Highness Daughter and Duke Anguiene, thought that although he were left out of the Treaty, he might yet in time by Orleans his means, make his Peace; so as these be|ing nice respects, and reflecting much upon the wisdome of the Agents, that was found to be bad counsel, which exposed the Goverment to the arbitriment of others, which in an absolute Monarchy will admit of no Com|panion.
It was conceived that the Prince had no minde to make his Peace then, for his great Soul being in love with glory, which was not to be sever'd from his Valour; and from other hopes given him by the Spaniards, designed at the same time to make his Name famous, and to get good store of Mony from the Spaniards; and that if he should fail of the appointed payments, he might at all times make his Peace with the King upon advantageous Terms; and that injoying the Wealth gotten by War, which far exceeded what he lost in France, he should make the World know, that Troubles be|ing the advantage of a Souldier, they ought never to be fore-gone by one who professeth Arms.
These Treaties being over, the Princes and Parliament stood still upon

the point, That the Amnesty granted by the King, and pardon for all that had been done the last five years, was not as was desired, to wit, not general, and without condition; but that it reached only to the Parisians, bearing but little respect to the Princes and Parliament: they therefore pretended that his Majesty should give ample, and unretractable Authority to the Duke of Orleans, to frame another, without any exceptions, and that it should be Authenticated by his Majesty in the Parliament of Paris, whither the Coun|cellors that were gone to Pontois should come. Many meetings were had about this; his Royal Highness writ some Letters to Court: Duke Anie, and Marquess Ioyeuse negotiated with the Privy Council, and did many other things which would be too tedious to relate: But the Court finding that it would be prejudicial to the Kin'gs Authority, Pasports for the Parlia|ments Commissioners were absolutely denied; so as Affairs remain'd intan|gled as before.
The Parliament being met on the third of October to hear what News Marquess St. Lambert brought, who was return'd from Court: Two Boat|men were imprisoned, who cry'd, Vive le Roy, e Mazarino, and many more were led to the Concergeria, and Process was ordered to be made against them, and it was said that this was done of purpose by some that gave them mony, that they might move the people to Sedition: This being brought to Court, and that the Parliament continued to proceed against some of the Assembly in the Palace-Royal, the King with his Council pass'd a Decree on the fifth of October, Whereby, He annull'd all the pretended proceedings of the Parliament of Paris, which were, or were to be publish'd; imposing severe punishment upon such Commissaries, or Iudges as should act any thing further therein; and commanded all his Majesties People in Paris, to see his Orders ex|ecuted.
The King's Army lay this mean while at Ville Neuf St. George, much straitned by the Princes Troops and those of their Confederates, being more than they in number; and were in danger to be beaten out of their Quarters, and fought with in their Retreat; for not only many of their men, but many of their Horses perished for want of Victuals, and Forrage: The Court was much troubled hereat, fearing some sinister accident; for the Victory consisted in that Armies abode near Paris, whereby the endea|vors which made for the King were fomented.
The Princes, who knew the importancie hereof, and that if the King's Army were preserved, all their Plots were ruin'd, did what they could to overcome it by Famine; but the neighbourhood of Paris, and the sickness which besell Conde, Wirtemberg, and many other of their Chief men, (which may truly be attributed to an effect of Divine Providence) caused the ruine of their Party. Together with these sick Princes, Lorrain and Beau|fort; and almost all the Chief Commanders were come to Paris with a con|siderable number of their best Soldiers, for fear of some Conspiracy amongst the Inhabitants, and to advise upon what was best to be done in this the Peo|ples tottering condition, who were weary with the length of these troubles. Turenne, a no less wise than valiant Commander, after a short consultation had with his Collegue Ferte Seneterre, resolved to get out of these Straits, and to remove his Army elsewhere, where it might be safe, and have where|on to live.
The 4th of October he past his Baggage and Artillery by night over the Seene by a Bridge of Boats; by break of day his Army rise in such order and silence, as they past undiscovered by the Enemies Sentinels.
Tavanes was the only General that was left in the enemies Camp, who being aware of Turenne's march, though too late, sounded to Horse, and put

his Army in order to follow, and fight him. But Turenne being shelter'd by the River, got soon to Corbeile, a place which was guarded by the King's men, where crossing the Seene upon a Stone-bridge, he escaped danger with much honor, and quarter'd upon the Marne, between Meiex and Lagny, raising Victuals from all the neighbouring parts, for the maintenance of his Troops. The Princes were mightily amazed at this, Conde in particular was scandali|zed; complaining of his Officers carelessness, saying, That had he been well, he would not have lost so favourable an occasion. But what is past being past remedy: On the 7th of the next Month, the Prince's Army advanc'd to the head of the Suburbs of St. Antoine, and for the defence of the City, incampt near St. Vincents-Castle. The King and Court went from Pontois to Mantes, that they might pass over the Seene there, and so come to St. Germains, inten|ding to come to Paris, when things should go as it was hoped they would do.
The Parisians were resolved to withdraw themselves out of those miseries wherein they were plunged; and being all of the same mind, according|ly as Fortune forsook the Princes, they sided with the King: wherefore Conde finding the storm ready to fall, bethought how to save himself and his Army, by removing quickly from Paris; and because by his going a|way, and the King's return, the good of Paris, and the Cardinals return was foreseen, many sought to follow the Cardinals re-rising Fortune; and some of the Prince's Friends began to wheel about, and particularly Count Chavigny.
Being much vext in mind at these changes of Fortune, Chavigny fell sick, and died on the 11th of October; and this was the end of Lyon di Boutelliere, Count of Chavigny, aged 44 years; one who at 19 years old was admitted into the King's Council; and at the age of 21, and 24, was made Secretary of State; and in 1642 had the care of all the important affairs of the Crown committed to his charge; and when Lewis the Thirteenth died, was made Plenipotentiary at the Peace of Munster: He was quick-witted, of a lively spirit, ready counsel, and ambitious of Glory and Greatness.
The Parliament and Town-house met often touching the present occur|rences; and all good men being grieved to see the poor Country people so wasted by the Souldiers, especially by the Lorrainers, who left nothing un|ransackt; divers Commissioners were chosen in the Town-house on the 9th of October to go again to Court, and to desire their Majesties to return to Paris. But because the King intended not to admit of publick Addresses from that Assembly which was held illegitimate since Beaufort, pretended Go|vernour of Paris, contrary to his Majesties Command, was there; it was propounded and agreed upon in Parliament, That Beaufort should be desired to renounce that Place willingly, and so not obviate that Peace which was so generally desired.
The Duke, who was absolutely absolved by Parliament for having slain Nemeurs, was willing to do it, and gave it back to Orleans, from whom he had received it. The Militia of Paris also was resolved to have Peace, to which the presence of the King being requisite, they chose 250 persons, to present their Duties to his Majesty, and to desire that he would honour his good Town of Paris with his Return. The Colonels acquainted the Court herewith, and desired wonted Pasports, which were soon grant|ed, and the King writ unto them to come to St. Germains on the 14th of October, where he intended to be that night. Besides this Letter written to all in general, he writ to every particular Colonel, wherein he thanked them for the good will they shewed to his Service; he also writ to the Commonal|ty, willing them to call a general Assembly in the Town-house, and to put the Provost de Merchants, Monsieur le Fevre and the Sheriffs Guilois, and Philip, again in their places.

Conde finding by these novelties that his abode in Paris would be to no purpose, and that all were resolved to receive the King, and peradventure to affront him, resolved to haste his departure; in pursuance whereof the Duke of Lorrain took his leave of the Duke of Orleans on the 11th of Octo|ber, and went towards his Army, which was not far off. But as he went out of St. Martin's-gate, the Guards stopt him, as not having a Pass from the Commonalty, and some of them imputing all the Miseries of France to his fault, would have imprisoned him, till such time as his Forces should be out of the Kingdome; and till he should have given satisfaction to the parts adjacent, for the wrongs which they had received by his men; but this was not done in respect of the Duke of Orleans, but he had a thousand injurious Words given him. The next day he went out by his Highness Au|thority; two dayes after parted Conde, Wirtenberg, Rochfaucaute, Taranto, with many Gentlemen, who would follow the Prince his Fortune; and as he went through the Streets, he was heard to say, That the Parisians hoped the King would return, but that should not end the War. He marched with his Army towards Reims the chief Town of Champagnia, thinking to winter there.
At his departure he left a Manifesto in Print at Paris, wherein he avowed all that he had done was for the Publick Good, and particularly for the Pari|sians; exhorting them not to trust the Court, and to believe that he by force of Arms would constrain them to Peace, and to make all due satisfa|ction.
Paris being thus abandon'd by Conde, and by all the chief Officers of his Army, the aforesaid Colonels, and Officers went to St. Germains, accom|panied by above 200. Citizens; they haulted at Ruell, being the half way, where the first Colonel Monsieur Sene Chastenoville, received Letters from Secretary Guenegaude, saying, That the King would be at St. Germains, on Thursday-night, and that they might come thither on Friday-morning, as they did. They were met at the Park-Gate, by Monsieur St. Tote Master of the Ceremonies, with four of the King's Trumpeters, who brought them be|tween the two Castles, where they lighted, and went to the Lodgings that were provided for them: They then had Audience of their Majesties, where the aforesaid Sene kneeling down with all the other Commissioners, having in a handsome Oration represented the general desire of his Majesties Pre|sence; assured his Majesty in the Names of them all, of sincere Loyalty, and of intire Obedience, with their plighted Faiths, that they would be all rea|dy, upon all Occurrences to spend their Lives and Livelyhoods in his Ma|jesties Service. That they desired him not to refuse this favour, but to suf|fer himself to be perswaded by the Tears, and Sighs which proceeded from their cordial Desires, protesting, That he should find nothing but due obse|quiousness, and perfect propension to perform the parts of humble and faith|ful Subjects.
The King himself answered them, That during Life he would remember the Service they did him upon this occasion; that he desired them to be alwayes assured of his good Affection; that though what those had done, who had revolted against him, might have made him go some whither else, yet since they were so desirous, he would go speedily to Paris; and that he would let the Provost des Mer|chants, and the Sheriffs know what he thought fit to that purpose.
The Queen added, That she had alwayes loved Paris, and to live there; that she never doubted the Citizens Loyalty; that she would alwayes seek to keep the King in the good Opinion which he had of Paris, and in his resolution of coming thither speedily. After this the Commissioners were carried to a Sumptuous Dinner, provided for them by the King; Dinner being done, they took

their leaves of their Majesties and returned to Paris, where the people hear|ing what had been said unto them, flockt about in the Streets, and welcom'd them with great Jubile.
Before his Majesty went from Mantes, he answered the Duke of Orleans his Letter, which Duke Anuille delivered him, touching the amendment of the Amnesty, which was to this purpose, That his Majesty desired not a new Declaration from him, but would be satisfied if he would make good his word, which he had so often given, of laying down Arms, and send|ding Forreigners to the Frontiers, so to free Paris; that his Majesty had no more to do, having published a general Amnesty; and such a one, as the most Seditious could not add any thing unto it, for their safety, nor yet pretend that it might be registred in Paris, since it had been already done in the Parliament at Pontois; so as his Majesty having anticipated his de|sire, there remain'd nothing but that the Duke should perform his promise; that his desire of having Pasports sent him was superfluous, since it tend|ed only to gain time, till the Spanish Forces commanded by the Duke of Wirtenberg were come to Paris, to joyn with Conde's men, and to hold the people in hand, till an other Army of Spaniards commanded by Prince Lig|ny, might come into the Kingdom, whereby they designed to keep Paris in slavery still, and keep his Majesty from thence. He concluded, That he ho|ped by God's assistance, to preserve his Subjects from all mischief; and ex|horted him to return to his Obedience.
When the said Colonels were gone, the resolution of the Courts return|ing to Paris was variously disputed in the Privy Councel; those who feared that some scandalous novelty might fall out yet, there being many Malecon|tents still there, said, The people were not to be trusted, who forgot what they had promised, upon any novelty; that therefore they should consider well, lest they might fall upon new Rocks. The Chancellour, Guarde de Seaux, Tilly, and almost all the rest were of this Opinion, saying, That they ought never to believe, where they had once deceived; nor think to find truth in those who had been so fouly false. But Prince Thomaso of Savoy, who had a chief hand in the Government, and who as a Forreigner desired what might be most serviceable to their Majesties, wisely weighing the prejudice which might be received, by suffering favourable occasions to escape their hands, was for entring Paris without delay, for driving the prime Seditious out; and as the Princes had made use of the popularity to strengthen their par|ty, so the King ought to serve himself of the same to overthrow the con|trary faction. Turenne was of the same Opinion; who considering that the parts about Paris were totally ruin'd, and the King's Army consequently but ill maintain'd, said, It was requisite to be Masters of Paris, in respect of the abundance of all things there, and that without that City, the King might be called a Prince without a Crown. This Opinion was imbraced.
In pursuance hereof, the Mareschal de l'Hospitall, the Provost des Mer|chants, and the Sheriffs, being restored to their places, went with the said Colonels into Paris, to the great satisfaction of the people: Those of the contrary party indeavoured to keep them from coming into the City, say|ing, That they would find but little safety there, amongst a people that hated them. And Orleans said in particular, That he not being able to promise them any thing; they ought to think what a hazard they should run. But these Threats did no good, for being informed how well the people were disposed to receive the King, they were also assured to be made welcome.
The Mareschal de l'Hospitall presently took possession of the Bastile, and of the Arsenal, putting out Louvieres; and order was taken through all the Corners and Streets of the City, that the people might rest quiet: His

Majesty ordered his Parliament at Pontoise, to meet on the Two and twen|tieth day afterwards, at the Louvre, where he intended himself to lodge; and the King of England, who lived in the Cardinal's Palace, withdrew himself, he moreover writ to the Commonalty, that his Majesty would make his Entry the same Two and twentieth day; that therefore Souldi|ers should be removed from the Gates, and that all Inhabitants should exer|cise their Professions; which was speedily done, and all the Guards were ta|ken off. Madamoiselle was made acquainted that the Duke of Anjou being to lye in her Lodgings at the Louvre, she was to leave them; which she un|willingly did, retiring to the House provided for extraordinary Embassa|dours in the Suburbs of St. Germains, near the Duke her Father's House.
On Monday Morning the Parliament met, whither Orleans, Beaufort, Estampes, and other Lords met; President Nesmond told them, He had re|ceived a Letter from the King, and that the like was sent to every particu|lar Councellour, willing them to be the next Morning at the Louvre, to understand his Majesties will touching the particular Affairs. Orleans, and twelve other Councellours, said they had received none, which they seem|ed to resent much, and were greatly abashed, finding that their ends were utterly ruin'd: the business was debated. The King's party being call'd to speak their Opinion, were for the Parliaments Meeting in the Gallery at the Louvre: Those who had received no Letters, knowing thereby that they were in disgrace, opposed it, shewing how harmful such a president might be to the priviledge of Parliament. Nesmond said, The King might keep his Parliament in what place of Paris he pleased; alledging that the like had formerly been done in the time of Henry the 2d. and Henry the 3d. He moreover said, That la Camera delle Vacationi had resolved to carry the Cloth of State, and the King's Seat of Justice into the same Gallery, and that it behoved them to obey; the major part agreeing herein, They resol|ved to be the next Morning by Sun-rising at the place appointed in red Robes. Yet the Councellours Meusniera, and Refuge, were appointed to ac|quaint the Chancellour, and Guard de Seaux, how prejudicial this would be to the King's Service, and to their Authority.
The same 21 of October their Majesties, and the whole Court went from St Germains towards Paris, whither about noon came the Chancellour, and Guard de Seaux, and after them, the Presidents Noyon and Cognieux. The King din'd at Ruell, in the Dutchess of Aiguillon's Palace, where he was nobly entertain'd by the said Dutchess; from hence he sent Count No|get, one who was very zealous in the King's Service, to acquaint the Duke of Orleans with his Majesties coming, and to wish him (as from himself) to meet, and complement his Majesty, assuring him that he should be gra|tiously received. The Duke was strangely surprised, not thinking that the King would come so unexpectedly to Paris, where the unquiet disposition of those yet remained, who had so much outraged his Authority. He an|swered the Count coldly, That he askt eight dayes to give his Resolution, since he could not do it without acquainting the Prince of Conde with it, with whom he was ingaged in friendship. The King being come to St. Clous, and hear|ring no news of the Dukes coming, sent the Duke to say the same thing unto him. His Highness was much beset with two weighty conside|rations; on the one side he was troubled to think he must deny to pay his due respects to his Nephew the King; on the other side he feared to fail in his friendship to the Prince of Conde, which might make the World doubt whether he did it out of necessity, or out of any other respect: At last he resolved not to go; and it was thought he did it by the advice of the Cardinal de Retz; who thought if the Duke would tarry in Paris, he

might inable him against the Court, by many who depended upon him.
The mean while, the Mareschal de l'Hospitalle, the Provost de Merchants, the Sheriffs, and others, who were met in the Town-House, prepared to meet the King with all Magnificency, and to Welcome him, as became faithful Subjects to do. They met his Majesty with a great number of civil People, besides Magistrates, and Officers, and returned that night with him to Paris; 'twas late ere the King arrived, for he linger'd by the way, expe|cting Orleans his coming, not thinking it fit to enter the City whilst he was there, or that he would promise to go out the next morning; for it be|came not Regal Dignity that he should tarry there, without seeing his Ma|jesty.
He was met by a great number of people, without the Gates, of all Con|ditions; above 300000 persons came to see his Entry; which he made on Horse-back, accompanyed by the King of England, Prince Thomaso, by a great number of Princes, Dukes, and Mareschals of France, and other Lords, who were then in the City.
The Queen came after the King in Coach, together with the Duke of A jou; she entred by Port St. Honore, and went by the Cardinal's Palace, where the King of great Britain lighted from Horse-back.
His Majesty was met at the Louvre-gate by the Cardinal de Retz, together with a great number of Prelates; at night Fire-works, and Bone-fires were made, the Bells rung, Cannons went off from the Bastile, and Arsenal; and you might read Joy in the Faces of all honest men, for this return, whereby that City was quieted, which had been so mch disturbed; and so it did succeed, for his Royal Presence dissipated all turbulent Clouds, as doth the Sun. Some Malecontents said, notwithstanding, that the Court came to Paris only for refuge, That Conde might return who had a great Army; that the design was to raise Impositions, that therefore it behoved them to keep in Arms, and to keep better Guards than bfore; for the King beguirt the Louvre with Guards, and his Army lay not far off. The night of the King's Arrival, Monsieur Saivin was sent to the Duke of Orle|ans, to will him from the King to retire to his House at imos. He an|swered somewhat sharply; and Beaufort, who was present, said, That he should contain himself within his Quarters: But they consulted again what Orleans had best to do; some were for his not obeying, but that he should tarry in his House at St. Germain's Suburbs, from whence he could not be so easily driven out by the King's bare Guards; for it was thought the people would not take up Arms against a Prince so near a kin to the King: and be|sides many Parisians depended yet upon him, and upon others of his Party, whereof Cardinal de Retz was one, and who was much favour'd by the Pa|risians; he insisted, that if all the well-affected people would repair to those parts, they might withstand the Court, by the help of the Inhabitants of the Suburbs; and that making Conde return with his Army, and with the Spaniards and Lrrainers, it might be, that the King, unwilling to live amongst such confusion upon the foundation of Citizens, who were sub|ject to change, might return to St. Germains or else, that the business fal|ling to a Treaty, wherein Retz might become necessary to the Agree|ment, he might be well with the Court, and assisted by Orleans, might be taken in to have a share in the State Government, which was s main end.
The Duke would not follow this advice, but resolved wisely to obey, and to withdraw the next Morning to Lymours, accompanied by Beau|fort, and Rohan, and many others of their Party. His Daughter Madamo|selle

went also out, and lived at Fargeaux, a Castle of hers, by the Loire, to|wards Briara.
It was happy for the Court that Orleans would not agree, and that he withdrew from Paris; for the King being now in full Authority, and the Duke refractory, and out of Paris with all his adherents, happy events might easily succeed.
The same day the Parliament met at the Louvre, all save those who had not received particular Letters from the King, which were the Presidents Bllieule, Thou, and Violet the Councellours Brouselle, Salement, Genoa, Pertaile, Brisack, Croysy, Fouquet, Machault, and Martinau; and all of them having their places in the great Hall, near the King's Lodgings, the King being underneath his Cloth of State, said, His Guard de Seaux, should ac|quaint them with his will; who after a short, and Eloquent Oration upon the present Occurrences acquainted them with Four Declarations; the Re|union of the Two Parliaments, the general Amnesty, the Prohibition that the Parliament should meddle in nothing but in things Civil and Criminal, according to Law and the Names of those who by the King's orders were to withdraw, which were the fore-named, who had received no particular Letters from the King; to whom Councellour Bitaut was added, who by mistake had a Letter sent him, all these were willed to withdraw; as also Beaufort, Roan, Rochefaucau, Frontailles, Bulley, Penis, the Domesticks of Conde, and of the Dutchess of Longueville, President Perult, the Wives, Children, and Domesticks of all that served then under the Princes, and in any Towns held by them, as well in Guienne, as elsewhere; who were not to return to Paris without the King's leave; it being laid to their charge, That they were those who had alwayes subverted the Parliament, and made the People seditious. Express Orders were also made against all things con|tained in the third Declaration.
The Queen of England, and the Dutchess of Chevereux went the same day to visit the Dutchess of Orleans, who said in Paris by reason that she was with Child; to whom Cheverux said in the Queen of France her Name, That her Highness had leave o stay in her Palace, or to go whither she plea|sed.
The Dutchess was very much affected with the novelty of this Action, and answered modestly, That she could not abandon the Duke her husband; and th not being able to do otherwise, in the condition she was in, she would be carried in Mens Arms; but she did not so, for she had express Orders from her Husband, not to hazard her self being so near her being brought to bed, as she was some few dayes after, of a Daughter.
Prince Thomaso went to visit her; and said, That he was never of opinion that the Duke should go from Court whereunto if he would have come, he should have been received with all cordial Affection by their Majesties.
But because it was not thought fit to suffer so conspicuous a Prince to re|main an Enemy to the King, Duke Anuille was sent to him to Limours on Wednesday, to Treat of Agreement wherein the King desiring that Ma|zarine might be comprehended, nothing was done. The Duke was re|solute never to be reconciled to him, nor never to come at Court whilst e was at the Helm of Government; for all things else he would have comply'd with the King.
A while after Secretary Tilliere, and some others, went to win him over, but they could not prevail; at last, having acquainted Conde with what had past, to whom he sent Camp-master Godovi, and being answered, That he agreed with him in all things; it was agreed, That he should go  quietly at Bloyse; that he should send for his Forces from Conde's Army, and

joyn them to those of the King; on Condition that they should not be im|ploy'd against the Prince, to whom professing himself a friend, he could not fail him in any whatsoever condition. The Duke's Affairs being thus adjusted, he perform'd what was agreed upon, and withdrew himself wholly from the care of the World, applying himself to live quietly, and free from trouble. Beaufort retired to Vandosme, and all the others that were banisht went to their Country-houses, mightily grieved, and much more mortified that Mazarine should triumph over their Miseries.
President Nesmond, and Councellour Vedau propounded the meeting of le Chambers of Requests, to think how they might protect their companions, who were in disgrace, saying, They would rather quit their Imployments, than suffer such a prejudice. But the major part being of another Opinion, the Chambers met not; and Nesmond being sent for to Court, received a sharp reprehension, accompanied with some Threats, which were afterwards put in execution, for he and Vedau were exil'd, as well as the rest. Some were unwilling to go from Paris, but were forc't, for fear of greater violence; only Brousels, being old, and poor, and wanting a Country-house, went not from Paris, but kept conceal'd there, fomented by his Neighbours, who did not only desire him not to go, but promised to defend him against all Violence: He constantly affirm'd, He feared nothing, for he was guilty of nothing; that if the Court desired his Life, let them take it, for he va|lued not Life now, that he had one foot in the Grave, which commonly gave life to good Mens praises. These Expressions wrought upon the hearts of many Men, whose minds were not yet quiet.
Many people, and in particular the Letters of Lodgings came before the King, whereof there are an innumerable number in Paris, telling his Ma|jesty, That they had got nothing during his Majestie's absence, wherefore they desired his Majesty that he would absolve them from what was due by them to their Land-lords, at our last Lady-day, and Mid-summer; Their Land-lords opposed it, affirming, That that was their Livelyhood, and that their Allegations were false; for most of those that complained had got more in the time of War, than in Peace; Wars making all things lawful in troublesome times.
The King had respect to their Demands, and granted six Months abate|ment to all that let Lodgings, and to all Artificers, who could not work, for want of venting their Ware; but as for those who during the War, had made advantage of their Merchandise, as Bakers, Butchers, Armor|rours, and such like, he declared, That they should pay. Orders were afterwards given for the Civil Government of the City; for to assure them|selves of Paris, was to please the people; which having succeeded happily by their means, who govern'd when the Court was under Hatches, it was little less than miraculous, to see their fury cease so soon, of themselves, and to see the scorn of a multitude mittigated, who boasted, That they would maintain their extravagancies, though the Frondeurs were broken, though the Parliament should be obedient, the boldest sort of people con|founded, and though his Majesty should Triumph more by Justice, and Innocency, than by Force and Power.
Whilst Affairs went thus at Paris, extravagancies continued in Bour|deaux. The Councel of the Olmiera had amongst other things, past a De|cree, That all Castles, and Towers in places neer the City should be slight|ed; and particularly that the Walls of the Castle of Budose should be thrown down, which was seated on high upon the Banks of the River Chiron, which coming from the Sanda, falls into Garomne over against Ca|dilliack; this place being inviron'd by strong antient Towers upon the

Walls, was surprised by a Captain of Horse, of Baltazar's Regiment, who put it and himself afterwards into the King's Service.
The Prince of Conti to favour the Councellour Spagnet, took upon him to preserve it, to which purpose he desired the favour of the Olmiere; who met often to advise whether or no they should gratifie Conty; some were for the yea, some for the nay; but having no mind to content Spagnet, nor yet to displease Conty, they sought how not to satisfie the one, and yet not dis|content the other: but as it often proves that the occasion proves worse than the effect, they unadvisedly fell to dismantle the Walls of the Castle of Ha in Bourdeaux, and to commit divers insolencies in the City. Conty was surprised at the Rabbles strange, and licentious darings, but finding the peoples rage grow too hot, he fought how to asswage it, spinning that out at length which he could not hastily procure; at last he did a little mo|derate their fury, and kept the great Tower from being demolished.
The Parliament, though Frondeurs, were no less astonished at the Olmie|ra's rash attempt; whilst Command being sweet, they thought it hard that their Authority should be eclipsed by the popularity, which they formerly had worshipped: They therefore thought it good to dissipate this new uni|on as soon as might be; which by unlawful pretences went about to dero|gate from the Parliaments Authority, and to strengthen themselves by the Authority of the Princes, who to become grateful to the people, sought to satisfie them; so as the great Frondeurs grew more incensed; and not con|tented with an Assembly, wherein every Sabboth-day the Finances were treated of, and where Gurguel was Chair-man; they listned to Proposals made by more mature, and well-minded Citizens; and agreed how to sur|prise the place of the said Olmiere's meeting, which sometimes was not very well guarded. At this time Father Berteau a Franciscan, was at Bourdeaux, sent thither by the Queen, who was often seen with the Rector of St. Peters, who was well affected to his Majestie's Service, and reverenced by all Men for his singular Piety.
He shew'd him how great a shame it was, that the scum of People should give Laws to so famous a City, so full of gallant Free-men; how that nei|ther for Conscience nor Honour they were not to withdraw themselves from lawful Obedience, and to submit to the yoke of Slavery: all the Coun|cellours were almost of the same Opinion; either for that they were weary of their past extravagancies, which had brought them to a Precipice, or for that they envy'd the increase of the Olmiest's Authority, which drew unto them the liberality of the Princes, and Spaniards. They therefore conspired to destroy the Olmiere; whereof the chief men were, Duratesta, Villars, Giraut, and others. Maisot, who at first was a great Frondeur, ac|quainted Blanc, Mauvesine, Tarang, and Mirate with the business; they agreed all to get as many arm'd Men as they could into their Houses, where|with to surprise the Publick House. This Maisot, by his Wives means, who was very devout, had an inckling of some things that he was to do by the Rector of St. Peters, and Father Bertaut: He was likewise promis'd to have the Parliament Re-establish't with advantagious Conditions, if he could re|duce Bourdeaux to its former Obedience. But he, who had an unquiet spi|rit, glib tongue, talking indiscreetly with every Citizen, afforded matter of a suggestion, which was made by some of the Olmiere, (whereof Lande Bratino, and St. Angelo, were two) to slay the chief of that Councel at a Banquet, which was to be made them by Iurate Robert; Maisot promis'd them 1500. double Pistolets, to be paid unto them by Rux, a rich Citizen, if the business were effected.
One thousand five hundred Men were therefore placed behind the publick

House, to make themselves Masters of it, and to ry through the Streets, Vive e Parliament, and were to carry the heads of the chief Olmerists, who were to be slain at the said invitation, upon the heads of their Pikes. But Lde, and St. Angeloe accused Maisot before the Prince of Conty; who causing him to be brought unto him by Villars, told him, He had discove|red his Practices; Maisot said, He would prove himself to be an honest Man, and went to the Hall of Justice; where being questioned by Sault the Vi|car-General, touching what he and others had plotted against the Life of the Prince of Coy, to betray the City; he answered, That for any attempt against the Prince his person, be put it to the Vicar-General Conference, whether he had ever dream of any such thing, or no; but that he did confess, That to free his Country, and the Parliament from being opprest by the Olmiere, he had conspi|red and had listned to Proposals which were made, of killing the chief Men of that Faction: Having said this, he was led to the Common Hall, where fearing that the inraged Multitude might kill him, the Prince of Conty, left the Captain of his Guard there with divers Souldiers. The good Citizens were sorry to see disorders increase, so as advising dayly amongst themselves what they were best to do, they could find no better way, then to seem as if they would joyn with the Olmerists, and so coming into the Common Hall, under colour of Friendship, to drive out the Olrists, and then do as occasion should serve: Upon this occasion above a hundred of the ablest Merchants met upon the Exchange, making as if they did so to subscribe the Union; but at the instant of effecting it, they were betray'd by their Consuls, who acquainting the Princes with the Plot, Cot More was sent by them to hinder it; but he being confused amongst the indiscreet Multi|tude, Conty himself got on Horse-back, and by his presence made the Mer|chants return to the Exchange, whether Monsieur Lnet coming, h begn to drink the Prince's Health to the people, and appeased the Tumult.
The Consuls who betray'd the Merchants, discover'd that the Rector of St. Peters, had the chief hand in these Affairs, accusing him moreover of having made a Sermon a little before to the people, exhorting them to put an end to their vexations, by reconciling themselves to God, and the King, who offer'd Peace. The Olmiere were so incensd hereat, as they went one night to his House to make him Prisoner; when they came in they found him on his knees, praying before a Crucifix, and without any respect taking his Writings from him, they delivered him to Villars, to carry him to pri|son: His Servant going into the Street, acquainted some of the chief In|habitants with it, who sounding to Arms, all the neighbourhood arm'd themselves; the Olmerist ran away, and the Rector saved himself, and kept himself a while concealed, not slackning his good intentions, nor forbear|ing to Treat sometimes with one, sometimes with another, secretly, how to to bring his Country to Peace, and to make the Princes either to accept of the King's Amnesty, or to go elsewhere.
Marsine return'd this mean while from Peregort, (having quarter'd his Forces there) as well to remedy this Novelty, as to keep the Dutchess of Longueville from going from Bourdeaux; for she falling out with the Prince her brother, was about to withdraw, and to accept of the Amnesty. The occasion of these distasts, were, for that Conde had suffer'd Guionet, M|rigny, and other of his Favourites, to use licentious Actions, and Words, which were prejudicial to her Authority, taking the Government of Affairs from her, and her brother Conty, which did in right belong unto them.
In this interim the Court had sent the Marquess of Chbret to Bourde|aux, Son to the late General of the Burdelois, who was slain at the Action

before Libourne, whose presence, both in Memory of his Father, and for his own worth, was thought might have been acceptable to the people: He did notwithstanding insinuate himself into the Oerists, and found credit with them; so as the Prince of Cont growing jealous that he might make him|self Head of that Faction, to the prejudice of his Authority, though he seemed willing to depend upon him, did under colour of honouring him, offer him the Command of a Brigade in the Country, and good Winter|Quarters, that he might keep him from Bourdeaux; and the same time fra|med a Complaint against him by the means of one called Pesche, one of the chiefest of the Seditious, who m the Olmiere accused him of Treason; Cham|beret who thought himself wrongfully calumniated began to make an up|roar; whereupon Conti taking pretence that such contentions ought to be obviated, made Chamberet retire, and the Princes, and Olmerists began to manage their Affairs with more circumspection; their distrust of the people did afterward so encrease, as that the Princes were more intent to keep themselves from Conspiracies, than to manage War against the King.
But to return to Catalonia, those of Barcellona desired to do somewhat which might facilitate their desired succour; wherefore they resolved to fall upon the Fort Rey, which the Spaniards had built upon Mongeuick. Don Iusippe di Pinos was destin'd hereunto, who put himself in order present|ly; and taking 400 Commanded Foot along with him, and 100 Horse, went privately out on the 16th of Iuly by night, and undiscovered by the Ene|my, entred the Mountain, from whence joyning with Cavalier Austrin, and Monsieur Varron, he advanced, having forc'd the Palisadoes, past the Dich, and made so gallant an Assault, as the Spaniards, not able to resist the French, they were forc'd to yield; at the noise whereof the Horse which were quartered at Sans beat to Arms, and squadronized themselves near the Fort St. Francis: The Catalonians, who were march'd out with 2000 Musquetiers, and 600 Horse, made their Foot retreat to Fort Mon|guick, and their Horse into the Trenches; which the Spaniards observing, and arguing some weakness, or stratagem by this sudden Retreat, they ad|vanc'd to from whence the Frenchmen were gone; whereby dividing the Fort from the City, they fiercely assaulted it, which Cavalier Austrin de|fended valiantly, and was slain there; Seignior Iayot succeeded him, defend|ing himself no less valiantly, repulst the Enemies second Assault, and forc'd them to retreat with some loss: But they kept their first Station still, where whilst they should keep, they were likelier to take it by Famine, than Force, for they within had but one days Victuals.
Mareschal della Motta being very sorry to hear that his men were retreated from their Station, before he had provided necessaries for them; and there being no other way to save it but by opening the Pass, and conveying in Vi|ctuals, he resolved to do it himself: And though he was not yet well healed of his wound, yet he caused himself to be carried in a Chair to Fort Mon|ge; and sent away twenty Souldiers, with each of them a sack of Bisket on their backs, that they might relieve it on the side next the Sea, whilst Marquess Marcelly should endeavour to get in on the other side with 500 Horse. But the Spaniards being advertised of all things by such Catalonians as were their friends, they doubled their Guard where Marcelly was to pass, and placed a good Body of Foot on the other side of the Mountain, to keep those from entring on the other side, who carried the Bisket; the Mareschal Commanded Captain Leonardo, a Catalonian, to see whether he could get in with 40 Horse, with each of them a sack of Biscot en croupe: But the Fort having neither bread nor water, Capitulated before he came, to surrender

upon good Warlike Conditions, which were not observed afterwards. For some Spaniards giving out that there was a Mine within the Fort which was to play, the Horse fell upon these poor people, and not listning to any thing, lew some of them, took some Prisoners, whilst but a few escaped by those craggy Mountains. When that was heard at Barcellon, it put them all in fear, as well for the extravagancie of the News, as for the moan which was made by the Parents of the dead; the loss was great, which had it been foreseen, and had the Fort been Victuall'd, the Passes might have been kept open, and the City maintain'd. But were it either negligence or treachery in the Catalonians, who as it was known afterwards, held ntelligence with the Spaniards, the Error was unexcusable, for it ruin'd all the rest.
Cervera was in no less danger thon Bellaguer had been; but the Ammuni|tion and Artillery of the French being in that Town, Marquess St. Andrea went thither, and fortunately preserved it: But because it was impossible to preserve the Fort St. Peter in his absence, he by Order from the Mareschal caused it to be burnt, and went himself to Villa Franca, where he could not tarry for want of Bread.
The General resolved again to make a general Assault upon the Spanish Camp; he acquainted St. Andrea with it, that he might draw near the Line; in order hereunto St. Andrea came on the 9th of August to Palve not far from the Enemies Camp; but finding neither Victuals, nor any thing that was promis'd him, fit to make an Assault, after he had tarried there three weeks, he undertook to Assault la Montagna St. Ierolino, being recruited with 1500 armed Country people, and 400 Pioneers. He appointe to do it by night, on the 4th of September; but did not do it: For the Gui had not brought his men to the place appointed in a fit time; so it was deferr'd: and it was well it was so, for those of the City had not receiv'd the Signes of his arri|val. The next day he gave out Orders to all in Writing, and his Forces marcht that night towards St. Reale, to fall upon the Spanish Trenches on that side: But the Horse that were led on by Monsieur d Alleigre loitered so long, as the last Squadrons came not thither till it was day; when those that were upon the Guard at St. Reale hearing the noise, gave an Alarm: St Andrea finding the day draw near, made the Assault; and his Foot falling headlong on, won the Line near a little fortified House, where the Spaniards repulst the French. Some silly People would have taken the Fort that was near the House, but were forc'd to retreat.
The French kept the Line they had taken till it was day, thinking that those of Barcellona should have come out according to Agreement; which they did not till the Sun was up: when the Spaniards finding there was no danger of losing the Fort, fell upon those that were come out of the City and beat them back to the Town Gates, with the loss of some Officers and di|vers Souldiers; so St. Andrea was forced to return to his former Quar|ters.
Cavallier della Ferriera, a well-experienced Seaman, was already gone with his Ships, without attempting to relieve the City, nor would he tarry three days till the Assault might be given; so as the Spaniards might easily land some Souldiers out of their Ships, and use them, which they to their advantage did.
The Court of France was no less troubled with the keeping of Cassalle in Monferrat, a Place of greater importance, than of Barcellon; the Spaniards who know how to make use of favourable conjunctures, prepar'd at the same time to fall upon that place; which wanted Mony Victuals, and Com|manders in Chief. The King writ to Mareschal de la Motte, to send St. An|drea's Forces presently to Piemonte, not having then conveniencie to provide

for it elsewhere, but so as he might leave Barcellona in a posture not to be lost for some time: towards the relief whereof the same Ferriere had 15000. double Pistols given him, wherewith he was to Rigg out Twelve Frigats, whereby to bring all things necessary to the besieged City, whereinto little Barks entred ever and anon with some Victuals, from the neighbouring Coasts.
This order for marching into Piemonte, was kept concealed from the su|perintendent Alligre; but being smelt out by the Officers, they thought it was done to cosen them; wherefore they together with the Commander of the Cavalry desired that they might come out of those miseries, which were grown insupportable in Catalonia, threatning to do it themselves, if it were denied them. Monsieur Alligre, (not the aforesaid superintendent, but another of the same name) who led the Horse in their March towards Gariga, treated hereof with St. Andrea, and protested together with the Officers, that they would tarry in Catalonia no longer then the 15th of Sep|tember, relying upon Promises which had been made them, and they spoke as if they were jealous that this St. Andrea held Intelligence with La Motte, and cared not though they should all perish, who were now reduced to 500. Horse, and 200. Foot.
They therefore came to Gariga, where the Horse-Officers had often Meet|ings with the Foot, to Treat how they might be gone without Andrea's knowledge; who being therefore inform'd by the Horse-Captains of Boi|sack's and Rivalet's Regiments, sent for the Commander Ferra, and for a Commander of ince Maurice of Savoy, who were his particular Friends, and Confidents, and desired them to keep their Souldiers obedient, and those of Boisack, and the others of his own Regiment, which were more in number, and more considerable: These promis'd to do their best, but went from their word the next Morning, saying, They could not force the wills of the other Officers, and Souldiers, who were extraordinarily incensed. An|drea went to Alligre, and desired him to keep his Forces from departing till the 15th of that Moneth, as they had promised, that he might give no|tice thereof to La Motte, who was in Barcellona; who with much ao, said, He would.
St. Andrea returned to his Quarters, and whilst he was about to go to Gironne to Treat with the superintendents d' Alleigre and Pinose how the For|ces might be diverted from their Resolution, Alleigre with divers other Of|ficers came in hast to him, to acquaint him, that the Souldiers would not be quieted, but went from their Word: the General made them contented to tarry three dayes; and he went himself to a certain Castle to speak with Pi|nose; by whose Approbation he sent Monsr. Clerg, superintendent of the Victu|als, to receive the King's original Letters from superintendent Aleigre, that he might shew them to the Souldiery, and convince them that the Orders were conditional, and not such as they imagined: He carried a Commissio|ner of Horse, and another of Foot, to be Eye-witnesses that he did not this to deceive them, but that things might go well.
The Marquess gave out, that it would be two dayes before he would re|turn, but he dispatch't his business so as he return'd the same night; which made the Soulders believe he meant to stop them, wherefore about mid-night they went towards Gironne; St. Andrea being mightily discontented here|at, went presently to Gironne, carrying his Equippage with him, because he knew not where to leave it safe. The Inhabitants hearing that the Souldi|ers had revolted, stopt him in the City, saying, That he being a Hugonote, it might be he held some Intelligence contrary to the King's Service. He was much troubled hereat, not so much that he was cross'd in applying reme|dies

to this evil, as that he was branded with a Title that the Hughenots had no ways deserved; for during all these Troubles, none had been more obe|dient and faithful to the King than they. The Marquess supposing that Alei|gre had been the occasion of all this Disorder, sent an Order to him in Wri|ting, to discharge him from medling any more in Command, and to forbid the Officers to obey him.
But since being stopt in Girone, he could not by his presence bring such Re|medies as were necessary to stop an incensed and jealous People, and fearing least the Souldiers might commit some Insolencies in their march to the Country people, the revenge whereof might fall upon him, he the next night slipt down the Wall, and went away, leaving his Baggage, and di|vers Officers in the City, and marched towards his men, who were advan|ced three Leages; he found his own Regiment not far off, which tarried for him. From whence he sent a Trumpet to Girone, complaining of their usage, and demanding his Baggage, and the freedom of his Officers, and Servants, or else he would be revenged. The Baggage was presently restored; they excused what they had done, and asked pardon for it.
The News of this sudden and unexpected Revolt of the Forces in Catolonia, which happened when the Court was in the greatest disorder, did not only discompose the Besieged Barcellonians, but all other Places that were for the King; and did much afflict the Court, and finding the loss of that Place ir|repairable, and therewith the like of the whole Province; the preservation whereof had cost France so much Gold, and weakned the best Forces of her Armies; but to take some order for this, the King desired Marquess Plessis Belliere, Lieutenant-General of St. Onge, to set aside all other things, and march with some of his Forces presently into Guienne, and joyn with Har|court, and go from thence to relieve Barcellona, unless the Count should like better to go thither himself, and leave the Marquess to Command the Forces in Guienne.
As soon as he had received this Order, he went to Rochel, to take his leave of the Duke of Vendosme, who was come thither a little before with his Fleet; and having acquainted him with what Orders he had received, the Duke prest him much to stay, till an Express should return whom he had sent to Court. But the Marquess being unwilling to be put to give an Account of any bad Accident which might happen by his delay, took his leave of the Duke, and marched thitherward. And hearing by the way that Harcourt was gone from Guienne, he sent to Court to know in this case what he should do; and the mean while advanced to Aubeterre, the Master whereof had a little before turn'd to the Prince's Party. Being come near to Perigorde, he heard that Marsin was come to oppose him with all his Forces, to stop his pas|sage, and to fight him. The Marquess, though he were inferiour to the Ene|my in Horse, would not give back, but resolved to meet him, and give him Battle: He quartered near a place called La Valette, from whence he march|ed to Rochbeaucourt, where he foorded the River, and prepared to fight; which as soon as Marsin heard, he presently retreated to Libourne, leaving the whole Country free for the King's Forces, except some Towns and Castles whereinto he had put Garrisons to incommodate the Enemy in his march.
Brantosme, a little City well fortify'd with strong old Walls, seated upon the Drogne, and which as yet had received no Garrison, but pretended Neu|trality, sent Commissioners to the Marquess, desiring him that he would permit her to remain Neuter still; but he answered, He came not to capitulate with the Kin'gs Subjects; that he would treat them as such if they would obey, otherwise he knew what he had to do: Whereupon they sent to present him with the Keys

of the Gates. So on the 18th of September he past the River Lisle without obstacle, under the Castle Bories, which yielded as he past by, as did also Lr|demesia, though it were Garrison'd by the Prince's men; and meeting here with Marquess Saufbeufe, Lieutenant-General of Guienne, and with Monsieur Crequi, with 400 Horse, he foorded over the Drogona; he then called Count Illebone, Marquess Saufbeuf, and the other Officers of the Guienne Army to Councel, Whom he acquainted with what Orders he had received, and desired part of their Forces: They excused themselves, saying, They were not sent to him but to Harcourt; That the Regiments, which were to go, were not specified; nay that his Orders were to take only such as had their Winter-quarters paid, whereof they had received little or none, and that they had received no other Orders from his Majesty since Harcourt's departure; wherefore he might do well to send to Court for more precise Oorders; as was forthwith done: That moreover he should wish Monsieur Tracy, in Mont Alban to provide Monyes to pay the Souldiers in Cata|lonia; and that in the interim he would go about to reduce all those Towns to their Obedience, which were in these convultions revolted.
Which things being agreed upon, Plessis Belliere, marched on the 24th of September to Beaumont, which had refused to receive in Marquess Saufbeuf, which he took; from thence he sent to another little City (which Saufbeuf had besieged three or four days) wishing the Inhabitants to yield, and to drive out the Prince's Garrison, which they prepared to do: But a Captain who commanded there, withdrew with 50 Foot into the Belfrey, saying, That he and all his would die there, rather than yield: Wherefore they blew it up, burying all that were in it in the rubbidge, except the Captain, who though he were covered six foot deep with rubbidge, was taken out alive and seven other Souldiers.
This Example terrified most of the Towns which were in Rebellion, so as one after another, they all swore Allegiance.
Yet St. Pastore a little ungarrison'd-Town stood out, which made Plessis Belliere, send Cavalier Crequi thither, with part of his Horse to reduce it; but were it either that those Townsmen had dealt hardly with the King's Souldiers when they retreated from the Siege of Villa Nova Agenois, or that they themselves had indammag'd the Neighbouring parts, they refused all offers, kept them out, threatning to shoot if they came nearer. The next morning Plessis Belliere went thither himself with 400 Foot, 200 Horse, and two small Guns. He used fair means first, but in vain; after three or four shot of the Artillery, some of the affrighted Inhabitants came forth to de|mand mercy, offering to open the Gates; but as they re-entred the City, one of the Heads of the People with some others, made opposition, and be|gan to shoot at the King's men; which obliged the General to dig a Mine un|der a Tower, whereat the Defendants being terrified, their Courage failed, and they call'd for mercy, which they obtain'd; only the Chief of the Sedi|tious was hang'd.
The same day that Plessis Belliere went to St. Pastour, Count Ilabone, and Marquess Saufbeufe went with some Horse to Lauson, to know if the Master of the Place had received a Garrison of the Princes; at which time Monsieur Monpullion, one of the contrary Party, was come thither with a con|siderable Body of Horse besides the Garrison, who hearing of the coming of the King's men, fell upon them at unawares, and forced them to re|treat.
This News coming to Plessis Belliere just as he parted from St. Pastour, for|ced him to make use in his passage of Castle Montbahus, scituate upon a rise of some consideration, whereinto those of the neighbouring part had re|moved all their moveables; this Castle belonged to the aforesaid Count Lau|son;

who hearing what was past, made Plessis Belliere acquainted with the wrongs which he had received by what had befaln his Town; saying, That he was the King's faithful Servant; and that the fear of Marquess Saufbeufe, who was his particular Enemy, had forced him to receive in the Prince's Garrison; to witness the which, he offered to put out the said Garrison; and in case the Comman|der thereof should refuse, he offerr'd to open him a Gate, provided that he would protect him from Saufbeuf's threats; and he did really drive out the Garrison within two days, and the General gratiously put him in possession of his Castle.
All the Troops marcht from thence to St. Basil near Marmande, wherein were the Regiments of Conti and Galapian, who had been worthily to be praised, had they done that for their King, which they did against his Ser|vice; for they defended themselves stoutly, and had never yielded had not necessity forced them, after having sustain'd the Siege twelve days; this place being taken, the Kings men past over the River, and marched towards Montalban, where the Souldiers were to receive their Pay, and then to march for Catalonia.
This was what was done in Guienne after Harcourt's Retreat, and whilst Barcellona was daily more and more straitned, and re-iterated her desires of succour, whereof she needed the effects more than the hopes, which were continually given her: But Force wanting through the iniquity of the time, which put all in confusion, all things languished. Wherefore the Spaniards, who knew all this, did not only continue this famous Siege, but imploy'd themselves in the taking of divers Towns which the French had in that Prin|cipallity. They took all the Towns which stand along the Sea, from Pala|mose to Barcellona, thereby bereaving the besieged City of that small relief which was brought from thence by night in little Boats, as hath been said.
When it was known in Barcellona that the Court had given order that the Guienne Army should march into Catalonia, it was thought fit by a Councel of War, that Don Iuseppe Marguerit, with divers other Catalonians should go into Rosiglion, where by their valour and knowledge of the Country, they might acilite the relief from France: In order whereunto, he went on the Second of October in a Feluca out of the Town, and past with no lit|tle danger through the Spanish Fleet by night, and came to Begur near Pala|mose, from thence he went to Armentera, to find out Marquess della Farai Governour of Roses, and Baron d' Ales, Commander of the Cavalery, to confer touching the Victualling Roses, which was in great need thereof. From whence he went to Girona, whither Marquess Mortara was come, where he tarried three days, to convey some Victuals into Roses, as he did, and then went with Baron d' Ailes to Perpignian, thinking to have found Plessis Belliere there, that they might joyntly indeavor to relieve the afflicted Country. But he was quite discouraged when he found he was not there, nor heard no news of his coming yet a while: yet in this his coming thither was good; for he discovered that Thomaso Bagnol, Governour of Rosiglion, under colour of besieging his Enemy Doctor Sagara in Sardinnia, had raised a Mili|tia in that Country, intending to betray the French, and to surprise Per|pignan.
When Marguerit was gone from Girona, Marquess Mortara came thither and took it without much opposition, as also all the other Castles and Towns thereabouts; wherefore Barcellona having no hope of relief, and compell'd by Famine, Marquess della Motta, by consent of the Governours, and of all the Commanders, on the Eleventh of October agreed with Don Iohn of Austria, upon these Articles, which we will here recite; since it is a City of such im|portance;

and in the loss whereof so many other consequences did concur, as for what may hereafter happen, it will not be displeaing to relate upon what Conditions it returned to the obedience of its first Master.
His Highness agreed, That the Mareschal de la Motte, Lieutenant-General to the most Christian King, together with all the Lieutenant-Generals, Camp-Mare|schals, Officers and Soldiers, and all other Persons of whatsoever Nation, Quality, or Condition, who would willingly follow the said Garrison, might march out unmo|lested with their Arms and Baggage; to wit, the Foot with Drums beating, Cou|lours flying, Bullets in Mouth, Match lighted at both ends, with six Pieces of Artil|lery, three great ones, and three little ones, such as belonged to the King of France, with three thousand weight of Powder, three thousand weight of Lead, four thou|sand weight of Match; and that the Souldiers of whatsoever Nation that had gone from one side to another, might not be molested: As for the Horse, They were to march out with Trumpets sounding, Coulours display'd, Arms and Baggage, Warlike Ammunition, with all Horses and Mules that had been taken, without it were such as had been taken 24 hours before the Capitulations should be subscribed.
That all Persons of whatsoever Birth, Quality, or Condition, as well Ecclesia|stical as Secular might be permitted to go out with the same Equipage; journeying with all Moveables, Goods, and Baggage, without molestation, nor that any one should pretend to recover any of the said Moveables, Confiscations, or things taken, till within 24 hours of subscribing these Articles; and that such as could not carry their Goods or Moveables along with them, might leave them to be sold by whom they pleased within six months, and have a Pasport for conveying the monies safe|ly into France, or elsewhere, where the owners should be; and also that they might call in any Monies or Debts that they had in Banck at Barcellona, or in any other place within six Months space. That the Mareschal la Motta should cause it to be proclaimed 24 hours before he marched out, that none should carry out any Move|ables which were not his own, or did not belong to some of the Company; and that if any fraud should be found herein, they might be recovered within the aforesaid six Months. That all the Inhabitants of Catalonia of what Quality or Condition, that would retire into France, might enjoy the same Conditions with those of Bar|cellona.
That all Prisoners of all sides which were taken after the War began in Catalo|nia, should be st free without Ransom, to wit, those that were in Catalonia, Ros|siglion, or Cordona
That his Higness should agree, That any French Barks, or those of any other Nation that were in the Haven, or Wharf of Barcellona, might sayl out when their Masters should please, and go into France uninjured: But on condition that they should not carry away any Artillery or any Warlike Ammunition, save such as abovesaid: That the French and those of other Nations should go out by St. An|thonies-Gate; that they should go the first day to St. Fileau, the second to Marte|reile, the third to Pieere, where they should tarry one day; the fifth to Igolaude, the sixth to Capoux, the seventh to Calat, the eighth to Linalinge, the ninth to Pont, where they staid one day; the eleventh to Folke, Monmagaltre, and Coil|ly, the twelfth to Coques, the thirteenth to Pouplo, the fourteenth to Sot, the fif|teenth to Libournes, the sixteenth to Esteris, where they might tarry one day; the eighteenth to Louer, the nineteenth they were to pass over, Sailack, or Piere Blan|ca, and to go into France: That the Commander of these Troops might make his Marches longer or shorter as he pleased: That he should have a Convey of an 100. Horse, to bring them to the Bay of France; and that his Highness should furnish both Horse and Foot with Victuals and necessary Monies for their Voyage.
That no Officer, nor Souldier might be detained for Debt; Carriages, Mules, and Horses might be provided for the Cannon, Baggage, Ammunition; for such

as were Sick or Wounded; and that the Sick, or Wounded that should be left be|hind in Catalonia, should be sent into France when they were well.
That Mareschal de la Motta, the Lieutenant Generals, Camp-Master, and aforesaid others, going out of Barcellona with their Arms, Ammunition, and Baggage by Port St. Anthony, the Spanish Army should be put into Battalia, on the side of the Gate Lanye, and that his Highness should have Notice of this, the night before; that the Hostages for performance of publick Faith, should be sent to Roses, and delivered to the Governour, or to him who should Command in his absence, who should keep them, till he should be assured by Letter from the Com|mander of the Garrison in Barcellona, that all the Forces were arrived in France; and that the Governour of Roses should acquaint the Governour of the said Garri|son when the said Hostages should be come; which were to be Don Carlo d'Ara|gon, one Horse Captain, and two Captains of Foot.
That the Hostages, when these Articles should be perform'd, should be sent into France by the Rode-way that leads to Rosillion, with a Pasport and Guide; as also all Prisoners that were in the power of the King of Spain in Catalonia, their Bread, and Tappe being paid for by the King of Spain till they should come into France; and as for the Garrison of the Castle, and City of Cardona, it should joyn with that of Barcellona, at Callis.
That as soon as these Articles were subscribed, the Souldiers of the Garrison should be furnished with Bread for as long as they should tarry in the City; and that they should March out on the Twelfth of October; and that though within that time the Town should be Victuall'd either by Sea or Land, the Articles should not|withstanding be observed, unless it were a Royal Succour, or the quantity of 10000. Quarters of Corn.
That no War-like Ammunition should be taken from the Magazines: That Mareschal de la Motta should cause all the Artillery that were in the aforesaid pla|ces, as also those that were in Montegivick, or elsewhere, belonging to the Catho|lick King, to be deliver'd unto Don Joyan Pallavesino, General of the Spanish Ar|tillery.
That his Higness, and Mareschal de la Motta, should promise to observe and keep all these Articles, without any reservation.
Affairs being thus adjusted, about 2700. French and Swisser's Foot, all choise and veteran Souldiers, and 800. Horse, with 700. Catalonian Foot, Marcht out of Barcellona the next day after Dinner, and about 200. Offi|cers, and Voluntiers of that City, and Principallity; they went by the way appointed, towards the Perineans, to go for Rosillion, which they did, observing their Articles punctually.
The Crown of France was very sensible of the loss of this City, which was followed by many other Towns, and almost by that whole Principallity, in the preservation whereof so much Treasure, and so many People had been lost.
The taking of Barcellona fill'd the Spaniards with vast pretences, and made them aspire after greater things. By this loss the French were the more in|cited to revenge, and to raise greater Forces to maintain the punctillio of Ho|nour.
The taking of Barcellona was at first sight a sweet bit to the Spaniards, but of bitter digestion; for they did not only consume the flower of their Ma|litia in so long a Siege, but spent so immense a some of Money, as the gain might be rather held destructive, than advantageous; for the Catalonians being naturally bitter Enemies to the Castelians, the latter were obliged to keep their Armies entire, to guard themselves rather against their own Sub|jects, than against their Enemies; and as Catalonia was judged by many, to be

one of the worst acquisitions that ever the French made, so was the recovery thereof ascribed by many to the ruine of Spain.
Whilst Affairs past thus in Catalonia, Plessis Belliere was come to Agen, whither Monsieur Trassy came to speak with him, and promis'd to see the Forces paid that were design'd for Catalonia according to the Court intenti|on; and soon after Orders being brought by Monsr. Nevile, one of the King's Gentlemen, who came thither on the 5th of November, those that were to March were immediately divided from the rest; and the Marquess marcht with those that were designed for Catalonia, who had part of the Pay that was due, paid upon the place, and were promis'd the rest at their coming to Mont Alban.
There was much ado to make them resolve upon this Voyage; the Cap|tains and Officers met together, and writ things of dangerous consequence to the Generals; but at last Cavallier Crequi, and Marquess Bellefons, who were to be Field-Mareschals of this Army, having assembled the Officers, spoke so fairly to them, as that they quieted them, and perswaded them to follow them chearfully, so as they might be paid, as they were promised, before they should go from Mas Verdune, whither they marched all, save the Regiments of Champagnia, and Lorrain, who obstinately said, They would ra|ther be cut i pieces, than March.
That of Champania, came notwithstanding some few dayes after, and joyned with the rest at Mas Verdune; from whence it was afterwards sent for back by the Duke of Candale, who commanded the Forces of Guien, when these were gone.
These Souldiers staid at Mas Verdune eight or ten dayes, expecting Pay; but for all the diligence that could be used, they could not be wholy paid off, for want of Monies; which made the Souldiers begin again to murmur; yet the Commanders used such efficatious Speeches to them, as they resolved to foord over the River at Mas Verdune on the 20th of November.
During their abode here, Plessis Belliere, that he might loose no time, went with Marquess St. Luke, to Beaumonte, and Grenade, which till then held for the Princes; he made them demolish their Fortifications, turn over a new Leaf, and turn'd out some of the most Seditious: So continuing his March he went to Carcasoun, and taking order for refraining the Souldiers Licentious|ness, he came on the first of October, to Segean.
This little Body of an Army, composed of many several Regiments, made about 1200. Horse, and 3000. Foot; at Segean he met with Mercure's Regi|ment, which was sent thither to incommodate Leucara, and to hinder the In-rodes of St. Aunais, which was revolted over to the Princes: the very day that he came thither, he heard that the Mareschal de la Motta was to come thither, having made an Agreement with St. Aunais; who was much confounded at the News of the arrival of these Forces. The Marquess went to meet the Mareschal, and after some discourse upon the present Affairs, he went towards the waters of Belerue, for Cure of the Wound which he re|ceived in Catalonia; and advised the Marquess to go to Constans, and drive the Enemy from thence, and to possess himself of all the Towns, and Castles which the Spaniards held there; which Plessis Belliere did punctually ob|serve, though his intention was to enter Lampourdan, and relieve Roses which wanted Men, and Victuals.
The Army entred into Constans; Thomas Bagnole, a Rebel commanded some Souldiers there for the King of Spain, as he had formerly done for the King of France; he seemed as if he would dispute the Pass at Terne; but instead of doing so, he left his Men in Garrison in Corbera, Rhodes, Ria, Lock, and in other places advantagiously seated, and with much ado,

saved himself on foot through the Mountains, leading his Horse in his hand.
The French presently besieged Rhodes, which held out for four or five dayes, for the Spaniards did desperately defend it; and being brought to extremity, and not able to get such Articles as they desired, five or six of their chief Commanders saved themselves over the Wall by night, and got to the Mountain: They furiously assaulted the Town, storm'd, and sackt it; the Garrison which was 300 natural Spaniards, and 50. Horse, got into the Castle, that they might come to some composition; but wanting all con|veniencies, they yielded upon Discretion, and were all made Prisoners of War. Those of Boule, and other neighbouring places, ran rudely in to plunder; and notwithstanding all the French Commanders could do, it was impossible for them, to keep them from firing the Town, when the Forces were gone, so great was their hatred thereunto.
The Army went from hence to Prades, and Bagnolle, withdrew to Villa Franca; Corbera, Ria, and Iock were taken, and all that little Country was re|duced to the King of France his obedience.
Plessis Belliere, and Bellefons went to discover Villa Franca; to do which, they were forced to grapple hard with those craggy Mountains two or three dayes; they went with 250. Horse, and 300. Musqueteers, by conti|nual narrow and hard wayes, by which no Horse was ever known to go; the pitiful Bagnolians thought to dispute the Pass in several places, but were ever put to the worst by the French: Their last Squadron was gathered by Bagnols in Oletta, consisting of about 400; they were led on by one Gras, a man of much fame amongst them; the taking of this place would certain|ly have been very hard, had they not bargained, and had not their Com|mander been slain at the first firing; the French Foot advanced couragiously, the Enemy were afraid, and were chased down the Mountain, at the bot|tom whereof they thought notwithstanding to get into Oletta; but the French got thither so soon, as they had not time to get into Bagnols; instead, of relieving them, as he had promised, was the first that went away with some Foot. The French staid two dayes at Oletta, not hearing any News of the Enemy; all those of the neighbouring Villages, came in to render Obedience, and to swear Fealty to France. Plessis visited Castle Niers, fa|mous for what had been formerly done there; this Castle belonged to Bag|nols, who had abandon'd it; after this having found out the Avenues to Villa Franca, he returned to from whence he was come.
He could not assault this place at this season, which was so cold and rainy, that he would have lost more than half his Army; besides, there were many Souldiers in the Town, with sufficient Provisions to defend it; nor could Cannon be brought thither; he therefore returned to Prades, from whence he sent account of all things to la Motta, who having taken his leave from the King, was already gone from Bellerue.
Cavallier Crequi was this mean while advanced with a great party of Horse, to convey 500. Foot into Roses, which he luckily did, though the Enemy had built some Forts about it; after which the King's Forces being still more incommodated for want of Victuals in the Country of Constans; and nothing else being to be done, by reason of the bitterness of the Wea|ther, without apparent danger of wasting all the Army to no purpose, Plessis Belliere, with the consent of all the Field Marshals, resolved to Quarter his Souldiers that Winter in Languedock; where he had order to tarry, toge|ther with Marquess Bellefons, to watch over the preservation of Roses, and the other Towns upon that Frontier; and his abode there, was to pur|pose; for hearing that there was a Bark laded with Corn, belonging to

some Merchants which lay at Agde, he used means by the Bishop of that Ci|ty, and by his own Credit, to convey the Bark of Corn into Roses; which afforded the Garrison means to wait for the relief of Men and Monies, which was sent them a while after from Provence, to preserve it from being betray'd by one Ganot, as shall be said in its proper place.
But because the loss of Cassalle, a place maintain'd so many years by the Crown of France, at the expence of so much Mony, and loss of so many men, was this year added to the other misfortunes of France, we will re|sume those Affairs a little higher, that they may be the better known.
It is already sufficiently known why Charles the First, Duke of Mantua, put Cassalle into the King of France his hands; and it is also known, That the Mantuans not being well pleased with the French-mens too high carriage of themselves, made them bear with what was not answerable to their expe|ctation. The business went on therefore without any notice-taking, till by reason of Civil Wars, that Crown began to be less fit for Forreign Affairs, the Spaniards making use of the same Conjunctures, made great progress in Flanders, Catalonia, and in Italy, whereby they became dreaded. Where|fore Duke Charles the Second of Mantua, found himself bound to have a care of preserving that place which he had recommended to the Prote|ction of France.
Affairs standing thus in the year 1651, the King of France Commanded Count Argenson to go immediately as Embassador from him to Venice; in order whereunto Argenson took his Journey in the beginning of May; but soon after his Arrival at Venice he died of a Feaver.
His Son succeeded him in his Embassy in November, and in his passage ne|gotiated in Piemont, Parma, and Mantua; but as soon as he had had publick Audience, he returned to Mantua to manage the Agreement between that Family and Savoy.
It is long since known, that the Treaty at Chierasco, was the chiefest cause of discord between these two Princes; Savoy did always demand the perfor|mance thereof, which Mantua always opposed: Yet this Treaty was con|firm'd by many other Treaties which were had fterwards; and is much strengthened by the last Treaty which was held at Munster.
The Emperor, and King of France are bound to maintain it by Arms; so as Mantua cn hardly withdraw himself out of it, yet till now; by reason of his near Alliance with Caesar, he hath staved off the blow, and kept Savoy out of possession, which he continually prest for: At first the Mantuan Agents said, the Emperor could not give it, because the Christian King had not done what he was by the same Treaty obliged to do, to wit, he had not paid the Mony which was promised on the behalf of Savoy.
This made it be believed that Duke Charles would end the business; and to this purpose Argenson had order, That as soon as he should be come to Ve|nice, that he should go and let Mantua know, that France was ready to make payment, so as he would yield to Savoy's pretended Investure: The Embas|sador perform'd his Order about the end of the year 1651, but he found Mantua to be otherwise minded than he was said to be in the French Court.
The Dukes Answer was, That the refusal which he made at the Emperor's Court, was not to the end that they imagined; but that he was resolved never to yield to the Treaty of Chierasco, till he had been righted for the great wrong which had been done him; yet he would advise with his Council how to give his Majesty all pos|sible satisfaction. Not long after Marquess Francisco Rolando della Val Mon|ferino, the Dukes Chief Minister of State, went to acquaint the Embassador with the Dukes resolution; which was, That his Highness did not oppose the desired Institure so much for the non-payment of the Monies due to him by the

Treaty of Chierasco; as for the prejudice he should receive in the Execution there|of, that he had oft-times made his Reasons known, and made his Protestations at the Meeting at Munster: And this was all the Ambassadour could get concern|ing this. The Mantuans offer'd many things to find some way to an Agree|ment, but never could hit upon any; for it was of too great consequence to part from the Treaty of Chierasco, whereof no one point was to be al|tered.
The Ambassadour was contented to carry the Copy of the Orders, and the Proxy which the Duke had sent to his Agent at Vienna, to oppose the busi|ness which was in hand. Argenson was not only sent fo the above-said bu|siness, but for another thing which did much trouble the Court of France; which was, to keep Cassalle from falling into the Spaniards hands, promising to restore it to the Duke upon some Conditions, viz. To remove all the French out of it, to put a Garrison of Swizzers into it, which we to take an Oath to the King, and to the Duke; That his Majesty should pay half the Garrison, the Duke a fourth part, and that they should endeavour to engage the other Princes of Italy for the rest, to the end that they might all have a share in the preservation of that place, which was of such importance for the Common Liberty. All these Proposals were agreed upon, and they would have been fully effected, had it not been for the Disorders which hapned in France.
The Ambassador being returned from Mantua, desired the Commonwealth to contribute to the perfecting of the business, and received great demonstrati|ons of good will towards the quite of Italy. But withal, how impossible it was for them to mind the preservation of other men's Estates, she being to defend her self without any assistance from others, against so potent an Enemy as the Turk: Wherefore the French not being able to rely upon the Venetians, Af|fairs were suspended. Argenson writ to the Court, that they must begin some new Treaty to put the place into the Duke's hands, to keep the Spaniard from besieging it. But the King's Council found it not necessary to do so; and their home Disorders made them not mind forreign Interests.
This mean while the French Forces parted from Piemont, as hath been said, with Marquess St. Andrea Monbran, which was followed with the loss of Tri|no, and Cressentino, which facilitated the like of Cassalle. The Duke of Man|tua did again and again desire the King of France that he would put on some resolution for the maintenance and preservation of that place, which want|ed Victuals, Men, and Commanders, and in such a condition, as though the Spaniards should want sufficient Forces for such an Enterprise, they might notwithstanding think upon it now, that France was so weak. Wherefore he cunningly held the Spaniards in hand, that he might afford the French time to accommodate their Home-Affairs, and to relieve Cassalle, or to restore it handsomely.
He made his desires first known by Girolimo Pirandi, a Gentleman of Mont|ferrat, his Agent in France, when the Court was at St. Germains; where the Cardinal weighing the importance of the business, caused presently 15000 Doubloones be assigned over, to the end that Victuals being thereby provided, and the Militia paid, the City might not need fear the Enemies at|tempts; but through the misery of those times, the Payments were so neg|lected, and diverted, as Cassalle languished still more, and the Spaniards were daily more encouraged: Pirandi did therefore reiterate the same desires, to whom the Duke sent express Messengers when the Court was at Pontois; where the Cardinal caused another Assignment be made, besides the first of 8000 double Pistols, and another in Compeigny of 10000. But of all these three Sums there was much ado to get 2000. For the Cardinal's Persecutions being now at the heighth, and he ready to go out of the Kingdom, they

were rather desirous to cross his Orders, and to make his Government appear ill, than to think of the Kingdoms concernments.
Duke Charles found where the shooe wrung him, and therefore thought fit to provide for his own Affairs; and some Proposals of Agreement being made between him and the King of Spain when he accompanied his Sister into Germany, which his Highness had refused, he wrought it so with his Aunt the Dowager Empress, and with the now Regent, his Sister, as that the Emperour held the Spaniards so in hand, as that either the French might re|cruit Cassalle, or else that they might resolve to put it into his Highness hands, who was the lawful Master thereof.
The Spaniards listned willingly hereunto, and promoted the Treaty with the Duke of Mantua, by the interposition of Prince Bozzolo; and of Father Don Augustin Guazzone Sommasco.
By reason of this backwardness which appeared in the Duke, Argenson received Order to return again to Mantua, to discover the Duke's real inten|tentions, and once more to offer at effecting the Treaty of Chierasco. The Duke kept constant to his Negative; but that he might not recede from his constant observance of his Majesty of France, but give him what satisfaction he could, he sent him a Breviate of the Reasons he had to oppose that Treaty, and answered the King's Letters with great respect.
The Ambassadour would have entred upon Discourse touching what was said of his Highness treating with the King of Spain by means of the Em|presses, and upon the Marquess of Caracene's threats, upon his refusal to treat; wherefore he spoke thereof to Marquess de la Vall: Who assured him, There was no Treaty by his Master with Spain; and that if there should be any, it would only be to re-invest him in Cassalle.
The Ambassaduor was surprised at this Answer, and added; That the Duke his Master would run great hazard in trusting the flatteries of his antient Enemies, and greater shame for having thrown off France at such a time; that he was sure the Spaniards would never meddle with Cassalle, without the good will, nay, without the request of his Highness: But all this prevailed nothing with the Marquess, who desired to see his Master free, and absolute Master of his Dominions, which made it be suspected that he held Intelligence with the Spaniards.
The Ambassadour in the Marquess his absence, resolved to feel the Duke's Pulse, upon what he had discoursed with Marquess la Vall; he went to visit the Duke, and plainly acquainted him with the jealousie he had of treating with his State-Minister: He told him, That it was publikly said, that there were Treaties in hand to drive the French out of Cassalle: That he could not conceive what advanage his Highness could receive thereby: That he feared some particular concernment might make him side with the Spaniards against his own in|clination and real good: And that if Marquess de la Vall had been wrought upon by the Spaniards, it behoved his Highness to correct him for it.
The Duke answered, That he had no Commerce with the Spaniard; that he had made no Agreement with them, and that if any thing should happen, he would acquaint him presently with it; that he was not ignorant of what Obligations his Family had to France which he should never forget; but that he hoped his Ma|jesty would not take it ill, if he should use all possible means to keep Cassalle from be|ing lost.
The Ambassadour reply'd, His King had set his heart too much upon this City, to suffer it to be lost; but that his Highness ought to have a care that he lost it not, out of too great a care of preserving it; that the frequent conferences of Marquess de la Vall with Prince Bozzolo, and divers other Spaniards, promis'd but little good; that he beseeched his Highness not to be deceived; to look into his Affairs with his own eyes, and to prevent all inconveniencies which might arise from a rash re|solution.

The Duke took all well that the Embassadour had said, and did again as|sure him, That he would be alwayes gratefully devoted to the King: Thus Argen|son returned to Venice, from whence he inform'd the Court of all that had pass'd; and how that divers Cabals had been held to re-enter into Cassalle, which had been treated upon with all secrecy by Prince Bozzolo, and Fa|ther Guazzone; adding, That the Spaniards desired nothing more than to bring the Duke over to his party, to stave him off from the protection of France; to recompence him with exchange of Territories, and to re-inti|grate him for what he should loose in France; that the business was neer at an end, and stuck only upon the Duke's pretentions, who would enter free, and absolute Master into Cassalle, as he was before the War; and desi|red to be helpt by Monies in some sort or other, to maintain the Garrison; and chiefly not to break with the King of France.
The Duke, when the Embassadour was gone, reflected more upon what had been by him said, and found much to his grief, that the Court of France had an ill opinion of his actions, whilst he knew that they tended only to the preservation of what was his own, without any prejudice to that Crown, where he intended to keep his antient good corrispondency.
Nor did he less wonder, that not only France, but Italy should judge amiss of the Marquess de la Vall's Actions, and that he held Intelligence with the Spaniards; and thought to abuse him with passionate representations, since he knew that the Marquess was only concern'd in his Service, and minded nothing but the making him absolute Master of all his own Towns, being he (who contrary to what was given out) stood stiffest against the Spaniard's Proposals; wherefore he humbly presented his constant Devotion to his Christian Majesty, and to his State Ministers, and sought to take from them the bad Opinions which might be insinuated into them by his envyers, and by those that loved not the Marquess.
And because the Governour of Millan, after having had conference in Serravalle, with Marquess Spinola, and other of his Catholick Majestie's Agents, had carryed the Spanish Army into Montferrat, and taken Ponte|stura, Corniolo, Ozano, Bossenguano, St. Georgio, Ocimiano, Mirabello, Borgo Ticinetto, and Frascine, whereby Cassalle was blockt up on all sides; so as after a long want of Monies, the Garrison was reduced to great extre|mity; the five Swisser's Regiments ready to lay down Arms, and be gone; the French but few, and not in a condition to do Service: the small Mont|ferrat Militia went out to get Victuals for the Camp; the whole Garrison grumbled, and were ready to put the Town into the hands of any that would give them advance Money, or their Arrears; Iona Clava, who with some others had Munitioned Cassalle, could provide the Garrison no longer with Bread, as they had done; nor yet particular Gentlemen, who had maintained it with Corn for five Moneths; the Duke renewed his desires to the Court, and propounded that if by reason of their Civil Wars; they could not send it convenient Relief, they would be contented that it might rather fall again into his hands upon requisite caution, than to the Spaniards, who protested, that if they could get it from the French, they would never restore it to the House of Mantua. St. Andrea did at the same time hold the Spaniards in hand, with Hopes, and Negotiations, to keep them from falling upon it by force, to afford time to the French to settle their Affairs, and to relieve it.
President Mirandi made these Proposals, but finding the business was still delaid, and that there was no means to bring back the Governour of Cassalle, Marquess Monpessat, who was in France, without being furnisht with Men or Monies, went to the Court himself, and propounded, That if they would

make Marquess Tavanes Mareschal of France, and General in Piemont, he should at his own expence within a Month space, raise 3000. Foot, and 1500. Horse, and relieve Cassalle with them.
This Proposition though it appeared fair, yet was not accepted for divers reasons, and perhaps, because the Marquess was Brother to Count Tavanes, who fought for Conde.
The Dutchess of Savoy, who was no less troubled than the French, that Cassalle should fall into the Spaniard's hands, solicited the French by her Em|bassadour the Marquess Abbate of Aglie, to come to some speedy expedient, protesting, That otherwise his Highness would be forced to seek an Agree|ment with Spain; and she sent Marquess Villa to Cassalle, to offer Monsieur St. Angelo, who commanded there, to send him in 400. Horse; St. Angelo, fearing that the Monferrians, who were not great friends to the Piemontesse, would not be well pleased with this, and not daring to accept the offer with|out the King's order, refused it, which caused some scandal, and murmuring in the Court at Turin; which grew greater when it was known, that Mar|quess di Penes, Governour of Pinaralle, who had order to send 800. Foot of Tault's Regiment to Cassalle, excused himself for the present, pretending that he could not conveniently weaken that Garrison, whilst the Spanish For|ces were so near.
The Spaniards who were fully advised of all that past, and who feared that any the least succour, which should be put into Cassalle, might make head against their Forces, which were not in a condition of making that Enter|prise, but by reason of the French-men's weakness, continued treating with the Duke, and told him freely, That unless he would joyn with them, they would take Cassalle, since the French were not in a capacity to relieve it, by reason of the War, which was now in its greatest height; so as to avoid losing it, there was no means left for him, but to joyn with them, drive out the French, and enter himself into his City.
The Duke, who's whole aim was to save that City, and to be therein in|dependent, as well from Spain, as France, proceeded warily therein, for it was a nice business; and not confiding wholly in the Spaniards, he carried the business so as if he would gratifie the one party, and not disgust the other.
At last the Governour of Millan, fearing lest delay would hurt his De|signes, sent Marquess Verullino Vicconte, one as valiant in War, as wise in managing State-Affairs, with order to find out the Duke at Rouera, and to continue Prince Bozzolo's Negotiation, and to end it, as was done; for the Marquess overcame all difficulties, and ended the Articles, which were kept secret, though diversly reported: But it was true that the Duke was sufferr'd to put 2000 Foot, and 300 Mantuan-Horse into Cassalle, and 1500 Monferrians, who were raised out of the Militia of the Country, all under Don Camillo Gonzaga, Brother to Prince Bozzolo; all these were by means of the said Gonzaga, and of Conte Ottavio Brabanti, received into the City. St. Angelo was forced to capitulate, and to put the Citadel into his Highness hands, who placed a Garrison there of his own Souldiers, not depending upon Spain; and the Empress obliged her self to furnish the Prince her Bro|ther with Monies to maintain the Garrison, with which Monies she was fur|nished by the King of Spain, by Agreement made between them (as said the French) as an expedient by which the Duke might excuse himself to the Court of France, as not having concluded any thing with the Spaniards.
Count Argenson being advertised of what past at the Court of Mantua, and that Marquess Visconte had concluded the Treaty, and that the Mantuan Militia was preparing to march, acquainted the King into what extremity

the Affairs now were brought; and considering that by reason of the Trou|bles which the Kingdom was in, so speedy a remedy could not be taken as was requisite, he acquainted the Common-wealth with the bad condition which Cassale was in; He told them, That their Senate would lose more thereby than France; and that if they should quit so weighty a Concernment, it would be no wonder if his King should also think upon what toucht him nearest; that he would be much displeased if the Spaniards should take Cassalle; but that their Common|wealth would find the ill effects.
The next day, before the Senate had resolved what answer to give the French Embassador, the Marquess de Fuentes Embassador from Spain came before them, who desired them that they would permit him to give them an account of those Proceedings: He acquainted them with the Dukes and the King his Masters resolutions; he endeavour'd to make his Masters in|tentions appear clearly to the Senate, and to free them of all jealousies.
The Senate answered the French Embassador, That the Common-wealth had had long War with the greatest Enemy of Christendom; wherefore they could undertake nothing in the troublesome conjuncture they were in; howsoever they would contribute their good will to the preservation of Cas|salle, to which purpose they would do all good offices with the interessed Parties.
They told the Spanish Embassador, That as his Catholick Majesty had al|ways witnessed his desire of Peace, so the Common-wealth was confident he would do still, to the entire tranquility of Italy, so much desired by the Senate: But that they could not mind him, that his King should do well to consider before he drew on worser humours, and renew'd a fierce War in Ita|ly in a time when the Common-wealth was incommodated with the Com|mon Enemy of Christendom. They also by their Agents spake to the same effect to the Governour of Millan, but the Spaniards forbare not to prosecute their Designes, pretending not to let slip an occasion so propitious to their Interests; believing that the business would not end as it did.
These Treaties with Mantua, and this advancing towards Cassalle, though they might give an Allarm to all the Princes of Italy, there being none who did not think but that the Spaniards would put a Garrison into that place, and that the Mantuans would not have govern'd their Affairs so advantageously, and to their much Glory, as beyond all mens expectation they did, yet by rea|son of an inckling that was had of an Agreement which would not be pre|judicial to any, every one stay'd expecting the event.
Argenson knowing that he could not work upon the Common-wealth, fur|ther than to make her intercede between the Parties concern'd, thought fit to write a Letter to the Duke of Mantua, wherein since it may be thereby known what the French-mens sence was, it will not be amiss to relate the Letter; which was as followeth:

Most Excellent Sir:
I Have received so many favours from your Highness upon several occasions, as it is very fit in some sort to make my acknowledgments; which I cannot do bet|ter than upon this occasion: I beseech your Highness to read it with as good a heart as it is written.
I take my self to be bound by the Imployment, wherewith I am honour'd, and by the confidence which your Highness hath put in me; I will pay these two Duties with sincerity: and I shall tell you that France is not concern'd herein but as it relates to your Highness; wherefore it is a Service which I pretend wholly to you Sir, wh|in I am sure to please the King, since his friendship to your Highness considered, he

will be pleased that I infrm you aright, and I passionately desire that your Great|ness may reeive advantage thereby.
All Italy is full of the News of Treaties between your Highness and Spain; I do not here discourse upon the manner how, neither do I desire to find out whether they be in your own Name, or in that of the Empress; but be it what it will, 'tis your Interest that is handled, and your Territories that are Treated of: 'Tis posi|tively said, that your Highness hath concluded what was propounded to you in your Voyage to Germany, and consented to what you then so vehemently denied, to wit, That you will forgo the Friendship of France, renounce the great Estate you have there, drive the French out of Cassalle, and willingly assubject your self to the Spaniard. Four considerable things which ought to be well weighed.
I doubt not but that those that have made your Highness put on these Re|solves, have cloked them with fair appearances; but they must be sounded to the bottom, and your true and real Servants cannot permit that your Highness be so surprised.
As for the first Point, Of foregoing France; Your Highness may do well to consider, whether it will be your advantage to deprive your self of such a leaning|stock; you think no more peradventure upon the vast Obligations you owe to that Kingdom, and may peradventure have forgotten that had it not been for the King of France his Protection, you had neither had Mantua, nor Montferrate. Exa|mine, I beseech you, how much you will suffer in your Reputation by so easily aban|doning a Party, from whence you have received such assistance? by renouncing their Friendship, who in your greatest necessities spared for nothing to sustein you; and de|clare your self against a Nation, so often called in to relief, whereof it never fail|ed. Doth your Highness peradventure think that the Spaniards will confide in you, when they shall find so sudden a change in you; say they should not observe their Promises, whither would you flee for refuge.
The Fame of the surprisal which your Highness intends to make your self in Per|son, makes all your Party suspected. Do you think that the King will not interrupt your Designe? and if it succeed not, how unfortunate will your Highness prove? you will be abandoned by both, because you can be useful to neither.
France will uybraid you with ingratitude; Spain will be aware of your weakness; Italy will accuse you of somewhat more than misfortune in this your sinister event. In what esteem will your Highness be in throughout all Europe? who will restore you to that City which you would willingly lose?
These are general reflections upon your State and Honour; and in the next place be pleased to reflect upon the state of your Domestick Affairs.
If your Highness break with France, you must resolve to lose all your Territo|ries which you possess there. I know the Spaniards will promise you Dominions in the Kingdom of Naples, and that those who shall treat with you, will not fail to pro|pound intire satisfaction upon this important Article. But mark, I pray, what you leave, and how little the Reward is which you are promised. Your Highness loseth a large succession of the best Towns that are in France, and wealth sufficient for a Cadet of your Family; on the contrary you are offerd Possessions, the true value whereof is not known, in a Country which you little understand, the possession whereof is as little safe, as is the Catholick King's Authority in that Kingdom; those who have been forc'd to be paid in those Monies, may give you a better account of it. Your Highness may enquire of the Prince of Parma, how he hath been treated, and by the little I have said, you may resolve.
For what concerns driving the French out of Cassalle, I well know that is the Cause of your Highness change; but beware it cause not your ruine, the Spaniards have so often attempted in vain to take it, as at last they despair to compass their  by force; now they will use their cunning to bereave you of it. And whilst they pretend to repossess you of your own, they intend to take it from you; could they

have done it of themselves, they would not invite you to joyn with them: But be|cause they know their own weakness, they will fortifie themselves with your Highness Credit in that City, and think they may easiy make themselves masters of it, when it shall be in your Highness hands. You consider not that their chief aim is to make the French distrust you: Consider what violence they used at first to invade the Marquisate of Finale. Think how they Treated the Proprietories. See what they have done to preserve Sabionetta, and Piombina; and believe they are alwayes of the same mind. They think Injustice glorious, so it may serve their Great|ness. They have neither Faith, Word, nor Sacrament which they do not violate when concern'd. Your Highsse must not think they will alter their former Policy for your sake. Your Highness is upon the very brink of falling into their Tyranny. You lose your self insensibly, and will not be able to get out so easily as you get in. I will grant they may let you enter into Cassalle, but are you sure they will suffer you to tarry there? Will not you be forc'd to have recourse to them often for maintenance for your Garrison? Who makes such hast to recover a thing will not so easily part with it. I have often protested to you on my King's behalf, that his Majesty expects only a favourable conjuncture to do it. The birth of the new Prince which God hath granted unto your Highness, may serve for a new security.
I speak with the freedom of a Frenchman, accompanied with the Zeal of a pas|sionate Servant of your Highness, as a man wholly unconcern'd. I write these lines out of gratitude, for the many Favours I have received from your Highness, and I write them for the good of all Italy, whereunto that of Mantua is striatly an|next. I humbly beseech your Highnesse to accept of my good will, to reflect a lit|tle upon these discourses, and to believe that I am, c.

But all this wrought no effect; the Duke's Answer to the Letter was full of respect to the King, complaining, That the present conjuncture of times had thrust him upon this resolution, to save Casal from being lost; and he thanked the Ambassadour for the good will which he had shewed to Mantua.
The Duke sent away the Marquess Don Camillo Gonzaga with the Mantuan Militia, and divers Gentlemen his Subjects towards Casal; and the 23th of September writ from Rivere a Letter to the Judges, Officers, Ministers and Subjects of Casal, and of the state of Monferrat, the Tenour whereof fol|lowes:

Faithful and Beloved, c.
SInce the Divine Majesty was pleased to call Us unto the Government of Our Do|minions, We have not applyed Our Self with more sollicitude and care to any thing than to the procuring of the Quiet of Monferrat; grieving for those Mise|ries you have for this long time with so much constancy suffered for complying with your Duty towards Us; but the Condition of Affairs hitherto have not enabled Us to perform a thing so just and with so much Passion desired by Us.
We have notwithstanding never omitted to improve any opportunity which Time hath offered unto your advantage; and having heard what was for several Months past publiquely reported, That the Marquess Caracene was to marh with the Forces of his Catholick Majestie unto the prejudice of that Our Fortress, We were most earnest Suitors to his Christian Majesty, That he would be pleased to send with all expedition Money and Forces for the security and defence thereof; or that his Majesty would in his great Wisdome pitch upon some Expedent which might hinder that Place from falling into other hands than Ours, according to the Consignation made thereof by the Duke Charles Our Grandfather, unto his Maje|stie's late Father of glorious Memory: And perceiving that Ou Applications o duced nothing but promises and hopes, We were willing not to be wanting on Our part to give all demonstrations possible of Our continual Respect and Duty towards

that Crown; and being sensible of the difficulty in sending necessary Supplyes during the present Troubles of that Kingdome, We have exceeded both Our own Power, and that of you Our welbeloved Subjects in maintaining the Garrison there for a long time, to our no small damage, and the total exhausting of our Treasure: And we could heartily ave wished we had been able to make a larger demonstration of our affections; but finding our selves unable longer to support the charge, and our ap|prehensions of the Marquess Caracene (who drew near to the said Fort with his whole Army) daily increasing, We did by advice of our Councel perswade him to decline allwayes of force, and to be content that we might enter and possess it with our own Subjects: And his Excellency being satisfied in the Iustice of our Demand, We resolved (before the executing of it) by an express Courrier to the Court of France, to second our former Applications thither, with remonstrating the imminent danger in which Cassale then stood, humbly beseeching his Majesty, That in case a more fit Expedient could not readily be found out to prevent those mischiefs, we might with his Majestie's good liking take course our selves for our Indempnity, by placing there our own Forces, with the exclusion of all others: And we have in the mean time Treated with the said Marquess touching the Terms upon which 'twas to be executed, and have received sufficient assurance from him, that in case we find no opposition, he will permit us freely to enter and enjoy it; that he will sud|denly draw off his Army from Monferrat: and that in case of opposition, he will em|ploy the Forces of his Master in compassing so just an end.
We were resolved in order hereunto to have come Our Self in Person, confiding principally in your fidelity, and the devotion you have unto Our Service, whereof We have had so many trials; if after the favour of a Son granted to us by the Di|vine Majestie, (which adds unto Our Obligation for preservation of Our Domi|nions, and must encrease your zeal in the co-operating towards it) we had not fal|len into a Tertian Ague, from which although we are at present (God be thanked) free, yet we are not in a condition to perform it, without apparent danger of a Re|lapse; and doubting that a longer delay may bring with it some irreparable preju|dice, we have resolved to send thither Don Camillo Gonzaga our Kinsman, to whom (by reason of his singular worth) we have entirely confided the dispatch of this Affair, whereof We have thought fit to give you notice, that you obey and assist him in all things he shall think fit and conducing thereunto, as you would do Our proper Person.
And we have hereby thought fit further to give you notice, That as we shall on all occasions make demonstration of our bounty and gratitude to such as shall upon this pressing occasion comply with their natural obligation to our Service; so we shall without mercy use the extremity of a rigorous Iustice towards all those who forget|ting their Loyalty shall shew themselves herein ill affected towards their Soveraign Lord, and careless of the Honour of their Country.

The Dutchess of Savoy having notice of this, and that Sault's Regiment which was at last commanded to march from Pinarol into Casal, had been ill treated by the Spaniards, so as of 800 Foot, there were but 40 that entred; They endeavoured with 1500 Horse, and 2000 Foot, to succour it; and the Forces drawing near the City, which is seated by the Po, under the Conduct of the Count of Verna General of the Horse, the Marquess Monte his Lieu|tenant General, writ into the Town to have provision made of Barks to pass the River; and that such of the Inhabitants as were devoted to the French, should put themselves into a posture for the assisting of the Enterprize.
But those of Moferrat suspecting that the Savoyards entred once into Ca|sal, might during the French broyls seize the Town and keep it for them|selves, refused to furnish any Barks, hindred them from drawing near the Town, and were the occasion that the Spaniards pressing the Citadel with|out

intermission with their Approaches and Artillery, the Baron de St. An|gelo who commanded there, was forced to a Capitulation; which was made the 21 of October, with Honourable Conditions; putting the Cittadel it self into the Duke of Mantua's hands, who placed therein a Garrison of their own Souldiers, to the derision of such as imagined, and would needs after|wards affirm, That not the Mantuans, but Spaniards were Masters of it.
The Governour of Milan observed Religiously what he had promised to the Duke, insomuch as his Highness having thought it convenient, that for the safety of the place a German Garrison should be placed in it, drawn out of uch as served under the Spaniard, being first discharged, and after taken nto his Higness Service, with an Oath to be faithful to him; Caracene refu|ed to consent unto it, suspecting that 'twould be thought a collusion be|ween them: Neither would he permit any of his Souldiers to enter the place, nor go himself into it, but in company of the Duke himself, who came thither some few dayes after.
The Generals of Savoy having not found in those of Monferrat that incli|nation towards them which they imagined, and knowing there was now no means for saving of Casal, that they might not lose all that preparation, re|solved to attempt the recovery of Crescentino, before which they came the 13th of October, and in seven dayes carried the place, because the Spaniards being engaged before the Cittadel of Casal, could not relieve it.
The news of this loss flying abroad, and the fame being not in Italy alone, but also throughout all Europe, That the Duke of Mantua being joyned with the Spaniard, had delivered into their hands that most Important Place, gave no small Jealousie to those who feared the Spaniards greatness, and made the Duke to be ill thought of in the Court of France, where they censured his Actions with much bitterness, and threatned upon the first occasion to make their resentments own by an exemplary punishment.
The Duke of Maua notwithstanding protested, That he compled with all due respects to France, and with all submission fit to demonstrate his de|votion and gratitude towards that Crown, and protested, That he would still continue obsequious and dutiful towards the most Christian King. But his Professions were not in France regarded in such manner as he expected, and having therefore published upon this occasion a Manifesto in the Month of September this very year, just before his agreement with the Spaniard, it will not be amiss to set it down, that so upon comparing thereof with the Declaration made after by the French, when the Lord Plessis Besanson was sent unto the Princes of Italy, the Prudent reader may be able to make a judg|ment touching the whole matter. The Manifesto was as followeth:



THe Obligations wherein the House of Mantua stands bound upon several oc|casions to the Crown of France, publickly owned by my Predecessors, and which I have inherited together with my Dukedome, have alwaies maintained in me an inviolable affection towards his most Christian Majesty, promising unto my self by his Royal assistance a most powerful Protection, whereby my state of Monerrat, and my Town and Citadel of Casal should be defended from loss or prejudice, and at last restored unto me with the same freedome as they were for their preservation and defence deposited into the hands of the late King of glorious Memory by the late Duke Charles my Lord and Grandfather. And although that Country hath for many years last past been daily ruined, not only by the Quartering of Souldiers, but also by the plunder of my poor Subjects, pillaged continually as well by the Forces of Pied|mont united unto those of his Majesty, as by the Armies of his Catholick Majesty; the one upon pretence of defending the Country; and the other with design to drive their Enemies out of Italy, and particularly from a Town so considerable for is neighbourhood unto the State of Milan, and thereby free themselves from the con|tinual

jealousie it gave them; yet having always constantly refused the Propositions and offers made unto me upon several occasions, I have rested firmly confident of the just Intentions of his most Christian Majesty, and that I should with his good liking, and without the interposition of any other, obtain from him that which be|longed unto me, without any dsmembring of the Country: but forasmuch as after having several times represented unto his Majesty the urgent and pressing necessi|ties of my Towns altogether unprovided, and the condition wherein they stood, be|ing exposed unto the danger of falling under the Command of any who should have designes upon them, my Applications full of duty and respect have brought no other return from his Majesty, but remote hopes of feeble Succours, which could bring o security unto the places; whether it were by the advice of some person ill affected to|ward my Family, or some other particular consideration, or by reason of my ill for|tune, the Kingdom being then engaged in other Interests, which were perhaps esteemed to be of greater consequence. After I had reiterated my Addresses, and petitioned by my Agents in that Court to have some speedy supply, or that some other expedient might be thought on for my preservation, since just means were not wanting to do it gloriously, and with immortal Reputation to the Crown of France, I resolved to give new proofs unto his Majesty of my affection and zeal unto his Service, by maintaining the Garrison many Months at my own charge: But this expence becoming insupportable to my Revenues, very much diminished, and to my Subjects who are totally destroyed, and did continually sollicite me to take some course for easing of those burdens under which they have long groaned; and perceiving that my suspicions were encreased by a new march of the Spanish Army into the Field, besides the report spread abroad that they would certainly attempt the place, the Governour of Milan being encouraged to it by reason of the weakness of the Garri|son, the taking of Trio a place very important towards the facilitating of the En|terprize, and the intestine Troubles wherein France was involved, which rendered him secure from a diversion thence; I suffered not my self to be for all this over|come with fear, or gained with those Propositions and Promises were made unto me, but sent an express Courrier to his most Christian Majesty, beseeching him that he would please to order either some speedy supply of men and money, or take some other resolution suitable to the necessity, or that otherwise he would not take it ill, I should my self take such Expedients as might be best, to gain the possession of the place for my self, who am the lawful Soveraign thereof, to the exclusion of all others, and keep it with a Guard of my own Souldiers, so as it might not longer be exposed unto the danger of falling into the hands of the Spaniard, or others, who may have Designes upon it; the which they have sufficiently demonstrated, not with|out being listned unto (as I am certainly informed) and their success therein would have proved to my irreparable damage, besides the other wrongs and injuries I suffer, which are not of small importance, but are acted contrary to the good and just inten|tions and the great disservice of his Majesty. Finally, Seeing my self reduced to an extreme and pressing necessity, and to avoid the greater evil, I have endeavou|red to perswade the Marquess Caracene to grant me together with a Cessation of Arms, the convenience of taking the possession of that Place and City, with the ex|clusion of all others, who assented thereunto; and that I might with ease and with|out let compass the Design, offered me in case of opposition all the Forces of his Catho|lick Majesty, that I might with more security compass my intention, engaging him|self not to enter into those Places upon other occasions, and that in case he were ne|cessitated to it, that he would leave them freely and without reserve under my abso|lute command.
And forasmuch as the Season doth advance, and that the said Marquess the Go|vernor presses and protests that he will lose no time of this Campagne, being unable (by reason of the sickness wherewith I am much weakened, and of that which the Arch-duchess my Consort, fell into since her lying in) to go in person as I had resol|ved, I have been forced to make use of Don Camillo Gonzaga for execution of this

Design, to whom by reason of his near Relation, being of my House, and of his Va|lour and Prudence I have entirely trusted the execution of this important Design, whereby I have at the same time provided for my own Preservation in the peaceable possesson of my Dominions, for the ease and relief of my own Subjects, and the general repose of Italy: Protesting nevertheless, that I shall notwithstanding still preserve (as I have ever done) an inviolable affection towards his Most Christian Majesty, and endeavour with all industry to give Testimonies thereof to the whole World, hoping in his Majesties goodness, that when he shall be pleased to make re|flections upon the present state of Affairs, he will not upon this occasion lessen his good opinion of, and kindness towards me, which I so highly prize and value. And I doubt not, but all that with sincere eyes and minds disinteressed shall consider the re|solution I have taken, and shall examine the before-mentioned important Motives which have induced me to it, will perceive they were no less just than necessary, and will find no occasion to blame me, that in the extremity of my Affairs, I have rather chosen to give a Remedy unto my Misfortunes, than to augment them, by declaring my self an enemy unto a Neighbour Nation more powerful than my self (and whose Dominions do divide mine) at a time when they offered to assist me.



The Duke then came to Casal about the end of October, where he staid till Christmass following, at what time he returned to Mantua; drew off the Man|tuans, and left there only those of Monferat, with some French who were married in the City: the Marquess Don Camillo returned to Bozolo with great glory, having highly merited from the Duke: the Marquess de la Val staid some days at Casal to give such Orders as were necessary, as General of the Duke's Forces; and conferred the Government of the Cittadel upon the Marquess Sigismu Gonzaga, and that of the City upon the Count Ot|tavio Brambati, Son to the late Count Francisco, who had so worthily served the house of Mantua, until his death at Paris, whilst he was Extraordinary Ambassadour there for the Duke. After the departure of which Brambati, who was by his urgent Affairs called home into his own Country, there was placed to Command in it, first the Marquess Bonifacio Fassali Casalasio, and afterwards Count Giouanni Emilis Veronese.
There followed also the change of divers of the Officers and Ministers, some of them being brought away to Mantua, and in their places several others sent to succeed them.
The Duke after gave an assurance unto the Ministers of France. That as soon as the Country of Monferat should be restored unto the pristine state, and put into his peaceable possession without disturbance, he would re|nounce the 3000 Crowns monthly which the Empress was obliged to fur|nish him for payment of the Garrison, and would maintain them at his pro|per costs; which he did, for taking away of all colour or pretence the French might have formed upon that point unto the prejudice of his Declara|tions, it being a thing certain that he had no imagination to let go that noble Town out of his hands, which rendred him considerable to all Italy, and va|lued both by the one and the other Crown, and these were always the true thoughts of the Marquess de Val, with whom the Spaniards (notwithstanding they dissembled it) were in truth highly dissatisfied.
But all these Declarations of the Duke and his Ambassadours were little worth, because things being represented in the Court of France different from what they were, the suspicion had so much force, that things were si|nisterly interpreted neither could the Kings Ministers be satisfied with the loss of a place of that importance, and which gave so much lustre over all Ita|ly to their Authority.
The other Princes of Italy were in a manner all of them jealous that Casal

would finally fall into the Spaniard's hands, and were therefore sorry the French had not in time provided for it, which it was said they might have done with a small matter, if they had not applyed themselves rather to per|secute Cardinal Mazarine and overthrow his Designs, than provide for the concernments of the Crown. And these Jealousies and Apprehensions were much increased by the Report was spread, That the Spaniard, after beating the French out of Casal, negotiated earnestly a Peace with Savoy; insinua|ting into the minds of the Ministers there, that the King of Spain would restore Versellis, drive the French out of Pignaroll, and the Cittadel of To|rino, adjust their differences with Mantua, and probably Marry the Infan|ta of Spain unto the Duke of Savoy, whereby they endeavoured to gain that Family, and chasing the French beyond the Mountains, to restore Peace un|to Italy, and their own Authority unto the Pristine Splendour.
These Treaties were listened unto by those of Piedmont with no small at|tention, and the rather because they suspected that (the most Christian King, being engaged in a Civil War, and not able to contribute unto the defence of Piedmont,) the Spaniards might with ease be able to make some powerful Invasion upon them, so as if they deferred the remedy until another time, they should perhaps find no means to compass it.
The Court of France, and most particularly the Cardinal, was highly jealous of this Treaty, who being mindful of the prejudice it might bring to the King's Interests, in case the Spaniards (having secured all things in Italy) should employ all their Forces in Catalonia and Flanders; laboured with all industry, as well by means of the Ambassadour Servient, as of the Abbot of Aglie, who was well disposed towards France, to uphold the Sa|voyards in hope of a ready and secure Assistance; an the Cardinal having a great credit and confidence with the House of Savoy, his onely word pre|vailed more than all other means to overthrow the Artifices of the Enemies unto the Crown of France; but in regard the Intestine troubles gave them not liberty to furnish Supplies as the Affairs required, that he might have the Court of Piedmont constant to their Union with France, he encouraged them with putting Verna and the new Town of Asti into their hands, and with the Honour of Treating their Ambassadours after the manner of those sent from Crowned Kings at their first Audience of his Majesty, and that the Guard should receive them in compleat Armour, which was a thing long pretended unto, and much desired by those of Piedmont.
Besides these Honours the Count de Quince, a bold Cavalier, and one rea|dy for the executing of all Designs was sent thither with the Title of Ge|neral of Piedmont, who, being in France with Title onely of Lieutenant Ge|neral, that he might command in chief accepted this Imployment, which was before refused by many others, not for hazard of their persons (because the French Cavaliers are generally bold and daring) but for Interest sake, as doubting that by reason of the divisions in the Kingdom, they were not like to receive Money, which is the Life and Soul of all Affairs.
This Count came to Turin the 6th of December, accompanied with a good number of Gentlemen of Quality, and amongst others the Marquess of Riche|lieu, Brother unto the Duke of the same Name, who having consummated a Marriage with Madamoiselle Beavois, and representing to have done it contrary to the liking of his Relations, went into Italy with an intention to break it; but the Design took not, because the Queen being unwilling the Lady should be abused, declared the Marriage valid, and treated her pub|lickly as Marchioness of Richelieu, to which the Marquess after some few Months acquiesced, and returned to Court.
Quince was shortly after followed by a good body of French Horse, and

quitting the Court went into Piedmont, by which recruit the minds of those in Piedmont were quieted, and the Designs of the Spaniards grounded upon the Civil Broils in France were broken.
In the mean time the happy News of this Success touching Casal, being brought the 16th of November unto the Catholick Court, Te Deum was the next day Sung in the Royal Chappel, and the same day towards night their Majesties accompanied with the Dutchess Margaret of Mantua, and all the Grandees of the Court, went to our Ladies of Atochia, to give due thanks for the accomplishment of a Design, which had ever before been fa|tal to that Monarchy, and may be said to have been the sole impediment unto the fortune of the Spanish Arms; although perhaps 'tis probable the troubles of Italy will not so end, because the French being inforced thereby unto a greater care of the Affairs of Italy, it may so happen that the humours decli|ning one where, will elsewhere gather, and be followed by those ruins in Lumbardy, which are used to be the consequents of a change in people.
They thought after (according to the wonted generosity of that great King) upon the demonstrations of esteem and gratitude due to the Marquess Carracene, who by Arms and Policy had accomplished an Affair of that im|portance, and they considered also the Merits of the Marquess of Mortara, who after so much suffering, and hardship in a Siege of Fifteen Moneths, had restored Barcelona, and Catalonia unto the Monarchy, but the rewards were below the expectation, because Carracene, who pretended to the Ho|nour of a Grandee, could not obtain it, (the number of persons of merit be|ing so great, that making one, it was necessary to confer that Title also up|on many others,) by reason whereof, the first Minister being more sparing in the conferring of that Dignity than was the late Lord Duke his Uncle, it was forborn, honouring him instead thereof with the charge of a Gentle|man of the King's Chamber; a Dignity conspicuous, and of much esteem amongst them.
To the Marquess of Mortara was granted an encrease of some yearly Rent, and to both hopes of larger acknowledgments hereafter in time con|venient.
There was in the mean time a fierce War between the Cossacks and Polan|ders, whereupon many fore-seeing what prejudice migt thereby happen to the Kingdome, (engaged also in a War with Muscovy,) when the Truce with the Crown of Sweden should be expired, and Hostility renewed with that Kingdom, (powerful by a numerous Militia enured to War and rich in Money, amassed together by the Plunder of the Empire) desired to interest three neutral Potentates in the Treaty of Peace between the Polan, and Swede, that in a Meeting to be appointed in some indifferent place, they might be Arbitrators touching the Equity of what was in dispute between them; these were the most Christian King, the Republic of Veni, and the States of Holland, who willingly undertook the Charge, and appointed for the place of Conference the Hans Town of Lubeck.
Polnd dispatched thither four Plenipotentiaries, persons of Quality; the principal of which was the Count of Lessenehs, and each of the ha|ving a distinct Train, appeared with a noble and splendid Equipage.
Sweden also sent four of theirs, the principal of whom was the Lord of Ro|feat, with an Equipage nothing inferiour to them.
The King of France sent for his Extraordinary Ambassadour and Media|tour the Lord of Chenut.
The State of Venice the Cavalier Michael Morosini; and the United Pro|vinces three of their Deputies.
The Elector of Brandenbourgh dispatched thither  person of Quality

his Kinsman, who not being able (by reason of a Sickness happened to him) to supply the place, there were surrogated in his stead three of his confi|dents, who became altogether useless there, by reason of some Ceremo|nies pretended to by the Elector equal to that of Soveraign Princes, where|by they remained excluded from all Conferences or Visits from any other than the Polanders.
The Cavalier Morosini Ambassadour from the Republick of Venice, was then in France, and by the arrival of the Senator Giovanni Sagredo his Successor at Court, ended his Imployment, with the entire satisfaction of his Majesty and his own Prince; towards whom (although France were at that time grievously afflicted with an Intestine War) his Majesty gave testi|mony of his gratitude by extraordinary Presents, and affectionate Expressi|ons of his esteem.
As soon as he had notice of the safe Conduct for the Plenipotentiaries of the Crowns, he left Paris the 22th of September, and after a trouble|some Voyage came to Lubeck, with a Train of Threescore persons, which he increased there, that he might not appear inferiour to any in the Splen|dour of his Retinue, as he was equal to them in his knowledge.
The Baron of Chenut followed him some few dayes after, and about the beginning of December all parties being met at the place appointed, (although the Hollanders were not yet come) they entred upon the matters that were Preliminary to the Treaty.
The first Pretension of the Swedes was, That they would by no means enter into a Treaty, unless Poland would raze out of their Writings, and Commissions, the Title of King of Sweden before used, and would also re|form their great Seal, by leaving out the Three Crowns, which are the Arms of Swden.
The Polanders, by perswasion of the Mediatours, agreed to raze it out of their Commissions, having first made a Protestation apart, wherein they declared the same was not to prejudice their right; But as to the Seal the same being the particular Arms of the King's Family, not of the Kingdome; this pretence was by the Arbitratours esteemed very slight; and therefore Morosini together with the Deputies of Holland, who arrived there about the end of Ianuary, 1653. (because the French were of the Swede's party) en|deavoured of themselves to perswade the Swedes that they would quit the same, and fall upon the Treaty; but they being positive to have the Commis|sion changed with the omission of the Title, and the reformation of the Seal, the matter stuck so as no perswasion of the Mediators was able to advance it; whereupon the Affair becoming desperate, because the Polanders could not alter their Instructions, without a new Diet impowering them to do it, the business fell; and in the Moneth of February the Meeting was dissolved, with|out coming to any resolution.
The Sedes shewed themselves little desirous of this accommodation; b|cause they hoped (seeing Poland engaged in a great War) to find a time more favourable to their Interests, that they might either make a Peace upon their own Terms, or breaking it, advantage themselves extraordinarily, during the weakness of that Kingdom.
The French adhered unto their sence (for which they were much blamed) whereby 'twas manifest it concerned them the Swedes should continue arm|ed, that in case the face of Affairs should alter, and the French Arms should gain any advantage over the Spaniards, the Emperour (standing in doubt of the Swedes) might not be able to assist them.
The Polanders therefore parted for their own Countrey, and the like did all the other Plenipotentiaries, and Mediators, only the Hollanders

staid some days after, having received Orders to negotiate with the Hans-Towns, and draw them to some Declaration in their favour against the
English:
Mean while the Ministers of Spain were not negligent in their prosperity, but prosecuting their good fortune, sent Orders to their Fleet in Biscay, to attaque Blage, a most important place, scituate at the mouth of the G|ronne wherein was Governour (as you before heard) the Duke of San Si|mon, a most faithful person to his Prince.
The Spaniards had fancied this Enterprize not to be difficult, because the French Armada being taken and destroyed by the English, they supposed it could not be in a condition speedily to relieve it; and they believed the For|ces of the Bourdelois, joyned with those of the Princes in Guienne, would be sufficient to block it up by Land: Battevile therefore sollicited the executi|on of the King's Orders, and with all diligence possible appeared with his Shipping in the Garonne; but he found things in a far different condition from that which divers discontented French had represented to the Court of Spain; so as 'twas necessary for him, without any attempt made, to return, and winter in the Port of Passage; where he discovered the Artifices of some, who to ingratiate themselves with his Catholick Majesty, and obtain rewards from him, represented things very different from truth, magnify|ing small matters, and lessening those of greater consequence.
Thereby it happened that discords and unkindnesses grew shortly after between Battevile, Marsin, and Lenet, which were followed with Calum|nies and Accusations exhibited by those French Commanders against Batte|vile himself, that they might get him removed out of Guienne; they bla|med him, that there were not in Bourg 1000 of the 1500 Irish paid by the Spaniard, that his dispatches had been altered, and accounts given of exorbi|tant expences, and that having changed the Spanish money into French he had thereby gained 25 in the hundred.
Don Lewis who loved and protected Battevile, ordered him to retire to St. Sebastians, declaring, That he was obliged not to give any disgust unto the Princes.
But in the Court of Spain it appeared not a thing blame-worthy (al|though it had been true) that this Lord (continuing faithful to the King's Interest) should be so cunning as to make his own particular advantage, be|cause it declared him to be a man of spirit, which was a thing displeasing to the French, and principally to Lenet, who having used to domineer without controul in Bourdeaux, could not endure to have any dependence upon the Ministers of Spain.
In execution of the abovesaid Orders, Battevile having first imbarked up|on two Vessels the most trusty of his Officers, and divers of his best Souldiers in the Garrison at Bourg; the ninth of December began his Voyage with no less bitterness than indignation, against Marsin and Lenet, who he pretended had wrongfully slandered him, for no other cause but that they found him a faithful and useful Servant to the King; from whose favour he had easily fallen; had he not been supported by the same Don Lewis D'aro, who pro|tected him with that sincerity and justice, which are the But of all his Actions.
To Don Ioseph Osorio was confirmed the Command of the Forces in Bourg, and the manage of the Treasure was conferred upon the Governour of St. Sebastians.
Cntelino at that time returned unto the Catholick Court, and was sent back with a Present of Jewels to the Princess of Conde, valued at 40000 Crowns; and a Bracelet of Diamonds for himself.

But the Cardinal Mazarin, who during all these Blustering storms had preserved the Royal Authority from the eminent danger of a Ship-wrack, and shewed himself to all the world to be one of the most expert and daring Mariners that ever sailed upon the Sea of Politick Affairs; as soon as he per|ceived the troublesome Commotions and storms which had so furiously agi|tated the whole Kingdom, to be dispersed by his Majestie's presence, and ac|cess to Paris, gave himself wholly to the study and practice of such fit Expe|dients, as might not only calm the intestine Motions, but also raise up the lost credit and reputation of the Royalty; and he believed the way to make the ame more reverenced and observed, was rather by Pardon than Chastise|ment; it being a Maxime fixed in the Cardinal's mind, That the generous spirits of the French Nation were sooner to be gained by courteous usage, than by the violence of Arms; which was the cause he set on foot Treaties with each one of the contumacious Persons; holding that love unto the King ought to be the fifth Element, and to preserve that concord between Subjects, which is not interrupted, but by the apprehensions of hatred, or revenge. He revived new Treaties and Propositions of Peace with the Prince of Conti, the Parliament of Bourdeaux, with the Counts of Harcourt and Ogran, and with all the other Princes, great Lords, and men of Spirit, who possessed rather by jealousies and suspicions, than natural passions, had estranged themselves from their Obedience to his Majesty; the first effects of which wise conduct were seen in the Pardon, which the King by the Madia|tion of the Mareschal De la Motte, granted unto the Baron of Sant Annes, Governour of Leucata, who had forsaken his Majestie's Service, upon several sinister impressions, till by this way of sweetness he was otherwise convin|ced and satisfied.
This Cavalier had revolted by the suggestion of some unquiet Spirits, and some distaste taken unto the Court, by reason his pretensions were dis|countenanced; but he was quieted and sweetned by the dextrous manage|ment, and civil means used towards him by the said Marquess, a person of great abilities, with whom the last of November he made an Accord, That pardon should be given to him and all the Inhabitants of Leucata; his Sons who were Prisoners in Paris should be released; the goods belonging to himself, or his friends restored; the Castle of Termes to be put into the hands of the Arch-bishop of Narbon to be restored to the said St. Annes after six months, or otherwise in case his Majesty should not be pleased to ratifie this Article, the two Troops of Horse raised by the said St. Annes, should be put into his Majesty's Service, and there should be paid unto him 860 Doubloons for his Charges in the said Levy, and 415 for the Losses of the Inhabitants of Leucata, and the Ransom of Poder his Cousin; all the Prisoners to be freed; all Treaties with the Spaniards, or the Princes, re|called, and an assurance upon his Honour, and Parol given never to swerve again from the obedience of the King.
The Cardinal had caused also a strict negotiation to be made with the Prince of Conde, by means of some Confidents of his, to pacifie him, and make him quit the Spaniards Service; offering him the Soveraignty of some Country out of France: But whether it were that the Prince found himself too far engaged with the Spaniard, or that the generosity of his Mind would not permit him to falsifie his word without some apparent cause or pretext, or that he thought this Dignity too mean, or were taken with the pleasant gust of those advantages he received from Spain, and in particular with the great Assignations made unto him, or whether he were led by other Suspi|cions, Reasons, or Respects, amongst which probably that which held the first place, was the desire of the occasions to use his Sword, his great heart being unable without trouble to return into the calm of Peace, the Propo|sitions

vanished without effect. The Prince declared, That he was no wayes ambitious of being a Soveraign Prince, contenting himself with the Qua|lity he had of being first Prince of the Blood; that he knew not how again to trust a person that had once deceived him, nor believe that person would be faithful to him, who had before shewed himself not to be such; that these Offers were like those Gifts which had formerly passed between Hector and Ajax; that we ought to give least credit unto those things which appear most probable; and that we must consider that how much more is promised for necessity, so much more likely are we to fail thereof when that is over; That he knew the Cardinal sufficiently for a person as apt to promise much, as he was afterwards industrious to perform onely what suited to his own ends: And he protested in fine, That he would never consent to any Accom|modation wherein the King of Spain should not also be included; to whom he professed himself highly obliged: The person imployed endeavoured to take from him all sinister Impressions, and represented to him that he should call to mind he was a French-man, and one of the Blood-Royal, that he had too much Reputation and Glory, not to be made the Butt of Envy and Jea|lousie, to a Nation that had so much emulation with France, and were am|bitious to have no dependance but on themselves; that to build his hopes upon those who proposed to themselves ends different from his, was to make a ruinous building; That Friends follow the Fortune not the Bodies of their Friends, and that in quitting France he should be abandoned by all the French-men; that ones Countrey ought to be as dear unto a prudent Man, as his Shell is to the Snail; and that being his true and faithful Servant, he took the freedome to tell him, It was much more honourable for such a Princes as he to be Cousin to the King of France, than Servant to the King of Spain; He added hereunto many efficatious reasons, but all in vain, be|cause the hatred and disdain of the Cardinal, were prevalent in the imag|nation of the Prince, and the opinion he had firmly conceived, that he should be the next Campagne too powerful for the King's Forces, and be enabled thereby to return to Paris.
The Cardinal therefore not being able to prevail with the Prince, thought of the means how to divide his Brother Conty from him; He caused advan|tageous Conditions to be proposed unto him, and thought that having once gained him, he should thereby restore Bourdeaux, and Guienne to their Pri|stine Obedience; because the Factions of this Prince were very powerful in that City, and Province, and the effects thereof were likely to be very advantageous to the King's Service; and the reduction of his Brother, by reason of the Jealousies, which peradventure the Spaniards might upon that occasion have of his Person, and the ill usage which it was probable he should receive from them, when he should be deprived of that support, which rendred him so much the more considerable. But although Conty were not a friend unto his Brother, and that his mind was much more apt to receive satisfaction, yet he was so fixed not to disoblige the Dutchess of Longueville his Sister, that without her he would resolve of nothing, and she remaining firm in the good Intelligence she held with Conde, and the hopes which the generosity of her own mind suggested to her; all those attempts proved useless, and consequently all the other attempts, and pra|ctises of those in Bourdeaux, who were affectionate to the King's Party, fell to the ground, their indeavours tending onely to bring things unto that pass, that the City should second such resolutions as should be taken by the Prince of Conty, and the Dutchess.
The Cardinal therefore took in hand other expedients, and since he could not gain the Princes, indeavoured by new Orders to deprive by lit|tle

and little, both them and the Town of Bourdeaux, from those Subjects, and Places which fomented their pretensions; and therefore the Duke of Vendosme was ordered to Sail with the Fleet into the Garonne; unto the Duke of Candale (who was already departed to Govern the Forces in Gui|enne) were dispatched all the Troops which could be got together in the neighbouring Provinces; and the Negotiations with the Count D' Ognon and others to divide them from the contrary Faction were set on foot, there|by to render (as it after happened) the King's Party in that Province the more powerful.
In this mean time the Prince of Conty sojourned with his Army in Cham|paigne, where having failed in his Designs upon Reims, Soissons, and other great Cities full of People, War-like, and Faithful to their King; he came at last unto Vervins, a feeble Place, without Garrison, or Fortification, and having left there two Regiments of Foot, and a Regiment of Horse, sate down with the gross of his Army before Rhetel, which in a short time was rendred to him by Monsieur di Kale, who was Governour, by reason of the weakness of the place, and want of things necessary for defence of it, as also did Chasteau Porcien, which is but little distant from it; but St. Mer|haud, another walled Town with a Castle not contemptible, scituate upon the head of the same River Aisne, which passeth to Rhetel, held out until the 13th of November, and being not relieved by the Mareschal Turenne, was then forced to a Capitulation, which was honourably granted unto the Baron of Saint Mor, who was there Governour; and because this Town be|ing scituated between the Mose and the Marne, and between the Cities of Verdun, and Chalons, was of some consequence, principally because it was not far distant from Clermont and Stenay, places held by Conde; he left there a great Garrison, under the Baron di Montalt, and gave them orders to for|tifie, pretending by maintaing of that, and Rhetel, to winter all his Troops in France, and thereby not onely to trouble all the neighbouring Frontiers, but also to ease Flanders, where (had not this been) he must have quarter|ed, and also to give life thereby to the Cabals in Paris, which though they were much weakened, were not so totally extinguished there, but that ma|ny of his friends, and of the Duke of Orleans his Partisans, endeavoured by underhand practises to raise some trouble.
After which, having licensed from his Camp the Troops of his Royal Highness, who, under the Command of the Baron of Valon their Comman|der in chief passed into Picardy, to the Service of his Majesty, but upon in|gagement not to accept any Imployment against Conde, he marched into the Barrois, he took Barleduc, with the loss of the Baron de Fougges, Lieutenant Ge|neral to the Duke of Lorrain; and after that Lagny, and the Castle of Voet, all of them places of small strength; after which the Winter being far advan|ced, and his Souldiers unwilling to begin any new Enterpise, he licensed the Troops of Flanders and Lorrain, and gave Winter Quarters to his own Soul|diers, upon the Mase, and the adjacent Country.
The Cardinal on the other side, exercising his thoughts indefatigably, about these so imbroiled and troublesome Affairs, considered that it was ab|solutely necessary before putting of the Army into Winter Quarters, to dislodge the Prince's Forces from their new Lodgings, and to recover the places they had taken, he therefore caused the King's Camp to be re-inforced with 000 Combatants drawn from the Duke of Elbeufe in Picardy, and by others from Normandy, and the bordering Provinces, and in lieu of coming to Paris (whither he was by his Majesty earnestly invited) went into the Army, to redress by his presence those matters there, which by the late di|visions were much weakened, and in great disorder, and which without

him could harldly have been executed by the Generals, because bringing along with him many Friends and Dependents, he stopt all those, who wea|ried with the past toyls, thought rather of retiring to their Houses, than tarrying longer, and encouraged the rest to continue in the King's Service, being had in great veneration and esteem among the Souldiery, by whom he was as much loved and reverenced, as he was hated and abhorred by the seditious and base Plebeians in Paris; neither was he at all deceived there|in, because the Souldiery being revived by his presence, and the Military Councils being thereby quickned, he gained those advantages, which cau|sed him shortly after to return glorious, and as it were Triumphant into Paris, more than ever in their Majesties favour, and the Authority of his Ministry.
The Marquess de Chasteauneuf continued notwithstanding all this while in Paris without Imployment, discharged of his Officers, with that resent|ment which is usual unto a great and generous heart like his, accompanied with an accomplished knowledge and experience in matters of State, and a professed inimitable Loyalty towards his Majesty alone, independent of all private interest whatsoever; and being therefore unable to contain himself (being in conversation among some Ladies) from the expression thereof, nor from mingling in his Discourse, together with his sighs against his own ill fortune, some censures touching the persons that then were at Stern; he was by the King upon the 12th of November banished from Paris: the next day his Majesty appearing in the Parliament, caused to be there verified and registred the Decree made in his Council of State, against the Princes of Conde, of Conti, the Dutchess of Longueville, the Duke of Rochefoucunt, and others who were all of them declared guilty of High Treason against the King.
The Court continued after to give fitting orders and redresses for the good Government of the Kingdom, and the avoiding of these new Machines which had been lately raised in opposition to the Royal Authority; and the King's Councel above all things applied themselves to find out fitting means for the quieting the mind of the Cardinal de Retz, who being full of lofty thoughts, and eminent pretensions, was much troubled to see the Cardinal Mazarin re-established quiet in Paris, and the Kingdom, to which he was much adverse, by reason of his particular designes. He gloried so much in the lustre of his Purple, and the value he put upon himself, that hoping with the same Arts he had gained them, to overthrow also the glory and the fortune of the other, and reimbuse himself the vast expence he had been at during the Broyls, whereby he was run far in debt, he went continually seeking the means to compass his intent, and as he had thrown down the greatness of Conde, to ruinate also that of the Cardinal Mazarin. He there|fore sollicited the Parliament to meet, and consult upon the means of resto|ring their secluded Members, pressed the Partizans to demand the Monies ad|vanced by them from the King (though they had all the time before never mentioned a word of it) to hold correspondence with the Seditious and Male-contents, to renew the Troubles, and compass his desires. And al|though remorse of Conscience made him at times suspicious, yet he fared not to be imprisoned by reason of his Dignity of Cardinal, as he was used to publish amongst his Confidents. And if he went not to Court it proceeded rather from the Maxime, that he would not be esteemed gracious there, and preserve thereby the favour of the people, whom he thought apt enough to a Commotion, than from the fear of receiving an affront; so highly did he over-rate the esteem, he thought was set upon himself: and remaining there|fore

in the middle of the City amongst the Citizens his friends and neighbors, he continued still impugning of the King's Authority, and hoped that by this means they would be forced to make application to him: Whereupon this being known by his Majestie's good Servants to be a pernitious action, which was by all means to be speedily redressed; there was a long debate between the Prince Thomaso of Savoy (who then exercised the Charge of Principal Minister of State) and divers others well-affected to his Majestie's Service, touching the means of removing him from Paris; and in case that should not succeed, to find some other fit expedient to take from the loose people this Temptation, which might perhaps engage them in new Disorders.
The Cardinal had in confidence acquainted the Princess of Guymeny, that he was willing to retire to Rome, and that coming to the King's knowledge, the Princess was charged in some dextrous manner, to let him know, That if we were resolved upon it, his Majesty would assent thereunto: And at the same time there was proposed unto him a specious Title, with a considerable Aynde de costa, That residing in Italy, he might protect the Interests of the Crown, as well in the life, as after the death of Innocent, in the Conclave: But when it came to the point, the effects were found very different from his Expressions, for he then answered, That the face of Affairs was changed, and that he could not now abandon his Friends to the discretion of the Court.
The Negotiation of the Princess having failed, there was employed therein by the Queen, the Princess Palatine, who was of a ready Wit, and lively spirit, and very fit for the undertaking of any knotty business. The Princess saw him several times, and failed not to represent unto him with much efficacie what was imputed to him by their Majesties, Adding, That 'twas too much for him to pretend to make use of that Dignity (which he had by his Majestie's favour and bounty) in a matter repugnant to the gust and satisfaction of his Ma|jesty, against whose good pleasure, it was a vanity worthy of blame in Subjects to oppose themselves. That he should not harbour in his breast these thoughts of trou|ble and disturbance, which by many were imputed to him; and that besides there were offered unto him besides Honorable Ayndas de Casta, and Assignations suffi|cient to maintain him at Rome: But the perswasions of this Princess availed nothing, because he strongly conceited his Reputation was concerned in the Voyage, in respect it would be thought he was driven out of France, and parting should abandon many of his Friends, which by the Rules of grati|tude he could not do. Finally, being convinced by the strong Reasons of the Princess, he delayed the time upon the pretence of expecting the Car|dinal Mazarine's coming to Paris, with whom alone, and no other, he was resolved to treat of that Affair; and refusing the Queens interposition there|in, which much encreased the suspicions against him: And he began then to demand a Government for one of his Dependants; a Secretary of States place for another Friend of his, and other Employments for divers of his Confidents, and discovered his pretensions to be very high and exorbitant. The Queen who had refused such things to the Prince of Conde, who was at the Gates of Paris with an Army, was resolved not to grant them unto a man who had nothing but a tongue to stir up fickle people, and such as were desirous of a change; the jealousies had of him being therefore much augmented, it was thought necessary (for securing the Government against his sinister and vagrant thoughts) to take a resolution to secure his Person.
The difficulty of the thing rested in the manner how to execute it, be|cause it was not practicable in his own House, and both dangerous and full of peril to do it in the Streets of Paris, which his Majesty desired to avoid,

and to do it without tumult, as well in regard of his Dignity of Cardinal, as because his principal aim was to do all things with great quietness, and without confusion.
But whilst the King's Ministers busied themselves in fitting of such things as might facilitate the execution thereof, which they found al|wayes full of difficulty, fortune, or rather the divine Justice, offered a means for the effecting of it much more favourable than was expe|cted.
His friends did represent unto him, that the King was resolved to be ob|served, and that it was his duty to pay his Majesty the ordinary Visits, or to abandon Paris; they told him this manner of proceeding was too scan|dalous, and de Retz being perswaded thereby, and Christmas now drawing near, was resolved to Preach himself in the Church of St. German of Aux|erre, whereof the Queen having notice, sent word unto the Curate, that she intended to be there in person.
The Cardinal took this for a favour, and thought himself obliged to wait upon her Majesty, and thank her for the Honour she intended to him, in persuance whereof upon the 20th of December, beyond all their hopes, or expectations, he went unto the Lovre, trusting upon his Dignity of Car|dinal, wherein he so much confided, that he said publickly, That although he had formerly been in some apprehension from the Court, yet since he was a Cardinal he dreaded nothing further from thence.
Being entred within the Court, he found the Queen was not then fully dressed, and therefore going up the great Stayres to see the King, he met his Majesty about the middle of them, by whom he was with great courtesie re|ceived, and brought into his Mothers Lodgings, with whom whilst de Retz complemented and discoursed, the King whispered to Monsieur de Tillier, and gave order for the Arresting of him, which a while after was executed by the Marquess of Villequier, Captain of the Guard, who seised upon him at the door of the Anti Camera.
The Cardinal was very pale, and much confounded; and said, What me? for what Cause? Villequier with some Souldiers conducted him into the great Gallery, and from thence into the Duke of Anjou his Apartment, where he was shut up about two hours, until the Guard to conduct him was put in or|der, and a Coach wherein he was after some time by the Porta del Conferenza, carried unto the Castle de Vincennes; no Tumult or Disturbance being all this while among the people, who discoursing of the News, applauded the King's resolution in it.
There were presently many and various discourses touching this extraor|dinary Accident happening as 'twere by chance: Those of the Court said, That the King began now to make himself known for such, and that this resoluti|on was a thing suddenly taken by himself, without the advice or perswasion of his Ministers, only for the publick repose and quiet of the Kingdom.
The Prisoner's Friends on the other side, gave out, This was a blow proceed|ing from the Cardinal Mazarin, who neither would, or knew how to return to Paris, whilst he had so considerable a Rival, that was supported by so many Friends, who were Enemies unto him: That he kept aloof from Paris, on purpose that he might not be known for the Contriver of this business, and for fear lest the people rising in favour of the Prisoner, should make him feel the effects of their long continued hatred and rancour against him. But whether it were so, or otherwise, the Cardinal Mazarin declared he had no part in the action; and for proof thereof writ unto his Majesty a very favourable Letter on the Prisoner's be|half; he represented to his Majesty, That by reason of the Character he bare of the most Christian King, he was obliged to defend the Immunities of the Church;

and therefore he mst earnestly besought him that he would have in this case such re|gards as were fit for his Royal Piety, and the Title he had of being first-born Son un|to the Church, recommending unto him with all earnestness the Interests of the Pri|soner.
Upon this Letter several Judgments were made; Many were of opinion he dealt not therein clearly from his heart, but endeavoured to palliate the Crime, whereof himself was the sole Author, and that this was an Ar|tifice which had been long before premeditated: Others who knew the execution thereof to be unoreseen and causual, were satisfied that Maza|rine was in his nature rather obliging than revengeful towards his Enemies, thought it to be an effect of his good inclination, proceeding from a desire to oblige that Prelat by so remarkable a benefit, to a reciprocal return of kindness, and to a generous emulation of corresponding to so noble and in|genuous a carriage: These were not any way mistaken, because it appeared after, that Cardinal Mazarin had used his utmost endeavour to gain Rez, and to remove those sinister conceptions which he had of him; and that he failed in the Design, was an effect of the incorrigible nature of Cardinal de Retz, envious of the glory and good fortune of Mazarine.
Many others of the most considerable Persons amongst the Clergy, em|ployed themselves in his favour; but Politick respects prevailing before the satisfaction of particular Persons, made it evidently manifest, his Majesty had no other ends, but the happiness and quiet of his Subjects.
And because the Court of Rome should have no occasion of offence there|by against France, for having done an Act so much abominated by the Canon Laws, there was a Courrier dispatched unto the Pope, to give him an ac|count of the whole business.
The Friends of the imprisoned Cardinal sent thither also another some few hours after, to complain unto his Holiness of that violence, and to engage him in the Prisoner's protection. The News in a few days after reached Rome; and the Pope, who had little affection for the French (and least of all for Mazarine) was wonderfully nettled at it, and if he had power equal to his will, possibly some things of consequence had been resolved, and put in execution: He assembled forthwith Congregations of the most able Cardi|nals his Confidents, and although there wanted not some moderate Persons amongst them, who failed not to represent that in a matter so delicate much circumspection ought to be used; Orders were notwithstanding sent to Mon|sieur Marini Archbishop of Avignon, That he should (together with the Offi|cers of his Court) transport himself to Paris, and there framing a Process touching the Crimes whereof the Prisoner was accused, should require to have the Judgment of them left unto the See Apostolick, to which only be|longs the power of giving Sentence against Cardinals.
But as at Rome they were most certain, That having formerly refused to receive Monsignor Corsino Nuntius Elect into France, only because he came without first giving notice unto the King, or his Ministers of his arrival, they would much less receive the Archbishop with his Commission; and that therefore they resolved a thing which could not take effect: So it was plain|ly understood at Paris that this was the advice of those, who desired to fur|nish the Popedom with pretexts of blaming France, for want of respect t|wards the See Apostolick, and to give the Pope occasion to joyn with the Ene|mies of that Crown; there being some in Rome, as well as Paris, who beli|ved the King would not have dared to contradict the Pope in that unhappy conjuncture of Affairs, and that therefore this bold resolution of sending the Archbishop Marini into France, would add very much to the reputation of his Holiness, and splendor of the Ecclesiastical Authority.

The Prince Cardinal Trivultio (who was then in Rome, as the Person intru|sted with management of the Interests of Spain, and as Ambassadour to his Catholick Majesty) wisely foresaw the vanity of this resolution, notwith|standing that he endeavoured always (as a good Minister of State) to conti|nue in his Holiness the sinister impressions against France, yet he approved not this advice; shewing plainly the ill success was likely to attend it: This Prince had executed this Function but from the 25th of November the year before, which had been put upon him in the manner, and for the Reasons following. The Cardinal of Arragon being dead shortly after his Promoti|on (which was very much delayed, either as not cordially sollicited by the Cardinal Albernaz (who desired not that a Competitor of such a Qua|lity and Kinsman of Don Louis d' Aro should prevail) or to facilitate the Promotion of the Count d'Ognate;) the Cardinal di Cuena was at the same time sent, or called back unto his residence at Malega, whereupon his Ca|tholick Majesty ordered Trivultio to leave the Government of Sardinia, and repair suddenly to Rome, to supply the Cardinal of Arragon's place who was destined thither, and gave him all the Spiritual Promotions in Italy, which became void by his death. But Trivultio being unable to go the Voyage so speedily, because he was first to quiet the Kingdom (which by reason of some private accidents was in commotion,) the death of Don Anthonio Ronchiglio happened, (whom Don Iohn of Austria at his parting from Sicily had left Pre|sident there) whereupon the Duke Dell. Infantado, who was Ambassadour at Rome, being appointed Vice-Roy there, the Cardinal Trivultio received new Orders to hasten his Journey, that he might enter upon the charge of his Embassy.
The Affair happened directly according to Trivultio his Presage, because the proceedings of the Roman Court which had no other foundation but the opinion and desire of those who promoted it, was suddenly quashed, when the entry of the Archbishop Marini into the Kingdom was stop't by Maza|rine, who knew the nature of the French, very easily inclined to pleasing No|velties, but inflexible to such resolutions as threaten them; in which they consider nothing but to maintain the King's Authority: And the French shewed themselves to be ill satisfied with the Court of Rome, reproaching it for partiality, for that whereas there had been several applications made un|to it the year before, to represent the Injuries done by the Parliament of Paris to Cardinal Mazarine, against all Humane, and Divine Laws, without any legal accusation, or just authority, contrary to the King's Pleasure, who justified and owned him for his Faithful Servant, when a reward of 50000 Crowns was set upon his head, besides the Confiscation of all his Goods, the Pope had not concerned himself at all in his protection, who had then no other support but his Holiness (the King's Authority being trodden under foot and violated;) whereas there was now so great a Noise for the Impri|sonment onely of the Cardinal de Retz, to which his Majesty was necessitated for the Publike good, and maintenance of the Royal Authority, against which Retz was accused to have long plotted; and the rather, because his Christian Majesty had no other intention but to hinder his proceedings therein; not to make his Process, and much less to judge him, as knowing well the same belonged onely unto Christ's Vicar; Although the Parliament had arrogated to themselves an authority to do it against Mazarine, without any of those cautions, necessary to be used by any who bear Reverence to Ho|ly Church.
These and the like Reasons were given by the French; who also urged the President of Lewis the 11th King of France, that imprisoned, and kept the Cardinal Ballua many years in restraint, holding correspondence with his

Majestie's Brother, and the Duke of Burgundy; and yet the Pope interposed onely by Fatherly Admonitions, and Requests for his delivery, although the things whereof he was accused, were nothing in comparison of what de Retz was charged withal. They said farther, That the King had procured this Dig|nity for his Subject, to oblige him unto a greater diligence in his Service; not to protect him in any thing prejudicial unto his Crown: That all things necessary for maintenance of their Kingdoms, were lawful unto Soveraign Princes; but all things were not permitted to Subjects which conduced unto their satisfaction: That none ingaged himself in the defence, or gave a more intire obedience unto the Popes in matters of the Church, then the Most Christian King, for which he had been al|waies willing to expose his Crown; but he ought likewise in the Interests of State, to take to heart the good and quiet of his Subjects, unto whom he was a most indulgent Father.
The disgust which the choice of Monsieur Corsino gave to the Court of France sprang hence; his Majestie's Ambassadour at Rome having received some inckling that the Pope intended to send another Nuntio in lieu of Mon|sieur the Marquess of Bagni, gave notice to his Holiness, That in case he in|tended such a thing, 'twere fit he should first declare what Prelate he intended to in|trust with that Imployment; that he might know whether he were a person would be grateful to his Majestie. The Pope pretended to have no such thought; but ome few days after published the Election of the said Monsignior Corsino. The Ambassadour gave present notice of the disgust his Majesty would take at the manner of this Election, rather then for the quality of the person, who was in himself very considerable, and one to whom his Majesty had no other exception. But the Pope insisting, That he had no obligation to send onely such Nuntio's as should be pleasing to the Princes unto whom they went, as he obliged not them to send him onely such Ambassadours as he approved, continued positive in what he had before resolved, as conceiving that to al|ter him, would prejudice the Reputation of the Holy See; and commanded the Nuntio to prosecute his Voyage,
The Kings of France pretend (chiefly in time of Warr) not to receive any Nuntio's or Legate from the Pope, but one that shall be to their satisfa|ction, for a reason which obliges no other Prince besides the Popes; viz. Be|cause it happens often, that those Prelates who are sent are not Subjects of the Church, but of some other Italian Prince (as this Corsino was, being a Flo|rentine); and because (although they were the Churches Subjects) they might be Pensioners to other Princes, therefore France hath not thought fit to accept any, before an Information given of his quality, lest they might otherwise receive into their house, one who was an enemy, or of their party; For this cause therefore and no other, the Kings of France have used to require that they may be advertised before a Nuntio be chosen, and therefore Mon|signior Corsino was stopped in Provence; but afterwards upon Treaty, it be|ing known that this Prelate was independent of any but the Pope, he was admitted, and had been certainly received, had not the accident of Cardi|nal Retz, and sending of the Archbishop of Avignon, given a stop to the whole Business.
The Imprisonment of this Cardinal, who was one of the principal supports of the Faction Della Fronda, did break and totally destroy it, because although there remained yet some reliques of this fire, they were such feeble sparks as of themselves could raise no flame; and therefore the King's Authority growing more vigorous, proceeded in the Execution of all those Councels which were esteemed proper for restoring the Kingdome into its pristine splendour.
The King's Revenues were by these Troubles very much diminished, and

therefore the business for Money was very pressing, vast Debts being con|tracted, and the Credit of the Court being reduced unto the utmost extre|mity, notwithstanding that his Majestie's Annual Revenue amounted to more than Eight Millions of Dobloones of Gold. There were therefore ma|ny Decrees for raising Money made by his Majesty, which were the last day of December verified, and Registred in Parliament in his Majestie's presence, with all readiness, although they were Thirteen in number; To which was added one Clause to sweeten them, viz. That this Relief should be employed in the most urgent Business of the Kingdom, and particularly in payment of the Soul|diery. And those Edicts the 7th of Ianuary following were also verified in the Chamber of Accompts, and the Court of Ayds, in presence of the Duke of Anjou, who was sent thither by his Majesty to that purpose.
Together with these good Reliefs unto the Civil Government, the Mar|tial Affairs began to be managed with a new vigour, and good success; con|sidering the loss and ruines which had happened to the King; and the whole Kingdom, not only in the parts of Flanders, and Guienne, but also in Italy, and Catalonia, in which Province Cardinal Mazarine (having resolved to maintain a brisk Warr, that the Spaniard might be thereby diverted from sending great supplies to other parts) had caused the Town of Roses to be seasonably relieved with some Barks of Provision, sent thither from Provence by the Duke of Mercoeur, and with the Regiment of Foot of Anjou, com|manded by Monsieur Friquembaut; by whose arrival there was discovered a notable Treason plotted in the place, by one Ganot an Intendant, married to a Catalonian Woman, handsome enough, and wanton, and therefore much frequented by the Garrison.
She with her blandishments, and arts, prevailed upon her Husband to treat with the Spaniard, made a great progress therein, and wrought so power|fully in the minds, not onely of the Officers of the Garrison, but of the Houshold Servants also of the Marquess de Fara, Governour of the place, that even his most antient, and reputed most faithful Servants, were engaged in this amorous Frenzy, and became complices in the Treason; by a wonder|ful and almost incredible example, wherein 'twas seen, that the allurements of a lascivious imagination, prevailed against the obligation of their vowed Loyalty, unto the loss of their Reputation, and the destruction of their Lives and Fortunes.
The design of this Conspiracy was to kill the Governour at a certain Post, one Night as he went the Round, and then to open the Gates unto the Spanish Troops, who under the Command of the Baron of Sabac, were entrench'd near unto them. The coming of this new Recruit cooled the Affair, and drew it out at length, because the Officers of this new Succour were to be treated withal, and gained, whereby it came to be so long delayed, that the Plot was discovered in this manner:
There was a Spanish Drum used to go, and return, for Exchange of Priso|ners, and other Occurrences of Warr, by whom Ganot used to communicate all things with the Enemy; it came into the Governour's Mind one day to have him searched, and see what Letters he carried, whether they were the same which he shewed as he went out of the Port, the Governour's Brother a young Cavalier took them from him; and the Drum growing first pale, and then blushing upon the taking of them from him, put the Cavalier into some suspicion of him; he brought the Letters unto the Governour, who finding them the same which had been at first shewed, thought no farther of it; but as he was upon the point of restoring the Letters, and discharging of the Drum, it came into his mind that Ganot himself had taught him to write with a certain water, the Characters whereof could not be seen but

near the fire; he thought therefore to review these Letters, and try it, per|haps they had the secret of this water; and by that means the whole business came to be discovered.
Ganot was forthwith called, and strictly examined, whether he knew any thing of the Conspiracy, which the Spaniards had about the betraying of the place, and desired if he did, he would discover it, promising him pardon, and ecrecie in the Affair (this the Governour did to make him serve as a double Instrument, that he might countermine the Enemies Designes) Ga|not denied it absolutely; but being afterwards convinced by these Letters, he suddenly abandoned himself unto that baseness which is usually the com|panion of guilt, confessed the whole, and all his Accomplices; who being seized upon, and tried by a Court-Marshal, to the number of above twenty, were cast, and suffered deservedly an ignominious death; amongst whom (to the admiration of all) was one Giardeni Secretary to the Governour, a person who had long served him, and had in many occasions by experience been found trusty, and of an unblemisht reputation.
In Guienne the King's Armies began to prosper, by degrees, as those of the Bourdelois grew weaker, who were divided amongst themselves, and go|verned by particular Interests and Passions. The Duke of Candale, who (as hath been already said) was sent to Command his Majestie's Forces in that Province in lieu of the Count d' Harcourt, took presently the Castle of Pi|niols, and seized upon Marmanda and Arguillon Towns fortified after the an|cient manner, scituated beyond Bourdeaux and Agen on this side of the Ga|ronne; and being afterwards informed that the Count Marsin had caused the Colonel Baltassar to pass the Garonne with five or 600 Horse, to gain some advantage by the division of the Cavalier d' Aubeterra's Troops, which were placed in Garrison, and that he had also made Monsieur di Bas, Mareschal de Campe to march towards Granada; he sent Orders to the said Cavalier d' Au|betterre to be watchful unto the preservation of the Town, as a Post which would be of great advantage to the Enemy, because it not only hindred their entrance into the Country of Chalosse and Armagnac, but made him Master of the River of Adour, which is the principal Stream of all that Pro|vince, the which having for its Head a Fountain called Cap Adour, in the Mountain of Tourmalet, in the Barrois, washes the Soyl of Bigorne, the Ci|ties of Turbe and of Aire, and after receiving into her self the Rivers of Isle, Leckez, Larras upon the Confines of Bigorre, and Gascoigne, and after of Lons and Douse, passeth to Mugron, where growing Navigable, with a less rapid course it discharges it self into the Ocean near to Baione.
To hinder this Design Aubeterre rallied his Troops with so much diligence and so good fortune, that in less than thirty hours he had gotten together more than three hundred Horse, and better than four hundred Musquetiers, with which he forthwith marched against the Enemy, but finding him pos|sessed already of the said Post of Grenada, he advanced notwithstanding to the Banks of Douse, in a place called San Mauritio, where had already passed 100 Horse, and as many Foot, whom he set upon, and charged so briskly, that almost all their Foot were lost, either by the Sword, or by the River, the Horse saving themselves by a hasty flight, and rallying behind the River with a Squadron of Horse as great as the other, and five hundred Musque|tiers.
The King's Troops forthwith passed the River with so much fury, that those of the Princes terrified with fear, after they had given one Volley of Shot with their Fire-arms, all fled, recommending their safety unto the swift|ness of their flight. Monsieur D' Avennes who commanded a Squadron of d' Aubeterre his Regiment, with the Monsieurs de Troe and Villeneuf, Officers

of the Regiment of Crequi, following them with extraordinary diligence, attacqued them so furiously, that amongst the dead and Prisoners, were ac|counted more than one hundred and fifty Irish, and amongst them was ta|ken Monsieur Faget, eldest Captain; and Serjeant Major of Baltassar, and Mon|sieur de Danansin mortally wounded; those who escaped shut themselves up into Grenada, against which place the same Cavalier d' Aubeterre forthwith advanced with some Recruits come unto him from Mont de Marsan, being a Town with a Bridge upon the said River of Douse; but he was not expected by the Enemy, for they escaping privately in the night time, escaped to Tortas, the most important place they had in all that Quarter, standing upon the same Ri|ver of Douse, and fortified with strong Walls, ancient Turrets, and a nume|rous Garrison.
The Duke of Candale after these fortunate Encounters, having first assu|red himself of Mont de Marsan, and other Towns in those Quarters by suffi|cient Garrisons, and banishing such of the Inhabitants as he found ill-affect|ed, left there Aubeterre with part of the Cavalry, and himself returned to|wards the Garonne, unto another Body of his men commanded by the Mar|quess de Camilla Lieutenant-General of the Army. Some few days after be|ing advertised that Monsieur de San Mico marched towards Roquefort, a place in the Countrey d' Albret beyond Mont de Marsan, and Prazas, with the Regiment of Conti, consisting of 400 Foot, and with 100 Horse, to pos|sess that place by means of the Intellgence he had with some of the Inhabi|tants corrupted by Monsieur de Pruque Captain of the Regiment of Guitaur, he marched to encounter him with the greatest force he could draw out of his Garrisons, and overtaking them as they were taking up their Quarters in the very Suburbs of Roquefort, he commanded the Cavalier Birague to make an attempt upon them with the Forlorn-hope, assuring him that he should be relieved and seconded; which being punctually executed, more than forty Souldiers of the Enemy were slain, and the rest enforced to shut themselves up in another Suburb, which was entrenched; at the same time there appeared beyond the River a Squadron of Horse, which was violently pursued even to the Town-gates; into which Aubeterre sent a Trumpet un|to the Baron de Marsan who was Governour of the Town, to offer him re|lief, which he refused; assuring him, He was in a condition to defend himself with the strength he had, and that he need not doubt his fidelity to the King's Ser|vice.
This good Answer made Aubeterre get to Horse, that he might find and fight the Enemy; but having notice by the way that they came with de Mi|co from facing San Iustin, a place within the County d' Albret, scituated be|tween the Rivers Gelixe and Douse, pursued by the Cavalier de Paris, and Monsieur de Serigeux with so good fortune that the Commander of them had hardly saved himself with only five Horse of threescore that he had with him; he resolved to pursue the Run-aways, and clear that Country from the Prince's Forces.
But being at the same time advertised, that the Town of Roquefort, and the Baron of Marsan against his Parole given, instead of defending the Town for the King, had received Colonel Baltassar with the Princes Forces, he marched forthwith thitherward with those few Horse he had then with him, that he might be revenged upon them; but hearing upon the way that Baltassar had taken San Iustin, and la Bastida shamefully rendred to him, where he was fortifying to make himself a Winter-quarter, he forthwith changed his Design, and thought it better to march against Bastida, within which were the Regiments of Leran and di Guitauld, with 200 Foot and 100 Horse

of Conti's under the Command of the said Leran, who was a Mareschal de Campo.
He joyned himself for this Design with the Monsieurs Dalidor and eilch, who had with them a good Body of Horse; and upon the 26th of Ianuary they drew near unto the place Didor with some Horse that dismounted, attacqued the Gate and forced i giving entrance to Aubeterre and his Com|panions, but finding a strong Bricado notably defended by de Leran and his Souldiers, the King's Forces were with some loss repulsed, and forced to seek  better way to gain their purpose.
They caused therefore the Barricado to be attacqued on three sides by a false Alarm, and in the mean time the Souldiers entred into some Houses upon another side, from whence firing upon the backs of those who defend|ed the Barricado, they forced them to quit it, and retire into the great Church, which standing in the middle of a large Piazza, they fortified themselves within i; Dalidor forthwith without loss of time advancing under the Wall, gained with great Valour the Breast-work drawn by the Enemy before the Doors, and then the Cavalier d' Aubeterre gave sudden notice to Leran, that he should lay down Arms, and yield, or otherwise he should have no Quar|ter.
Leran made Articles, That liberty being given to himself and the Staff-Offi|cers to retire themselves where they thought good, the Souldiers and the other Officers should remain Prisoners of War: Which being executed, there remained Prisoners with the Kings Forces more than 200 Foot, and about 300 Horse, with all their Baggage.
The Enterprise was Noble and very Honourable to the King's Comman|ders, although they lost therein about forty of their own men, together with Monsieur della Chappelle; and this fortunate encounter facilitated also the gaining of Mas d' Aginois, which presently rendred it self without much re|sistance; after this Action the King and Princes Forces scouring every where over that fertile, and late peaceable Campagne, rendred the Inhabitants thereof as unhappy, as the Bourdelois had shewed themselves imprudent, in drawing on their own shoulders a War, only to please others, whereby they could reap nothing but an irrevocable ruine, an eternal infamy, and in case the Arms of the Male-contents should have prevailed, a slavery to them|selves, instead of the mild Government of their lawful and most gracious Soveraign.
These Maximes were notwithstanding understood by some, and had possi|bly been followed with effect, in case the wavering multitude without cause o reason had not suffered themselves to be governed by a blind fury, and inconsiderate ambition.
In this mean the Scnes for the Ballet were preparing in Paris, and the Prince of Conti in Bourdeaux, together with the Princesses, his Cousin, and Sister, being invited by the Carneval-Season, that they might win upon the minds, and please the simple People, and especially the rude multitude, greedy of Novelties, and delighted with pompous Shews, celebrated the Solemnity of the Christening of the Prince of Conde his Second Son, born the Sept. before; wherein (according to the Prince of Conde's Orders) were God-fathers, the Jurates of the City, and the Dutchess of Longueville his Sister, who adorn|ed pompously with all her Jewels went to the Cathedral of the City, attend|ed by the Cavalier Todias, first Jurate, and the Count Marsin, (who held the Infant) the Prince of Conti, the Duke of Anguien, and all the Principal Ca|valiers and Officers of the Party being also present.
The City after made a magnificent Feast and Banquet, which was scram|bled

at by those of the Olmiera; and there were also made for some days fol|lowing other Balls, and Bonfires, with Justs, Tiltings, Comedies, and Masques, as if that Countrey had felt nothing of War or Misery.
In the mean time divers secret Plots were driven on for the reducing of Bourdeaux to his Majesties Obedience; and it was a matter of difficulty to reduce that powerful and warlike City, so they made use of Industry and Art for the effecting of it. The Father Faur, a Franciscan, who was after made Bishop of Glandeues, a man subtle and zealous in his Majesties Service, who had much contributed to the reduction of Paris, proposed also the form|ing of some Intelligence in the City of Bourdeaux it self, by means of the Fathers of his Order.
To this effect there was sent thither Father Bertaut, Guardian of Breda, to settle an Intelligence with the Father Ithier Superior of the Franciscan Convent in Bourdeaux, who carried with him several Orders fit for advan|cing the Design, according as Accidents should fall out. Bertaut being dis|covered by the Prince of Conti, escaped from his hands with great dexterity, having upon pretence of kindness told him many falshoods to conceal from him the true knowledg of the Design, and of the persons acting in it; but the Father Ithier was not at all moved therewith, because knowing himself to be gratious, and welbeloved by the Citizens, he hoped, That although his De|signs should be discovered by some accident, yet he should be protected by them; and the rather, because he was assured that there were many, who groaned under the Ty|ranny of the Olmiera, who with inconsiderate precipitation, went on, and were upon the point of ruining the Countrey, and Religion, by Treaties with the English to give them entrance into Guienne. They concluded therefore, that there was no better or more secure a way, than to gain some of the principal persons of the Olmiera.
The Mother Angelica, Abbess of the discalsed Carmelites, gave occasion thereof to the Father Ythier, and discovered to him that one of her Con|vent, Sister unto Villars, had told her how well he was disposed to return unto his Majestie's obedience, touched with remorse of Conscience, and the apprehension of a miserable end, due to his crimes; and he had therefore prayed his Sister, That she together with her company, would pray to God to give him strength, and courage, to amend his life.
The Father Ythier doubted not to discover himself unto the Nun, and to perswade her to keep her Brother fixed in his good purpose. Villars under|took to restore the City to the King's obedience, provided his Majesty would grant a General Act of Oblivion to all, to himself the charge of Procurator, and Syndiche to the Community, and the summe of 40000 Crowns to be distributed amongst those, who should be instrumental in it. The Court assented to the Proposition, and upon the Father's request gave order, That no violence should be offered unto the Prince or Princesses within the Town. The design proceeded hopefully, and would easily have been effected, if Villars (unconstant in his resolution) had not revealed the whole Plot; which happened upon a bare surmise of Signior Lenet, who gave out that he knew there was a new party framing in Bourdeaux, wherein many that professed great Service to the Princes had a hand: Villars believing that some one of the Conspirators had discovered it unto Lenet, and fearing that he should be ruined, cast how to save himself by revealing the whole Treaty unto the Prince of Conty; he said, That he had not engaged himself therein, but to obtain thereby a clearer knowledg of it, and be able to make a fler discovery unto the Prince, which was the cause he had not given him an earlier knowledge of it. The Prince told him, That he was well assured of his fidelity, and should never believe other of him; and therefore gave him Orders to continue his intelligence with

them, that he might observe them better, and discover all the complices therein. That he might have the stronger proof against Father Ythier, he obliged by solemn Oath Blaraut, and Giuraut, Goldmiths, that they should go to receive the Money promised by his Majesty, whereof 1500 double Pi|stols were consigned. So as upon their Examination, and Depositions, the Father was imprisoned, and brought before a Councel, in which Marsin Pre|sided, and where were present many of the Olmiera, and some Officers of the Army, there a contest rose, Whether Secular persons might sit in Iudgment upon Clergy-men? but 'twas not there resolved.
The Prince of Conti and Dutchess of Longueville gave positive Orders he should not die, but be kept Prisoner; Marsin, and Lenet, whose endeavour was to make the people furious, caused some Carters to cry out, Tolle, tolle, Crucifige; wherewith some of the Judges being much troubled, with incensed Countenances said, They were not Iewes, and if the others were not Christians, they might go look them out a Pilate; for their parts, they intended not to dip their hands in innocent blood. Whereat Marsin was much troubled, and to end the Dispute, caused him to be condemned to be publickly Carted; which caused a Spectacle of great compassion through the City, and brought much blame and hatred upon the Princes Party, because the Father being carried about, shouted at, reviled, and suffering a thousand insolencies from the rude multitude, went undisturbed, not moved either with the apprehension of death, or any injuries were done unto him, as if he had been going to a glo|rious Triumph. This his demeanour and fearless, yet full of humility, and patience, so moved the People, that they were forced to return him forth|with unto the Prison, from whence he came; and because they had taken away his habit, the Dutchess of Longueville misliking such barbarism, gave order to have it restored, and that the insolency of the People should be re|pressed. There was after this a Cousin of the same Father apprehended, who was privy to all his Transactions, to whom was given a strange Tor|ment; but he, as if it had been nothing, suffered the same with a wonder|ful, and incredible patience, never opening his mouth of any thing touching the matter. The same morning that Father Ythier was taken, there were also arrested the President Dafis, and the Councellor Borde, and Castelare, and committed to the Castle du Ha; who were after released on their Pa|rols. Dafis, that he might free himself from all intrigues, took a Pass to go unto his Brother.
At the same time there was a Treaty by another Frier, called Lande, to|gether with a Gentlewoman called de Lune, to gain the Colonel March, who gave ear unto the sollicitations of the Frier's Brother, and communicated his design with this Widow, which was to make use of 100 Light Horse that he had hard by the Town, to put a Gate thereof into the Duke of Candale's hand, praying her to write unto him touching the same, and to desire he would direct the means fit for the putting it in Execution: This Plot was also com|municated with the Jurate Rubert, but at last March himself discovered it unto Marsin, and some few dayes after Lande acquainted the Prince of Conty with it, whereupon the Gentlewoman was imprisoned, long examined, and confronted with Lande, who justified it to him, that himself was the Au|thor of the whole Plot, and therefore was a Traytor and a Villain. The ingenuity of this Lady was more favoured than the Accusers Information, who was afterwards arrested and banished by the Olmiere, and the Gentle|woman released, and permitted to return to her own house in the Coun|trey.
Mean while the City of Monsegur, wherein was garrison'd the Marquess of Monpruilla's Regiment, was given up to the King's Party, together with

their own Officers, upon pretence that they owed them 2000 Doubloons of their Pay, they put themselves into his Majestie's Service; imprisoned the Commissary of the Quarters, from whom they took a good sum of Money, which he had raised upon the Neighbourhood; but they released him after, together with some of Marsin's Officers, who at that time besieged Saint Fermo a little Town hard by: This was the Prologue unto the ruine of the Princes Party, who were forsaken by the best of their Troops, wearied with living in perpetual action, without any hopes of profit or reward, wherewith the Princes had endeavoured to sweeten all the Travels and hard|ships of their Party.
There followed after this divers other Accidents that much weakned the said Party, which having no other foundation but the hope of bettering their Fortunes, in lieu thereof met with unlooked for violences and op|pression: A certain Ingineer was imprisoned, and 3500 Doubloons taken from him, under colour that he had blamed the new form of Government; from another called de Tuches, they took 500 Doubloons, upon pretence that he had written to Paris the News which past at Bourdeaux; there was a Vessel seised, and 25000 Crowns belonging to some Holland Merchants con|fiscated, which she was carrying to Rochel, being raised by Corn sold in that City, declaring the same to be Counter-band Goods; by which and such-like proceedings, Merchant-strangers, and the most able Citizens were extreme|ly exasperated, seeing that without shame or Conscience, they stopped at no unjust or barbarous action: About this time, that is, upon the first of Fe|bruary, the Duke of Vendosme appeared with his Fleet in the Garonne, and presently began to build a Fort in the Isle of Cazaux, scituated i'th middest of the River, and therefore of great importance, and no small annoyance to those of Bourdeaux, amongst whom there being many inwardly affected to his Majesty, it was necessary the rst should be watchful and vigilant against Stratagems and Surprises, which in such occasions are often practi|sed. And because the Curate of St. Peter's Church had in a publick Sermon exhorted those of his Parish to shake off the yoke of that slavery they suffer|ed under an unjust Authority, usurped over them by the base Councel of the Olmiera, he was by order of the Prince of Conti arrested, and committed to Prison; but the people of his Parish rising in a tumult upon his carrying to Prison, he caused him to be released, and sent away, fearing that something worse might happen; because such Persons as are admitted to teach the Word of God have great influence upon the people when they perswade un|to peace, and to a quiet life; and for this cause were also banished the Cu|rates of St. Simon, and St. Ramy, together with the Priors and Guardians of the Dominicans and Capuchines, divers Councellors of Parliament, and several Citizens, who chose rather to suffer any persecution, than to run along with a Faction which was directly contrary unto the the Service of his Majesty; so as the Parliament (which at that time was by his Maesty transferred to Agen) lessened so fast, that there remained in Bourdeaux only nine Councellors, most of which were so terrified and confounded, that they knew not well what they were doing.
The Parliament transferred, began their meeting in Agen the third of March, the Signor de Lane second President presided at the opening of it; in the presence of the Duke of Candale, the Bishop of the City, and several other Persons of Quality, who assembled upon that occasion: But in Bour|deaux the suspicion of some new Conspiracie still encreasing, all diligence possible was used to prevent it, and maintain the Prince's power: Publick Proclamation was made, That all strangers without employment should depart the City; all Hosts, Taverners, and such as let Lodgings were forbid

to lodge, or receive any, without a billet from the Magistrate, or his De|puty. All Conventicles were forbidden, and all Night walking after the Tap-too, and vigilant Guards being set every where, they were very watch|ful against surprizes; and the rather, because the Souldiers and Captains of the Royal Party, drew more and more down into the neigbouring Towns and Provinces.
And forasmuch as the taking of Sarlat, Sallagnat, Tetrason, and other wal|led Towns of Perigord by the Prince's Forces, gave them the means of scou|ring all the Neighbouring quarters unto the great damage of the Province, the Marquess Pampadour, Lieutenant of the Province of Limousin, gathering together some Gentlemen, and divers Troops garrison'd at Nontron, and other adjacent places under the Command of Monsieur de Brusquet Savagnac, Mareschal de Campo, and divers others drawn out of the Marquess de Mont|brun, and Count de Pardillian, their Regiments, under the Command of Monsieur de Baradas, Maistre de Campo, took a resolution to march against the Enemy who kept at St. Roberts, in the County of Agen, and by cutting off their way to Terrason, to oblige them unto an engagement. This design was no sooner discovered by the Enemy, but they resolved to expect the coming of the King's Forces upon a rising ground, where they drew up be|ing 600 Foot, and as many Horse, commanded by Monsieur de la Roche.
Pampadour being well pleased to see the resolution of his Enemies corre|spond with his desire, sent Monsieur de Brusquet with the Regiment of St. An|dre, to engage them, and himself with the other Squadrons followed to re|lieve him. The Prince's Troops made some resistance; but after the first charge, being frighted with the fury of St. Andre's old Horse, and not ac|customed to such fierce engagements, suddenly turned their backs, and fled: The Foot abandoned by the Horse, casting down their Arms, cryed, God save the King; and without moving yielded to the discretion of the Conquerors, who by this Victory, besides the gain of all their Baggage, freed their Coun|trey from the continual trouble of these Souldiers, who were so much the more licentious, by how much they were straightned in their pay, and dis|pleased with the Princes, whom they served. The Town of Montignac, sci|tuate upon the Bank of the Dordogne, belonging to the Marquess of Hautefort, gave testimony of an Exemplary Loyalty, when instead of subscribing the Accord with the Count Marsin, as did the other Towns of Perigord, they took Arms, and did not only maintain themselves in the obedience due to His Majesty, but also did all the hurt they could unto the Prince's Troops, as they did also in this Action of St. Roberto, where Monsieur de Boulon issuing out with some Firelocks by Order of Monsieur de Radon Governour of that Castle, they presently gave them chase, and took several Prisoners.
The Castle of St. Surin was also besieged, and taken by the Royalists, it was rendred at discretion, and the Captain Trinquet who commanded there, was carried prisoner to Blaye: There followed also the taking of divers other Castles, and Walled Towns, which with some small dispute either rendred themselves, or were taken by force of Arms, whereby the Prince's Troops came to be straightned into a narrow compass, and the greatest part of the Inhabitants by their example were perswaded to return unto their du|ty, by submitting to his Majestie's Authority.
These good Successes in Guienne were seconded by other Accidents which were of great advantage to the King's Party; for the Newes came, That on the 28th of February there had been a great Fight at Sea between the English and the Hollanders, wherein each Party taking themselves to have the bet|ter, and the loss of Ships being almost equal, the Victory remained undeci|ded: And this Engagement of the English in a Warr against the Hollanders,

hidred them from being able to embrace those resolutions against France, which otherwise they might have done, by assisting those of Bourdeaux to the great prejudice of the Crown of France; which would have run great hazard, being attacked on the one side by the powerful Forces of the King of Spain, and on the other by Intestine Broyls, if at the same time it had been also assaulted by the English: But the good Fortune of France, subordi|nate unto the Will of God, which disposeth all things according to the order of his Providence, preserved in that conjuncture this most Christian King|dom, from receiving prejudice by that Nation different in Religion, and Customes, which at that time met with the fairest opportunity that might be to have wrought her ends; it being governed then by a violent party, had she not undertaken Enterprises different from what was expected, and being confounded within her self, had not given leisure to the King's Authority to gather strength, and to destroy the force of those who being disobedient themselves, endeavoured by their Cabal to bring all the rest into confu|sion.
This was by the Warr with Holland, of which I shall onely touch the prin|cipal Motives, because I would not with long digressions break off the thred of that Narration I have prescribed unto my self.
After the Parliament of England had made it self Master of that whole Kingdom, and overcome with its Victorious Arms, the Realms of Scotland, and of Ireland, they cast about how to maintain themselves in Arms with Forrainers, having no Enemy at home; because in times of quiet, Factions use to arise, and Armies weaken, which brings ruine to Commonwealths, especially in the beginning of a new Government, when their minds are wavering between the hopes of settlement, and fears of falling.
It happened then that no just cause appearing for a breach with France, they took a fair pretence for a Warr with the Hollander, as being those who having gained a considerable reputation at Sea, seemed to eclipse the lustre of the long feared, and unresistible force of the English, on that Element.
These Jealousies, between them (besides the natural Emulation usual amongst bordering States) were heightned by the art and industry of the neighbouring Crowns, who observing with a jealous Eye, two Common|wealths by their sides, grown powerful, by Warr and Violence, could not but suspect from them some of those inconveniencies, which are usually of|fered by those who are strongly provided with Sea Forces: The cause of difference was the Herring Fishing about the Orcades, (Islands on the North of Scotland, and Members of Great Britain) to which the Hollanders send yearly a vast number of Ships, and draw from it an excessive Profit. The English pretended, That the Hollanders possession of this Fishing was an effect onely of the negligence of their Kings, accompanied with so great a loss un|to the Commonwealth by the Hollanders usurpation, and therefore not to be longer suffered by a Nation that, before Holland was so much as known, enjoyed without contest the principal Dominion of the Ocean. To this the States-General pleaded, That their Right was sufficiently established by their long continued possession, and Prescription.
This was the Motive upon which either party beginning first to raise For|ces at Sea, the one for recovery of this loss, and the other for the preserving of it, fell afterwards to an open breach, with so great a prejudice to both parties, whose principal subsistence and strength depended upon Trade, that the same being hereby interrupted, produced all the effects of a miserable, and destructive Warr; but principally to Holland, which being straitned by the smallness of their Territory upon Land, had no means of subsisting, but by the Sea. To these Reasons which were derived from profit, and in|terest

of State, were added others touching the punctilio of Reputation. The English pretending themselves to have been slighted by the Hollanders up|on several occasions, and principally in the killing of their Ambassadour at the Hague, who was against the Law of Nations assassinated there, by some English of the King's Party.
And the Hollanders (who by their fresh and frequent Victories obtained against the Power of the King of Spain, had already gained so great a Repu|tation, that they were generally much esteemed and feared; and had be|sides concluded so advantageous a Peace with his Catholick Majesty) not daigning to give way unto the threats of England, wherein the wounds of their Intestine Broyls were yet fresh bleeding, took little care to satisfie the Parliament therein; but sent to Sea a numerous Fleet, and either Party fal|ling to Acts of Hostility, many Merchants Ships were lost on either side. And their Fleets who were above 100 Sayl strong on either side, meeting at last, there passed the said Battle, and many other Fights at Sea, with loss on both sides; but in such manner, as each Party pretending to have the Victory, it could not be well told which side had got it, the loss consisting only in that of one or two Ships more or less than the Relations which were published, and therefore each Party failed not to put to Sea afresh, with an intention of fighting for it; the Hollanders notwithstanding were very sen|sible of the loss of Van Trump, their General, a Person of great Valour and extraordinary Experience at Sea. And we may well believe, that as there is no comparison between the Greatness and Power of England and Holland, which is far inferior to it in richess, in extent of Land, and Bodies of men, so without doubt the English would have prevailed, had they not been distra|cted by new intestine Broyls and Troubles.
The Court of France therefore considering how fit it was to make use of this favourable conjuncture of time to assure themselves of Guienne, and Bourdeaux a City so disposed to risings, resolved to make all fitting prepara|tions for the reducing of them; and therefore besides the Fleet sent into the Garonne (as hath been said) and the advance of Souldiers from all parts into the Province, the Cardinal Mazarine continued the Treaties of Agreement with several Parties, to see if he could give an end rather by Composition than Arms unto that War, which being against Subjects, renders the Victo|ry weak and languishing; whereof reserving the Account to the next Book, I will resume the Relation of what was done during this time in Champagne, where all persons being encouraged by the arrival of the Cardinal's Army, and the Recruits sent from him after the taking of Barleduc, and passing of the River Aisne, they besieged Chasteau Porcien, in which Monsieur de Bois|son commanding with a strong and numerous Garrison of old Souldiers, ren|dred the place very considerable, especially being in the heart of Winter, a time very unfit for Armies to keep the field.
This difficulty was overcome by the Cardinal himself, by whose presence (the Souldiers having an extraordinary love for him) all dangers seemed light, and were endured with a patience equal to that affection wherewith he was served and followed.
The Regiment d' Espagny, Commanded by its Colonel, attacqued the said Town of Chasteau Porcien by Orders from the Duke d' Elbeuf, and Mareschal d' Aumont; and the second of Ianuary at night possessed themselves thereof without resistance; the Enemy being retired into the Castle, from whence they fired fast upon the King's Forces, who had made there a Barricado, and taken up their Quarters, and some time after fell to mining; but because the besieged defended themselves obstinately, and threw great quantity of wild|fire into the Town, wherewith many Houses were burned, this work was

hindred. The Count de St. Aignan first Gentleman of the King's Chamber, having Commanded in Chief the Body of an Army, was come as a Volun|tier there to wait upon the Cardinal, as did also many other Lords and Great Persons; this Count with the good liking of the Duke d' Elbeuf, and Mareschal d' Aumont the Generals, began a new Mine, together with the Marquess d' Espagny, and Monsieur de Layeux, and St. Aignan being busied at the work where he wrought indefatigably with his wonted Courage; one night about five a Clock, as he returned, he was shot with a Musket in his left arm, and received a great Wound; but this accident hindred him not from running presently with Sword in hand before he was dressed to make Head against a Slly, where the Besieged were valiantly received, and beat|en back: At the last the Mine being compleated and ready to be fired, and another also of Monsieur de la Fronde, being in a good forwardness, the Ene|mies seeing the works very much advanced by the assistance of the Cardinal, who (neglecting all thoughts of dangers) was never from the Work, yielded upon Articles, and marched out after six days respite, which were willingly accorded to them, to see if Conde would advance to relieve them, which he gave out that he would do; but he not appearing, they then issued out, and the Town was restored unto his Majestie's obedience.
The Prince of Conde knowing that without stronger succours it was im|possible to give a stop unto the Cardinal's proceedings, and much troubled to see his Designes crossed, which were (as he told the Ministers of Spain) to winter in France, and maintain the War in that Kingdom, without Charge to Flanders, being much grieved, and perhaps repenting that he had put himself into that Action, began to cast away those hopes, which till then had born him up, and represented in time, not only to the Ministers of Flanders, but also to the Catholick King's Court, the necessity there was of a greater Force for the carrying on of that Affair: Writing (besides the Orders sent to Monsieur de St. Agolin his Agent in Madrid) unto the Favourite Don Lewis d' Aro, a Letter to the ensuing purpose.

MY LORD:
I Cannot possibly forbear longer to give your Excellency an account of the wretch|ed condition wherein my Affairs stand, for want of those things which have been promised me; your Excellency knows with what patience I have seen (for want of Money) all my Concerns in Guienne to go to ruine; Paris, Montrond; Dijon, Bourges, and many other considerable places to be lost; and with what con|stancy I have refused all the advantages have been offered me by the Court of France, for the observance of my promise; but I must now declare unto your Ex|cellency, that I find my self reduced to the last point. The Cardinal Mazarine is returned into the Kingdom, hath got together all the Power of France, and is now come to drive me from my Winter-Quarters; the Army of Flanders, and the moyety of that of Lorrain have abandoned me, and the Duke Charles speaks of calling the remainder from me. The Count Fuensaldagne, who makes open shew of an aversion to assist me, hath let me know there is no Money for me, nor no hope of it; in the mean time the Enemies establish themselves, possess my Quarters, and in case they establish their Design, will settle an Authority which as yet France ne|ver knew, and put themselves into such a condition, as will be very troublesome, not to me alone, but to your Excellency also. My Friends have lost all hope of be|ing succoured, and perceiving me to be thus abandoned, do make their peace one af|ter another, and quit my Party. I beseech you my Lord, to take some good Order herein, Commanding these Ministers expresly to assist me with all their Troops; when all those of the Enemy shall come against me, or with part of them when I shall

be assaulted only with a Party; and also to send me forthwith Money which hath been with so much asseveration promised me. I shall then be bold to promise, that we shall quickly force the Enemy to quit the Field, or consent unto a just and honou|rable Peace.
This I expect from his Majesty's Iustice, and your friendship, and shall endea|vour to let you see, I am most Affectionate to serve you, c.

He added a Postscript to the Letter, whereby he desired him to give cre|dit unto what should be declared unto him touching this matter by St. Ago|lin, by word of mouth, or by Monsieur Lenet by Letter, to whom he had re|commended the care of his Affairs in Bourdeaux.
The Prince's design was by all means to keep up his party in Guienne, and thereby to assure the City, and Parliament of Bourdeaux, and by that diver|sion (employing a good part of the Catholick King's Forces in that Province) he thought with the Flanders Army to enter France, and give new life unto the fickleness of the Parisians, and the bitterness of male-contents; and there|fore all his desires were reduced unto two points, One, That the King of Spain, with Men and Money speedily dispatch't into Guienne, would add new fuel to the Warr which was there kindled: And sending the Money promi|sed into Flanders, would permit him to encrease his Army, and march upon those designs he had projected independent upon any other.
But forasmuch as the Spaniard by the exorbitant Expence he had been at in the Sieges and Enterprises of Barcellona, Gravelin, Dunkirk, Trin, and Casal, was very bare of Men, and Money, and the Kingdom of Naples could not now furnish those great Recruits of Men and Treasure, in which consisted the chief strength of the Spanish Forces, but rather appeared likely to fall into despair, by reason of the oppressions it had suffered under the King's Mi|nisters; the Provisions of Guienne were so slow and feeble, and the Prepa|rations in Flanders so short of the hopes and expectations of the Prince of Conde, that it was evident the Victories obtained in the Year 1652, were rather a weakening, than a strength, unto that Monarchy. The Prince there|fore being disabled to perform things whereof he had given hopes unto the French that followed him, was forced to dismiss the best part of them, and to permit them with his good leave to return to the obedience of his Majesty, which was done by many of them for that onely reason; And the Duke of Rochefaucaut, being disabled by the Wounds he received in the last Fight at the Fauxbough of St. Anthonie in Paris to serve farther in the War, accepted by his consent of a Pardon, and quitted the Prince's Party with his intire good liking and consent.
The King's Council in Spain did notwithstanding what it was able in those straits, for Provisions both for Guienne and Flanders, and was not wanting by means of their Ambassadour at London, to try all means of engaging the English against the French; but 'twas observed, that in the Propositions for their sending of Men into Guienne, the Catholick Ambassadour moved very warily; he was willing Spain should have a footing in that Province, but 'twas against his Maximes, That the English should nestle there, whose power ought to be suspected unto the Spaniard; their Dominions not onely in Europe, but also in America, being exposed to the Invasion of their formidable Fleets. mann'd by a Nation ill affected to the Professors of the Roman Catholick Re|ligion.
And because the Neapolitans, and particularly the Nobles, complained, and every one cryed out against the rigours of the Count d' Ognate, Vice-Roy there, murmuring that Pardons were not sincerely kept, so as there was no end of punishment; the Catholick King resolved (his three years being long

since past) to recall him into Spain: The King's Council considered, that 'twas hard (not to say impossible) that Minister should be perswaded to act with more sweetness, because it appeared manifestly, that the Maximes of his Government tending onely to depress the Baronage and secure the People to him by good turns, and a rigid Justice, he would make use of his Majestie's Authority upon all occasions to put the same in execution, principally against those who were suspected or accused to have had hand in the late Revoluti|ons: Those who were his Enemies at Court, had also the better means to do ill offices, not only by reason of the small correspondence he held with Don Iohn of Austria, and his part taking with the Brothers of Cardinal Barberin; but most especially by reason of his Wealth, and the absolute Authority he exercised in his Government; which encreased the Envy and Emulation against him. To all this was added, the ill satisfaction of his Holiness, who protested, That he was cause of the small correspondence between him and the King of Spain, by reason of those continual prejudices the matters of the Church recei|ved, by the Discords he entertained with the Archbishop Cardinal Philomarini, the nature of which, though they were such as of themselves might be some Motives of distrust against him, yet they were reported to have had another cause, the said Archbishop being charged not to have dealt sincrrely in the beginning of the Tumults, and in the progress of the Treaty, so as if he had encouraged the People, covering his partiality under the pretence of maintaining that confidence with them, which might render his interposition the more useful: That he had done many Actions esteemed prejudicial, and such as shewed no good intention, particularly in receiving the Duke of Guise, in a manner refused unto Don John of Austria, with the Ceremonies onely due to lawful Princes: That he had discovered many Councels, and Designs to the Enemy, and in particular (although too late) the last Plot, whereby the City was recovered by the Vice-Roy; That nourishing Factions without regard unto the danger of the Times, he had bred Troubles, and prosecuted all his Actions and De|signs with violence. To the Count d Ognate was appointed Successour the Count of Castriglio, either to remove him from Court, or to sweeten the Rigours of Ognate, he being a Cavalier very dextrous, affable, and full of courtesie.
In the mean time Cardinal Mazarine being encouraged by the good Suc|cess of his Enterprises, undertook also the Investing of Rhetel, and St. Menhou, and rallying together all the Troops of Mareschal Turenne, and de la Ferte Se|neterre, marched that way, hoping to perform this before the Souldiers went into Quarters; but by reason of the strong Garrisons wherewith the Prince of Conde had reinforced these places, and the sharpness of the Season, he gave over the attempt, and in lieu thereof, sent the Marquess Castelnau, and the Count Broglia to attack Vervins, which they did the 27th of Ianuary, for|cing the Garrison which was 300 Foot, and 200 Horse, to quit the place next day towards Night; And the Cardinal leaving there for Governour Mon|sieur de Rinville with a strong Guard, dismissed the Troops into their Quar|ters, and so ended the Campagne of 1652; In Chasteau Porcien was left for Commander the Count de Grand Pre, and the Frontiers of Champagne being provided with sufficient strength against the attempts, might be made by the Garrisons of Mouson, St. Menhou, Clermont, and Stenay; the Cardinal ac|companied with a great number of Noble Persons, and Officers of the Army, went to Paris, whither he had been invited by frequent Courriers from their Majesties.
The Marquess Pallavicin Treated at the same time the Affair touching the Restitution of the Galley, taken by the Count d' Harcourt from the Genoueses, and the Justice of that Common-wealths Demand appearing to the Court of France, his Majesty, whose intentions were to preserve Friendship, and good

correspondence with them, overcame all difficulties, and with great Equity and Justice, gave order for the restitution, commanding that the Galley fit|ted up, and fully armed, should by a Gentleman sent expressly for that pur|pose, be brought unto the Town of Genoua, and there restored, as it was the August following, where the Senate in acknowledgment of his Majestie's ge|nerous goodness, caused the Gentleman to be Treated at the publick charge in the said Marquess Pollavicin his House, and dismissed him with a Present of 1000 Duckets in Plate.
This Galley had been thus taken, in the Encounter which past in the Year 1638. between 15 Gallies of France, and as many of Spain, as hath been else|where said; There were 5. taken by the French from the Spaniard, one of which in that long Fight having lost all her Men, and Tackle, it was impos|sible for the French General to bring her into Provence, and therefore put|ting some few Marriners and Souldiers into her, he left her in the Fosse D' Arrassi, himself following on his way towards the Islands of St. Margaret, and St. Honorato; Notice hereof being given unto the Spanish Garrison in Finall, and to the People of Loano, Subjects to the Prince Doria, the same Night with certain Barks, and Filoukes from the Creeks in the said places, they surprized the Galley without resistance; the rather, because she lay off the Castle, so as she could not be thereby defended, and brought her safe in|to the Port of Genoua, to which the other Spanish Galleys were retired: This Accident was falsly reported to the French General, suggesting that those of Arassi, and others Subjects of the Republique, had concurred to the recovery of this Galley; which being also confirmed by the common dis|course at Thoulon, and Marseilles, and reported in the French Court, gave occasion unto the Count d' Harcourt, being Admiral, to engage himself in de|manding the restitution of this Galley; to which purpose coming with his great Ships near Genoua, he sent with much Civility and Courtesie to request of the Republick, that they would put into his hands this Galley, which be|ing gotten in a just Warr from the Enemy, was possessed by their Subjects. The Senate gave order, that a relation of the truth of the fact should be given unto Harcourt, that she had been taken, not by their Subjects, but by Spa|niards; and that for the satisfaction of France, they would make strict en|quiry to see if any of their Subjects had hand in it: Harcourt passed in shew well satisfied with the ingenuous proceeding of the Republick, who failed not to use their best diligence to be informed of the truth; and it was found, that among so many who joyned in the recovery of the Vessel, there were three poor Mariners who were Genoueses, whom they caused to be severely punished, and sent due information thereof unto Gio. Baptista Salazzo their Ambassadour in France, that he might satisfie the Court, and thought they had given sufficient satisfaction, and made it to appear that 'twas far from their intention, the least damage should be done by any of their Subjects. But on the contrary, that two Galleys being in the same Fight taken from the French by the Spaniard, and brought into Genoua, wherein were many wounded persons, and Prisoners, the common Souldiers were forthwith taken into Hospitals, and the Officers, and Persons of Quality, by particular Gentlemen into their Houses, where they were treated with much magnifi|cence and Courtesie; amongst them two Captains of the Gallies lodged by Gio. Battista Raggi, confessed that they had never found any where so much Courtesie as they had experienced in Genoua. This Raggi was Nephew to the deceased, and Brother to the living Cardinal of that name, who after he had for five moneths defrayed their charges, got them their liberties without Ransome. But as there is never wanting in great Princes Courts envious persons, and back-biters who do ill offices, and turn the sweetest,

and most obliging actions into poyson, it was insinuated to Harcourt, that he had been abused by the State of Genoua in his demand, under colour of ta|king information touching the manner of the recovery of the Spanish Gal|ley.
This Prince fierce by Nature, and apt to resent Injuries, the year follow|ing being at Sea with the Fleet under his Command, sailed to the River of Genoua, passing within two miles of St. Remy, and two Senators of Genoua be|ing there about Publick Affairs, upon the notice they had of the appearing of the French Fleet, sent a Gentleman with a Galley, and several Provisions to refresh, and Complement the French General; but after the usual Salutes coming aboard the French Admiral, without the least suspicion of Hostility, the Galley was surprised whilest the Gentleman was aboard of Harcourt's Ship, performing of his Message to him.
The Senators were much astonished and surprized with the unwonted strangeness of this Action of the French Admiral, who sailing as a Friend up|on the Seas of the Republick, aad being saluted as such by them, the Hosti|lity committed by him could be nothing else but an apparent breach of Pub|lick Faith, and a violation of the Law of Nations. The Gentleman and Cap|tain of the Galley complained to the General, charging him with a Fact so detestible, and unusual: He replyed sharply to them, That they being of the Republick of Venice, who had taken a Galley, which on the King's behalf he had demanded, but could not get, he was bound to take satisfaction himself where he could find it. He caused the Galley to be plundered, released the Captain and Mariners, and brought the Vessel with the Tackle to Thoulon. The news of this Accident coming to Genoua, was the more sensible to the Senators, and the whole City, by how much it was known to be less just, and reasonable; and the rather, because in this Action, and other occasions, the Republick had al|waies shewed a good correspondence with France; so as if the great wisdom of the Senate had not shewed it self in regulating the Motions of the People, and City, not suffering them to fall tumultously upon those resolutions which must be undertaken upon mature advice, there was some danger left the Genoueses should have fallen upon the French, and deprived them of their Goods and Lives, in revenge of so apparent an Injury.
The Commonwealth failed not amongst other Provisions to dispatch pre|sently a Courrier to their Ambassadour in France, with orders to represent unto his Majesty this Accident so unexpected, without reason, and contrary to all Lawes of Hospitality, letting him know, They hoped from his Majestie's Iustice, not only restitution of the Galley taken, but satisfaction also for the Injury, which with so much violence was done unto them: The Ambassadour espoused the cause, declaimed against the strangeness of the Action, and set forth the injustice of it with so much evidence of Reason, that the Cardinal Richelieu after he had excused it, upon pretence of reprisal, by reason of an injury of the like nature received from the Genoueses, told him, That if the Common|Wealth would by their Letters to his Majesty desire a Restitution of the Galley, he doubted not but that his Majesty would please to do it. But this Business, the di|spatch whereof was thought so easie, by reason of the delayes used in it, which are proper to great Courts, took not effect but at the time, and in the man|ner above rehearsed.
The Marquess Pallavicin ceased not at the same time to make continual applications unto his Majestie's Ministers at Court,Anno 1653. That they would give order to have the Common-Wealths Ambassadours treated with the same Ceremonies are usual unto those of Crown'd Princes. He shewed that this Demand was founded upon Justice; Forasmuch as besides that Liguria had

been often called a Kingdome, this Common-Wealth had for many Ages past been Owners of that of Sardinia, conquered by force of Arms, and that of Cyprus, ren|dred it Tributary for many years, and taken from the French that of Corfu, which it still holds; besides so many Glorious Conquests in the Levant, which rendred it formidable unto all its Enemies, and especially the Infidels, against whom the Chri|stian Princes never almost undertook a Warr, without receiving powerful assistance from this Common-Wealth: Which hath been therefore Honoured by many Popes with the Title of their Protector. And the Commonwealth thought it self heren obliged to challenge the same Respect with other Potentates, because the Bull of Urban the 8th. for conferring the Title of Eminence upon the Cardinals, with pain of Excommunication to all that should refuse to use it towards them, Except|ing Kings; that Exception, upon the instance of the Venetian Republick, was de|clared to extend unto all Potentates who had Royal Dignity; whereupon the Com|monwealth of Genoua for preserving of its Dignity declared it self by a particular Decree to be comprehended in the number of such Potentates, requiring the same not only from Pope Innocent the 10th, unto whom they sent Raffael de la Torne a particular Envoy for that purpose, but also by others in all the Courts of the prime Princes of Christendome.
Pallavicin found a great disposition in the King to gratifie them with this Honour; the Ambassadour of this Republick being the year following re|ceived with the same form used towards those of Crowned Princes, as in the continuance of this Story shall be declared.
It will not also be amiss to give a short touch of the Affairs treated at this time in Germany, and particularly in the Diet at Ratisbone, concerning the strengthening of the Peace concluded the Year before in Osnaburgh, and Munster, because both French and Spaniard had some share in it; in regard the Spaniards following the Maxime, To have the effects of things which were likely rather to be seen, than felt, endeavoured under the plausible pretence of Religion to delay the restoring of those Places they possessed in the Lower Palatinate, to discompose that Peace from which they were excluded with their so great resentment, if at least they may be said to be excluded who are neither principal, nor accessary, it being manifest by the Declarations of the Swedes, and Protestants in Germany, that they never pretended to have any open Enmity against the King of Spain.
But finally, by the care and sollicitude of the Emperour, and his Negotia|tion full of Candour and Clemency, the restitution of Frankendale (held and refused to be given up by the Spaniard) being obtained, and the differences of the City of Hailbrun, and others adjusted, the Meeting of Nuremberg was concluded, whereby those Obstacles which were referred to their Decision by the Imperial Diet, and which might have ministred matter unto new differences, and divisions, were smoothed in the end of the Year 1652, unto the satisfaction of the Resolutions taken in the said Diet, the occasions where|of was in appearance to determine the Points reserved at the Treaty in Mun|ster, but in substance to proceed unto the Election of the King of the Romans; a thing wonderfully desired by the Emperour, that he might establish the King of Hungary his Son, in the Succession of the Empire.
His Imperial Majesty was loth to put this to the trial, unless he were first assured of the undoubted success of his designs. He knew the Electors were almost all of them particularly obliged to him in point of gratitude, and the Prince Palatine more than the rest, being by his means restored to the pos|session of Frankendale; but he was very suspicious in his mind of the Hans Towns, swelling with pretensions, by support of the Swedes, and animated by their good intelligence with France, and therefore thought they would with their whole Power, give what disturbance to it they were able. The

Emperour therefore thought fit before summoning of the Diet in Ratisbone, to sound the minds of the Electors by his Letters, that he might inform him|self whether they approved the coming now to the Election of his Succes|sor.
He wrote therefore very Affectionate Letters to each of them unto that purpose, and made them to be accompanied by the person who had charge to present them, with those reflections were fit to make them jealous of those States in the Election, and to animate them not to suffer that any other should partake of that Prerogative, which was due only to themselves, independent upon any other person whatsoever.
The Electors took in good part the Advice given, and much more the gra|tious Expressions of his Imperial Majestie, they returned Answer therefore in Terms full of Reverence, and particular Devotion, and most especially the Prince Palatine endeavoured to express his Gratitude; because he well knew that although his Catholick Majestie out of his Natural Generosity had con|descended to the restitution of Frankendale to gratifie him, without any other condition; yet the Emperour by the cross management of the Spanish Mini|sters, had been forced to quit the City of Besanzon in the Franche Comt, and to promise payment of 25000 Dollers from the Circles of the Empire unto the King of Spain, to get possession of it.
The Emperour being therefore certified of the good inclination of the Electors, summoned a Diet to meet at the end of the Year 1652, and in the moneth of August advanced to Prague, whither under colour of doing him reverence, and confirming the good intelligence between them, came all the Electors in person, excepting onely he of Cologne who was sick, and sent thither in his stead the Count of Fustembergh; and the Elector of Bavaria, who in his place deputed thither his Mother Anna Maria of Austria, Sister unto the Emperour, who came accompanied with a Train of 200 persons, and upon the 29th of September, was by the Emperour himself met out of the City at the White Mountain, in which place all the other Electors were also encountred by him, with so much shew of Love and Kindness, that there was none who did not think himself highly obliged by the Emperour's Cour|tesie, who gave order that the King of Hungary should give the first Visit un|to every one of the Electors.
There followed afterwards in Prague the mutual declarations of a constant, and sincere intelligence between the Parties, and the ascertaining of the Ar|ticles necessarily conducing unto the common intention of electing a King of the Romans.
Upon these assurances, the Emperour accompanied by all his Court went to Ratisbone in December following, whither came the Electors of Moguntia, Treves, Cologne, and the Prince Palatine of Bavaria sent thither with the Title of his Ambassadour and Plenipotentiary, the Count Maximilian Curtio, a Ca|valier of rare parts, and singular abilities; Brandenburgh dispatcht thither Ioachino Frederick, Baron of Plumenthall, a Person of very clear repute, who dyed there, and Saxony had the young Schonfelt and Sesen, a person of great Dexterity, and profound Learning. In the first opening of the Diet there grew several differences by reason of the pretensions to Titles, and preceden|cies, which spent some dayes, and delayed the making of the Propositions; the Emperour was not able to make his Cavalcade according to the antient usage, but made his Entry in Coach, because that he was ill disposed: The States opposed themselves to this, pretending that the antient Form should not be altered; but they gave way at last therein to satisfie his Majesty: The Emperour intended also that the Meeting should be kept in his own Palace, upon the same ground of his want of health; but the States were so positive

against this, that he could not obtain it, but the same was in the publick house destinated unto such occasions.
At last the Assembly met, and the Marquess de Buda, after a fine Elegant Oration made in praise of Caesar, and of the Assembly, opened the Proposi|tions upon which they were to Treat, being these:
First, Concerning the manner whereby to establish the Peace gained with so much Labour, Trouble, and Expence, between the Head, and Members, and between them, and Forraign Princes, to cherish the antient, and sincere confidence was here|tofore, and in what manner their common Countrey afflicted with so many passed Warrs, might for the time to come be preserved from any ill intelligences which might arise, and that what remained to be done, and concluded in the Treaty of Peace, might be executed as was just and fitting.
To consider touching the Expedients whereby without long delayes (which are al|wayes hurtful) those things may be decided, which are remitted to the Diet by the said Treaty.
His Imperial Majesty shewed himself ready to subscribe all these Proposi|tions, promising to continue in a Fatherly and Cordial Affection towards all in general, and every one in particular.
The Meeting therefore at first went on with general Propositions, touch|ing the Policy of the Empire, and the things which were reserved unto the Diet by the Treaty of Munster; but afterwards they entred upon the Trea|ty, touching the Election of a King of the Romans.
The Hans Towns then set on foot their Pretensions to be admitted to the said Election, whereunto they were privately encouraged by the French, and Swedes; whereat the Electors were offended, that others should intrude themselves into a business appertained solely to them. And the differences at last grew to that height, that there being no means to accord them, the Electors resolved to divide from them, and to meet in Augusta; where in the moneth of May following, they proceeded to the Election of Ferdinand the Fourth, King of Hungary, for King of the Romans; after which they returned to Ratisbone, to perform the Ceremonies of his Coronation. The said States protested against it, pretending it to be invalid; but in vain, because it was approved by all the rest, and the King was lawfully inthron'd and settled in that Dignity.
The Ceremony of the Coronation was performed, in which there grew a difference between the Elector of Brandenburgh, and the Palatine, either of them pretending, that it belonged to him to carry the Imperial Crown; which was at last adjusted by the Emperour, who caused the said Crown to be consigned unto the Palatine as Treasurer of the Empire; the Count of Hohen Zollern carried the Scepter, the Count of Papenham the Sword, and these with the Elector Palatine went before the Emperour, who was carried in a Chair into the Church, where solemn Mass was sung, and all Ceremo|nies performed which are usual in such occasions.
The Hans Towns seeing their pretensions to have a vote in the Election insufficient, declared, That they intended to take into consideration the 49. Ar|ticles which used to be solemnly sworn by a new King of the Romans, that is to examine, add to, or take from them. The Reformed insisted, That they should be ratified, and sworn by the King, according to the Form they had appointed. This Dispute continued for some time with obstinacy, but the Emperour's Au|thority, and the Reasons alledged at last prevailing, they acquiesced, and this difficulty was overcome.
The Meeting continued after, and debated upon the Points already men|tioned, but with so little success, that the Diet was at last dissolved with little satisfaction, by reason of the difference in Opinions which rose amongst them.
The Protestants pretended that in all things which were to be decided, they might give their Votes apart; alledging, That forasmuch as the Catho|licks were more in number, it was convenient, to the end things might be indiffe|rently carried, that their Voices should be equal to the Catholicks. The Empe|rour was much against it, and stood firmly in the negative; but being above measure desirous of Peace, and that the Diet should end with an entire sa|tisfaction to all Parties, he at last consented to it, with this reservation, That the same should be onely understood to extend unto those things which were to be decided, not to such as were already settled, and that it stould be for this time onely.
The Protestants having advanced this step, were not content, but pressed farther, in regard the Assembly being to break up, and the matters which were not determined, being to be referred unto another Meeting in Frank|fort, a free City situate near the Lower Palatinate upon the River Maine, they pretended also to have the same liberty of voting apart as was granted them in this Assembly at Ratisbone.
The Catholicks shewed themselves resolute not to give way unto this In|novation of the Protestants; They had therefore secret meetings apart, and took a resolution to oppose it vigorously. The Protestants also had their meetings, and resolved to insist upon this demand, and go through with the obtaining of it, if otherwise they could not compass it; by force of Arms; declaring to be a matter just, honest, and convenient. These their Propositions were backed by the Swedes, and the French also, who were glad to set Di|vision between the Parties, and to render the party which depended upon them, equal in all advantages with those who they believed would not run their way, so as the matter tended to a new Rupture, and breach of the Peace, which had been gained with so much trouble.
The Emperour wisely foreseeing the ill effects which this division might beget, by the Advice of his Council, and particularly of the Count of Aus|bourg, a Person of great Integrity, Abilities, and Experience, (who was after made a Prince of the Empire) gave notice by the Count Curtio, Vice-Chan|cellor of the Empire, unto the Elector of Moguntia, That he should endeavour by all means to adjust this Difference.
The Protestants having by some means got notice of the Emperour's in|clination to adjust this difference, grew more positive in their Resolutions to have it, so as the Archbishop of Moguntia being not able to gain any thing upon them; that he might accomplish the Emperour's desire, endeavoured to perswade the Catholicks to comply with them; and therein laboured so effectually as he perswaded those who were the most averse, to consent unto the satisfaction of the Protestants, that is to say, that they should also have an Equality of Votes in the meeting of Frankfort, upon condition it should be for that time onely, and should extend onely to the three Points, which were there to be discussed, and ended, which were:

First, Touching the Arming of the Circles of Germany, and the Provisions fit to be made for the Publick Safety.
Secondly, The settling of the Policy, and good Orders of the Empire.
Thirdly, Touching the manner of making restitution of Goods and Estates, upon the Articles of Oblivion, and Religion.

These things being obtained by the Protestants, they pressed farther, and demanded in lieu of the Deputation appointed at Frankfort, a sub-de|putation, that is, an incorporating together of all the Three Estates; in which sub-deputation, a determinate number was to be chosen, that is, so

many Protestants, and so many Catholicks; and this to avoid a croud, that but few only might be present at debates, whom they knew to be firm, and unbiassed to the Common Interest; the multitude of persons being suspected by them, as more easie to be wrought upon by the contrary party, and gain|ed by gits, and favours bestowed upon them by the Catholicks.
But these new Demands of the Protestants being full of arrogance, and which evidently shewed they were not to be satisfied, gave so much offence to the Emperour, that losing all patience, he gave them notice, He inten|ded absolutely to part, without staying to perform the Ceremonies done at a Recesse. In order whereunto he caused all the publick Meeting-Places to be unhang|ed, and all things to be taken down wherewith they were adorned, for performing the Solemnity usual at the dissolving of the Diet, which con|sists in the Singing of a solemn High Mass by the Bishop, Prince of Ratisbone, at which his Majesty is present in a Pontifical Habit.
This resolution being perceived by the Protestants, who foresaw that in case the Assembly should break up abruptly, the same would be of great pre|judice unto them, they went carefully to the house of Prince Drictestain, the Emperour's Major Domo, a Cavalier of great Wisdome, and an unspotted Faith, and there having given many Reasons, and made many excuses, they declared, That they would submit unto his Majestie's Pleasure, and waive the pre|tensions aforesaid. The Prince went presently unto the Palace to acquaint the Emperour, how the Protestants had changed their Obstinacy into Reverence, and that they resolved to give his Majesty full satisfaction.
The Emperour was pleased with this humble carriage, and laying aside all displeasure, gave order that the places should be again fitted up; and so the Solemnity was performed with the usual Ceremonies: After which at the time of publishing of the Recesse in the Great Hall, the Emperour obli|ged himself to maintain sincerely all that was agreed on; and by an Elegant Discourse gave satisfaction to all persons of his Incomparable Kindness, and Affection towards the Publick Good.
The Elector of Moguntia in the name of all the States, gave him great Thanks for the Trouble he had suffered by so long a stay, and wished unto him a good Voyage: And in this manner ended the Diet, being reduced unto a Deputation Extraordinary in Frankfort, and the adjourning of all other matters discussed in this, unto another Diet to be held in Ratisbone, within the term of two years.
There were at this Meeting divers other Affairs treated which belonged to Forraign Princes out of Germany, amongst which one was, the Investiture desired by the Duke of Savoy, of the Lands of Monferrat, according to the Treaty of Chierasco, 1631. To which purpose the Count Bolyer, one of the Lords of Lucerne, was sent expressly from the Court of Piedmont to Ratisbone, who solicited the matter with all earnestness, and by all such means as were to be expected from so dextrous, and capable a person.
The Duke had the Year before sent the Marquess of Lullin, a Cavalier of great Quality unto Vienna, with the Title of his Extraordinary Ambassa|dour, upon the same occasion, where he appeared with a numerous and splendid Retinue, suitable unto his own Generosity, and that of the Prince who sent him; but his Negotiations were fruitless, and met with some disgust, because besides his not prevailing in what he came for, the Emperour caused to be expunged from his Writings, the Title of Royal Highness, declaring, That it belonged solely unto him, to confer Titles upon the Princes of Christendome.
The Pretensions of Savoy in the Diet, were favoured by Monsieur de Vau|tort, Ambassadour Extraordinary unto his Christian Majestie, a Person

greatly experienced in the management of Affairs, and throughly acquaint|ed with the Interests of Germany; They were also countenanced by the Elector of Bavaria, newly allied with the House of Savoy, having contracted Marriage with the Princess Henrietta Adalaide, Sister of this Duke Charles Emmanuel, but what diligence soever was used, and what reasons soever were alledged, they could never bring it to a conclusion, it being ever put off, upon one pretence, or other, because the Emperour was diverted by the earnest solicitation and endeavours of the Duke of Mantua his Agent, who opposed it openly by reason of the prejudice it would bring unto his Master's Interests; to which was added the Affection his Majestie had for his Cousin, and the great care he took to satisfie the Empress Leonara Gonzaga, a Widow, the Duke's Aunt, who was a Princess of great Un|derstanding, and diverted him from coming to a determination in this Affair.
The Marriage of the Elector of Bavaria with this Princess of Savoy, was in the Year 1650, which was in the life-time of Duke Maximilian his Fa|ther, who died after in Septemb. 1651. in a good old age, with the Reputa|tion of being the greatest Politician, and the most Prudent and Pious Prince in our Age. He being a man of a most accomplished Experience, had not taken his Measures ill, in this Alliance with Savoy, and consequently with the King of France, to whom he had alwaies a particular inclination, fore|seeing with much Wisdome of what consequence in progress of time upon several Accidents the good correspondence with, and protection of the King of France, might be unto his House, who had alwaies a particular Esteem for the Elector.
The Count Maximilian Curtio, first Minister to his Electoral Highness, a Cavalier of Extraordinary Capacity, and replenished with all Good, and Virtuous Qualities, was he who passed into Piedmont with a Proud, and Sumptuous Equipage of Gentlemen, and Servants, to be the Proxie for the Marriage, who in the Year 1652. went also thither, to wait upon the Bride, and conduct her into Bavaria, where he arrived in Iune the same year.
This Princess parted from Turin the 16th of May, 1652, and was accom|panied by the Dutchess her Mother, the Duke her Brother, and all the Prin|cipal Persons of that Court to Moncallier, from thence by the way of Ast, and Alexandria, she came to Milan, being received with all due Respect  Honour, through all that State, and her hcarges defrayed by the King, the charge whereof was committed to Don Girolamo Stampo. Don Pietro Gonzales, Go|vernour of Alexandria, a Person of great Valour, met her upon the Borders with a Brave Retinue, and Treated her Splendidly in that City, whither came to Complement her in the Marquiss of Caracene his name, (himself being at that time engaged at the Siege of Trin) Don Gasparo de Thebes, Cap|tain of the said Marques his Guard: From Milan she went into the Terri|tory of the Venetians, where she was received upon the Confines by Anthonio Bernardi, Captain of Brescia, Royally served, and her Charges defrayed through all that State: From thence she continued her Voyage through Tiroll, where she was generally Treated by the Arch-Duke Charles Ferdi|nand; and in the Moneth of Iune following, came to Monaco, the Residence of his Electoral Highness, where she was received by the Elector her Spouse, with such tender Love and Affection, as is peculiar to one who had long wished for and expected her, and as was due to the Rare Beauties and Perfections of such a Princess.

When the Coronation of the King of the Romans was to be performed, the Emperour caused Notice to be given unto the French Ambassadour, That he might, if he pleased, be present at the Ceremony; but that in case he came, he must needs give the Precedency to the Ambassadour of Spain. Vautort an|swered, That as for coming thither he would do as he saw best; but as for the Precedence; he knew not any person who could take it from his King, who was un|doubtedly the first of Christendome. He forbore notwithstanding to go thi|ther, because he would not stand in an ill posture with the House of Austria, but might apply himself to those Affairs for which he came, which were to continue, and encrease the good intelligence between the States of the Em|pire, and the Crown of France, that he might be watchful to prevent all prejudice might come unto the Interests of that Crown, or its Friends and Confederates, by the Resolutions which should there be taken, to get the in|vestiture of the places held by the French in Alsatia, and to countenance the Interests of Savoy, in the investiture he pretended unto of the Towns in Monferrat, according to the before mentioned Treaty of Chierasco.
After the Coronation the Ambassadour Vautort going for Audience unto his Imperial-Majesty, he was received with shews of great Esteem, and cour|tesie, the Emperour excusing himself modestly, That he could not do other|wise. The Ambassadour replyed with all Civility to his Complements; but defended the Interests and Prerogative of his King, with all freedome, and boldness.
The Crown of Sweden sent to this Diet the young Count Oxenstern, with the Title of Ambassadour Extraordinary, to have the Investiture of the Towns of Pomerania, assigned unto the Swedes by the Treaty of Munster; but the Emperour refusing to receive him under that title, because he came to perform the Office of a Feudatary, some differences arose, which notwith|standing were after laid aside.
There were also in this Diet great Controversies between the Emperour, and the States, who set on foot a bold and a very distastful Pretension, which was, That they conceived there ought to be an Election of Iudges, who might Cen|sure and Iudge the Actions of the Emperours themselves, with power to revoke, and adnul all Decrees which they conceived to be contrary to Iustice, or the Consti|tution of the Municipal Lawes.
This Affair as it pressed hard upon the Emperour was very warmly impugned, and rejected, it being censured as an audacious boldness, to go about to prescribe Laws unto him, who had the power of making them.
The Contest was long, as being full of knotty Points, and tedious diffi|culties, and was solicited with great earnestness and fervour, by a person depending on the Emperour himself, who having had a Judgment passed against him before his Majestie, feared he should not be able to find a good dispatch hereafter of his Causes there; but the Endeavours and Artifices of those who laboured therein, found such opposition, that the Pretenders were finally inforced to give it over, without being able to make a farther pro|gress in it.
At this Meeting the Marquess of Castle Rodrigo, Ambassadour from the Catholick King, a Person of great Virtue, and deep foresight, managed di|vers things advantageous to the Interests of his Master.
He endeavoured by all means to engage his Imperial Majesty in some Treaty with the Count d' Hrcourt; who was in Brisac, being upon ill terms with the Court of France, to gain out of his hands that most Important Fortress, which he said was the Gate by which the French might at their plea|sure pass the Rhine, and come into the heart of Germany; and a Key which would

keep them shut up in their own bounds. That France shook hands, by means thereof, with the States, Princes of the Empire, and Protestant Cantons their Friends, so as the Circles of the Empire having alwayes at hand, the assistance which upon all occasions they might draw from that united Kingdome, so well armed, would by consequence swell with such high Pretensions, as must necessarily either disturb the Publick Quiet, or much weaken and eclipse the Imperial Autho|rity.
That Caesar being so highly concerned for the general Good, ought not to let slip an occasion presented him by Fortune, to regain by Art a Place which was never to be won by force of Arms.
He shewed farther, That Lorrain being beyond Burgundy, and Alsatia, (al|though the Duke should be restored by the General Peace) it would (instead of be|ing what it was formerly a Knot that united the Low-Countries with the Franche Comt, and the Austrian Countries) be rather a barr, and partition to continue them divided from each other; which was the greatest prejudice could happen to the Dominions of his Catholick Majesty, and of the whole House of Austria, whose weakness consisted principally in this, That their Countries being dis-joyned, they could not without great difficulty, communicate those Succours to each other, which are necessary for their subsistence in time of Warr.
Besides, that the French being freed from all Iealousies on that side, would with more confidence employ their whole strength in other places.
But all his Endeavours were without effect, as well by reason of the noble disposition of the Emperour, who was resolved to observe inviolably the Peace of Munster, as of the Ingenuity of Harecourt, who would never give ear unto the Propositions reiterated to him from the Spaniards, who used their utmost endeavour to make him enter into a Treaty with them, by their own, and by the Duke of Lorrain's means, whom they made sensible what advantage the dislodging of the French out of Alsatia, would be unto the Interests of his House; and particularly out of Brisac, which would alwayes be a bridle upon Lorrain, if he should hereafter recover it by any Treaty. But Harecourt preferring his Honour, and Reputation, be|fore all other advantages that might befal him; although he might per|haps give ear unto some Propositions, and Invitations to a Treaty, re|fused notwithstanding to enter into any, or to negotiate touching this Affair.
Castle Rodrigo sped notwithstanding well touching the Imprisonment of Charles Duke of Lorrain; with whom the Spaniards were ill satisfied, because they found not in his actions, that correspondence which they expected from his gratitude.
They represented therefore to his Imperial Majestie, That the said Duke was not sincere, and cordial in his union with Spain; that he held private Intel|ligence with the Court of France, retarded with the difficulties he cast the execu|tion of those Enterprises, which had been well designed; That being altogether in|tent upon his own particular advantage, he had ill treated the Subjects, ruined the Countrey, exasperated the Neighbours, and caused every where a huge aversion, and hatred, not onely against his own Forces, but also against those of his Catho|lick Majesty, who being united with the Lorrainers, had their share also in the Countries Curses; so as they were in a continual apprehension, that he joyn|ing with the French would bring an inevitable prejudice upon his Majestie's Affairs in Flanders; or if he were still let alone, would put the People in despera|tion.
The Emperour at last perswaded by these Reasons, and assured that this aversion was not unto the House of Lorrain, but onely to the person of the

Duke, by reason of his deportments, gave his consent that he should be Ar|rested, and writ about it into Spain, where a while after the resolution was taken to secure themselves of his person; but in such manner, as that the same might be dextrously put in execution, for avoiding of those Inconve|niencies might happen by so scandalous and unexpected an Accident, where|of we shall hereafter Treat more at large, and give relation of the most Re|markable Passages in that Action.
The End of the Ninth Book.



THE HISTORY OF FRANCE. The TENTH BOOK.

The CONTENTS.
The Cardinal Mazarine returns to Paris; Is Received with great Applause: There followes a distribution of several Imployments, and particularly that of the Great Almoner of France unto Cardinal Antonio Barberini. Great Prepa|rations are made for Warr. The Cardinal Francis Barberini declares himself no Friend to Mazarine: Gives order to his Nephews to leave France; and Marries Don Maffeo to a little Neece of Pope Innocent the 10th. Several Encounters passe in Flanders, wherein the Prince of Conde's Forces are wor|sted; Monsieur Croissy Fouquet is taken Prisoner. The Count Quinc goes to Command the French Forces in Piedmont. The Savoy Ambassadour is received in France with the Ceremony due to Soveraign Princes. Monsieur de Plessis Besanc~on is sent by the King of France into Italy; And his Negotiati|ons with the Duke of Mantua, and other Italian Princes. The Count d'Ognon agrees with the Court; And the Count d'Harcourt submits unto his Majestie's Obedience, after several Treaties. The French Army under the Command of the Marquiss Plessis Balliere, marches into Catalonia, succours Roses, and makes divers Progresses. Gironne besieged by the French, is relieved by the Spaniard. The Mareschal d'Oquincourt is sent to Command the Forces in Catalonia; And his Marches. The Warre in Guienne continues. The Bur|delois have recourse to England for Relief, but without effect. The King's Forces make a progress in that Province. Preparations are made in Spain to Relieve it: New Divisions, and Factions spring up in Bourdeaux, upon seve|ral Designs, and Interests. Many of the French do quit the Prince of Conde's Party. The City of Paris Entertains the Cardinal Mazarine with demonstra|tions of Affection, and Treats him splendidly in the Town-House. Bellagarda besieged, and taken by the Duke of Espernon. The French Army marches into the Field, and takes Rhetel. That of Spain also marches out with Powerful Forces; Enters France; Is waited on by the French: They Encamp for some time with various Success Some Conspiracies in Bourdeaux are discovered. New Recruits are sent from Court into Guienne; and the King's Forces take Bourg, Libourn, and other places, and straighten Burdeaux, the Citizens where|of make meetings amongst themselves, and desire Peace; There grow some Tu|mults,

which are quieted by the Prince of Conty. The Treaties are revived; Difficulties are cast in; The Propositions of both Parties are debated severally, and at last the Peace ensues. The Spanish Fleet comes into the mouth of the Garonne, and hearing of the Peace concluded, cast Anchor, and proceed no far|ther. The Princess of Conde, and the Duke of Anguien, with their Dome|sti, take Shipig, and o for Flanders.The Dukes of Vendosme and Can|da enter into ourdeaux: Several Places in Guienne return to his Maje|stie's Obedience. The Marches and Encampings of both Armies, upon the Frontiers of France, and Occurrences happening between the Parties: The Spaniards besiege Rocroy, and the French, Monson, and both the one and the other Town are taken. The Treaty between the Court and Cardinal de Retz is revived, but he refuses all terms of Agreement. A Plot against Cardinal Ma|zarine is discovered, and the persons guilty are taken, and condemned to death. The Mareschal Granc goes to Command the French Army in Piedmont, there is a great Fight between the Armies at Rochetta del Tanaro. The Spanish Fleet leaves the Seas of Guienne, and returns into Biscay without effecting of their purpose. The Siege and taking of Saint Menhaud: The Motions of Car|dinal Mazarine. The Prince Marries the Countess Martinozzi, Niece to the Cardinal. The Imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain. The Treaties of the French with the Protector Cromwell, the Duke of Mantua, and the Duke of Modena. The secret Negotiations about the Duke of Guise his going into the Kingdome of Naples.

THE Cardinal Mazarine came into Paris upon the Third of February, about Two  clock in the Afternoon, Honoured by the King himself, the Duke of Anjo, and all the Court, who went to meet him two Leagues out of the City.
His Majesty received him with extraordinary tenderness of Affection, took him into his own Coach, and entred by the Port of San Deny, through a great throng of People, and brought him along with himself into the Louvre, where his Lodgings were provided (as being first Minister of State) near to his Majesty, where he was forthwith Visited by the Body of the City, and by all the other Orders, and Magistrates, who acknowledging to have re|ceived by his means singular Benefits, and that all France was highly obli|ged unto him for his Conduct, testified the Content they took at his Fortu|nate Return. It was notwithstanding thought by many, That by how much the greater shews of Love were made outwardly, so much the less was the Affection which was really born unto him; there being no hatred so intense and dangerous, as that which shrouds it self under the mask of simulation. But I who have with an exact diligence and long experience, endeavoured to instruct my self in the Nature of those Persons of whom I write, may to the glory of France say, I have not met with any People less given to dis|sembling than they are, who being open and free of speech, as they think little of what is past, so they consider nothing of what's to come; all their Faculties being wholly taken up with intending onely the instant of the pre|sent time. Whosoever therefore shall consider the Injuries and Scorns, which were in September before done to the Cardinal's Name, and Memory, in Paris, and what were now the Honours, and Welcome which he received there in February following, will know, this only can be said, That the Price of 50000 Crowns set on his head, and all the Scorns and Contempts cast upon his Reputation, were onely the Effects of a Passion, which being wisely dis|sembled by this Cardinal, served afterwards to let them see his good, and just Intentions, and made him at last triumphant overall his Persecutions, and rendred his Ministry Glorious to all Posterity.
The same Night his Majesty kept him to Supper with himself, in the Lodg|ings of the Mareschal de Villeroy; that Night were many Bone-fires made, and the next day as he returned from Mass, he cast some Money amongst the people, as he had done the day before upon the way in the Countrey as he passed along: And the Visits which he received from the Grandees at Court and other particular Persons of all Orders and Conditions, being over, he betook himself unto the management of the Affairs of the Crown. The same day there came to Paris also his three Neeces, who had been alwayes with him, who were also met out of the Port of St. Honor, by the Princess of Carignan, the Marshal of Guebran his Lady, the Marchioness of Ampous, and several other Ladies of Quality. These Ladies were also Lodged in the Louvre, in a Quarter apart over the Queens Lodgings.
The King since his return had not done any thing in the distribution of Offices, and Charges, either Ecclesiastical, or Secular, (although many were void, and there were a great number of pretenders) being desirous to expect the Cardinal's coming, and to give him the Honour of disposing them, as he who was best informed of each man's merit; whereby he made himself also to be much more observed, whilest every man being in hope to be rewarded according to his merit, became more ready, and careful, in the Service of his Majesty,
He had notwithstanding of himself passed the Edicts for New Impositions, and done all other things which were like to prove displeasing to the People, because (had it been done after the Cardinal's Return) it might seem to have been done at his sollicitation, whereby those Crimes would have been afresh imputed to him; whereof he had formerly, though without cause, been esteemed guilty. But there remaining unto him now by the special Favour of his Majesty, the disposition of the Church Benefices, and divers other Offices, and Charges of the Court, and Kingdome, he began presently to make a distribution of them, among such persons as he esteemed best deser|ving, and fittest for the Imployments; reserving notwithstanding a good part of them undisposed, that he might keep up the hopes of such as were for the present disappointed of Imployments.
To the Count Servient, who was a Minister of State of great Wisdome, well deserving of the Crown, and most Affectionate to his Majestie's Ser|vice, in which he was grown old, having spent his time in the manage|ment of sundry Charges to the advantage of the Publick, he gave the Office of super-Intendant over the Finances, vacant by the death of the Marquiss of Vienville, with whom was joyned Monsieur Fouquet, Procureur General, who was also made Minister of State; a Person of great Merit for his conti|nued Loyalty to his Majesty, to whom upon all occasions (and particularly in the Translation of the Parliament to Pontoise) he ad rendred very par|ticular Service, so as there was then seen at the same time two super-Inten|dants of the Finances, as there was also a Chancellor, and a Keeper of the Great Seal, a thing seldome practised, although the like hath been before du|ring the Ministry of the Cardinal Richelieu.
To these Super-Intendants, were also added four Intendants of the Finan|ces, who were the Monsieurs Paget, Boisleue, Housset, and Brisaccier, he took also good order for payment of the King's Revenues, to the great ease, and satisfaction of the Farmers of them.
Cardinal Anthonio Barberini coming about that time to Paris, the Dignity of Great Almoner of France, vacant by the death of Cardinal Richelieu, Archbishop of Lions, was conferred upon him by the means of Mazarine, who endeavoured to give testimony of his gratitude, and to oblige him more strictly to the Crown, as conceiving his protection in Rome, necessary unto

the Interests of France; the Cardinal Francisco his Brother being accounted averse to them, by whom ill offices had been then lately done unto his Ma|jesty by Letters, censuring the Conduct, and direction of Affairs.
It was reported in Court, That this change in Cardinal Barberini, was be|cause he was gained by the Pope, and Spaniard, upon the hope of restoring to him the Profits of the Ecclesiastical Benefices of Naples, and Sicily, and the Money sequestred in Rome, when the Pope pretended by calling him to ac|count, to undo the House of Barberini.
That which moved the Pope to a re-union with the Barberins, was, because having not long to live, he thought not fit to leave a lasting Feud between his own Relations, and that Family, which was still powerful in Rome; and the Spaniards also desired the same, that they might take off the dependence of that Family upon France, and find no opposition from them, upon the Election of a new Pope.
The Cardinal Francisco therefore being transported with this hope, be|cause he had no other pretext, made use of this, That he had been neglected in France, the Cardinal Mazarine having married his own Niece to the Duke Mer|coeur, without concerning himself to find a party for his Niece, as he might have done; And seeming to resent this highly, he commanded the Abbot his Nephew, who was at Lions, to take away privately the Prince Praefect and all his Family from thence, causing them to retire into Italy near Vin|cenza; and this he did whilest Cardinal Anthonio was in Paris, without gi|ving him the least notice of it.
This sudden Resolution appeared strange in France, and the rather, be|cause there had been alwaies a good intelligence between that Baberini and Cardinal Mazarine, unto whom he had proposed some years before the Marriage of one of his Nieces, Colonel Vaini her Cousin being sent into France about it, and the thing had been agreed by his Majestie's consent, and Writings drawn up touching the Marriage.
After this Reconciliation of Cardinal Barberini with the Pope, that this Union with that House might be more firm, there was a Marriage concluded between Don Maffeo Barberini, then the Abbot, and a little Niece of the Pope, in consideration of which Marriage the Prince Prefetto was promoted to be Cardinal, and renounced the Inheritance unto his said Brother the Bride|groom.
The Bishoprick of Poictiers, worth about 30000 Crowns yearly, was also given to the said Cardinal Anthonio, the same being void by the death of Monsieur Rocheposay an Excellent Prelate who had enjoyed that Dignity 40 years; and had in two important occasions preserved that Countrey to the King, himself with a halfe Pike in hand followed by the people, who were much devoted  him, standing in opposition to the Nobility, who in the former Wars had taken Arms for the Queen-Mother of the late King, and intended to seize upon that great City, as is written in the History of those times, and now at last shewed a great Loyalty in preserving it by his gene|rous Actions for his Majesty; as also did the Marquiss his Nephew, who was Lieutenant General of Poictou, who without any regard of the Expence, went to meet, and serve the King, when he came into that Province with a good number of Gentlemen, and kept open house for the Court two moneths together.
The Bishop had another Nephew, an Abbot, Brother to the Marquiss, a person replete with virtuous qualities, it was great reason that for the me|rits of the Brother, of the whole Family, and for those also of the Abbot him|self, that Dignity should have been conferred upon him, and the Court esteeming likewise that 'twas just intended to gratifie him with it: But in

Governments it happens often, that Princes, and their Ministers, are by emer|gent occasions enforced to prefer Publick Interest; before the satisfaction of private persons; and the Abbot, after the hopes given him thereof, for a year and a half, was at last excluded, without the least cause on his part gi|ven for his being deprived of it: The Abbot notwithstanding acquiesced without resentment unto the King and Cardinal's pleasure, preferring his Majestie's Satisfaction before any particular concernments of his own; and that no suspicion might be had that he intended to engage himself amongst the Malecontents, retired himself, and went to make his residence in Rome; comforted in this, That both his merit, and the wrong done to him, were publickly notorious. The Cardinal Anthonio being informed of the great Worth of the Abbot, condoled with him, and by an Act suitable unto the generosity of his nature, declared a readiness to make a resignation thereof to him; but he with a greatness of mind equal to such an offer, returned him thanks, and refused to accept of it; And with Patience, which is the Scene of all the Virtues, considered, that the Favours of Princes though slow, are like the soft and gentle motion of benign Planets, which fail not in due season to communicate their influences unto the bodies which they govern.
The Archbishoprick of Lions was given to Monsieur Villeroy, Brother to the Mareschal of France, a Person of Eminent, and singular Parts: Of many other Ecclesiastical Benefices, and Abbeys which were void, Mazarine (though he gave promises to several) yet refused to dispose any, that he might keep all in hopes, and consequently make them more obsequious, and that he might be alwaies master of something, whereby to reward and gra|tifie those, who should best serve him to his satisfaction; which was a thing very ill taken by divers, who thinking they had sufficiently merited by their long patience, could not without much trouble suffer this delay, and exclaiming against this Maxime, said, The Cardinal was like him, who gve not the Medicine till the Patient was dead. The Duke of Guise, and the Mareschals de Turenne, and Grammont, were about the same time made Ministers of State, as well in reward of their Services, as for their great Capacities, and Wise|dome.
And now the King leaving the Reins of the Government wholly unto the Cardinal's management, to avoid Idleness gave himself unto those sprightly Exercises, which are commonly most suitable unto the Lively Chearfulness of Generous Youth; that was unto a wondrous Ball, danced often by his Majesty, and several other great Cavaliers, with general Applause, and Commendation, in the great Hall of the Petit Bourbon, excellently set out, and adorned by Scenes, and Machines, invented by Giacomo Torrelli an Ita|lian, his Majestie's Engineer, to which being very much assisted therein by Signior Ascunio Amaltei, a famous Priest; it was danced the first time upon the 23. of February at Night, in presence of the Queen; of all the Princes, Princesses, Grandees of the Court, and Ministers of Forain Princes.
It was divided into four parts, or nights, wherein there were Forty three Acts, or changes, all of them so extreamly splendid, both for the novelty of what was represented, the goodness of the matter therein recited, the Sumptuous Magnificence of the Cloaths, and Gracefulness of all the persons who acted in it; that the Spectators had been at a stand unto which they should have attributed most of Gallantry, had not the King like to a Radiant Sun behind a Cloud, from the disguise of those Habits, shot forth such Rayes of his Majestick Looks, and graceful Action, as dazeling the Eyes of all, en|forced them with just reason to acknowledge, that there was none could equal the Grace, or Majesty of his deportment.
In the beginning of the Action fire catched accidentally upon the Hang|ings which were before the entrance on the Stage, and was like to have disturbed, and confounded the whole order of it, but the fearless Courage of his Majestie, and care of those who had charge of ordering things, resto|red all forthwith to its pristine quiet; And this was taken for a Presage of what should follow; like to the Auguries of the Assyrians and Persians, who regulated all their Enterprises, by the Omens gathered from that Element.
Truly those who made this Observation were not deceived, because the day before that very night, the Count Beauvais Lieutenant General of his Majestie's Forces in Champaigne, having notice that the Prince of Conde being come to Stenay, had lodged about 1400 Horse and Foot in the Village of Therme, marched thither privately, and about an hour after midnight, fell upon them with so much fury, that more than 300 Foot and 200 Horse were taken prisoners, and the rest with the Count de Briol, Commander, by the darkness of the night made shift to disperse, and get away.
This good Military Rencounter was attended by another Fortunate Suc|cess in Civil Matters, of no slight consequence, which was, the Commit|ment of Monsieur Croissy Fouquet, a Counsellour of Parliament, one of the Prince of Conde's part, and who had been a great Stickler amongst the Fa|ction des Frondeurs, which was raised against the Cardinal. He was taken in Paris, not so much because he was a banished person, as for holding pri|vate intelligence with the Prince of Conde, and because he had made use of a pretended Pass from Court, to Treat, and Advertise him what passed, and manage a new Cabal with those of the Prince's party. He had alwaies shewed himself a bitter Enemy of the Cardinal's; and it being thought a matter of importance unto the settlement of his Majestie's Authority, that some ex|ample should be made, and especially of some Member of Parliament, there was a resolution taken to make his Process. Upon which he desired to be brought from the Bois de Vincennes, unto the Bastile, where he thought the Parliament (amongst whom he had much credit, and many Friends) would favour him; there were assigned Commissaries for judging of him, and the Monsieurs de Lsco, and Bison, were appointed to draw his Process; but he continuing firm not to answer elsewhere but in Parliament, necessitated the Court to condemn him as a Mute; which being a thing extraordinary in France, and that which was against him being onely grounded upon con|jecture, against which he made good defence, made them resolve to remand his Process to the Parliament, either because he might answer before his natural Judges; or because the Cardinal being of a sweet Nature, was loth to put things to extremity; in vertue whereof the Chancellor, and first Pre|sident having sent for, and examined him, and finding that there was more of suspition than proof against him, upon the Report they made thereof un|to the Cardinal, and by reason of the continual instances made by Croissy, That he might be judged by the Parliament, it was resolved to free him, upon condition he should remain in Italy, until the Prince had made his Peace, or that the King should recal him. This Example above all shewed the Cardi|nal's moderation, there having been no person of the whole Party, who had more violently acted against him. Monsieur Courtin, a Maistre de Requeste, was also at the same time imprisoned as a Complice, and Friend unto Croissy, but defending himself with Wit, and Spirit, was released.
There were also taken prisoners in Champaigne upon the Road to Paris, the Monsieurs de Vineuil, and Ioly, with forged Passes, accused for going to Pa|ris with Letters of Credence and Instrctions, to form some new Party against his Majestie's Service, to scatter Libels defamatory against the Court, and his Government, to raise Sedition amongst the People, and to engage the Friends

and Kindred of the Cardinal de Retz, into the Prince of Conde's Faction; and also with other Dispatches, containing the wayes they were to use for Treating to this purpose, as well within as without the Kingdome. They were strictly kept, and their Release absolutely denyed unto the Prince of Conde, and the Commanders of the Spanish Army, who pretended they were Prisoners of Warr, and as such required them from Count Vaubecour, Governour of Cha|lons, threatning to use the same Treatment to others, as was shewed to them. The King denied absolutely to give allowance to those Protests, declared their Crimes, and shewed, That Rebels could never be comprehended amongst the number of prisoners of Warr; that therefore if any breach of Quarter should be offered unto those Prisoners which the Spaniards had in their hands, it should be corresponded unto in the same terms, against those of their Party who were Prisoners with his Majestie.
There were also several other persons of inferiour Rank seised, who against the King's Edicts took the boldness of coming into Paris, being of the Prince's Party.
The Preparations for the next Campagne were after made, and divers Sums of Money were delivered by the Cardinal to Colonels, and Captains of the old Troops for Recruits, and to others for new Levies; he thought fit also to have a Strength of German Horse, and gave the Care thereof unto the Count Neunteil, Monsieur de Milet, Contery, and others, who went for that purpose into Germany, as was also done in the Country of Lige, by th Counts of Grand Pre, and Beauvais.
And forasmuch as Piedmont seemed to be much threatned by the loss of Casal, and the Preparations for Warr made by the Spaniard in the State of Milan, where they expected several Recruits of Souldiers, both from Naples, and Germany, the Duke of Savoy therefore reiterated his Dsies, That he might either be assisted by a considerable strength of Souldiers, or permitted to agree upon a Neutrality with Spain: There were therefore sent from the Court of France into Piedmont, 4500 Foot,  1500 Horse, who passed happily in May unto Annore for the recruit of the Count de Quinc, Commander General of the French Forces in those Parts, there being no Mareschal of France sent to Command them.
And in regard the Spaniards continued still their Negotiations begun long before in the Court of Savoy, either to gain them to their party, or at least to perswade them unto a Neutrality, upon Terms very advantageous which they proposed, some Minister of Piedmont seeming to be well inclined thereto; his Majesty therefore dispatched Monsieur au Plessis Besanzon, Lieutenant Gene|ral of his Army, a Person of great Understanding, and profound Judgment, unto the Princes of Italy with the Title of his Envoy, to Treat upon all Affairs and Concernments in those Countries.
Besanzon taking leave of their Majesties, and the Cardinal, (who were then at Fountain Bleau) in the beginning of May, went forthwith unto Turin, where having first assured the Duke of his Majesty's intentions to maintain the Treaty at Chierasco, and to protect alwayes that State with the speedy supply of a strength of Souldiers, and Considerable Officers; He went after unto Casal, where the Duke of Mantua then was, where being received with such Honours as are due to such as are Ambassadours, he reduced his Negotiation unto two Heads; The One, That his Majesty should be satisfied touching the In|terest of Casal, so as that Town might not either by surprise, exchange, or otherwise howsoever, come into the Spaniards hands. And the other, Touching the Inte|rests which the Ministers of Spain, under the Duke of Mantua's Name, might have against Monferrat held by Savoy, the King being ready to pay effectively the Sum contained in the Treaty of Chierasco, on behalf of the House of Savoy.
The Duke answered unto these Propositions, That he acknowledged this come|ing of Monsieur Du Plessis, as a particular Favour to him, being a Person in whom he should confide, who as a Prudent Man, being informed of the necessity which had obliged him to get into the possession of his Towns, and being satisfied that no Acci|dent whatsoever should alter him from that Devotion which by reason of infinite tyes, and obligations, he professed towards his Christian Majesty, would also, as he hoped, be so kind to him, as to perswade his Majesty, That with the hazard of his Life, and Fortunes, and that also of all his Subjects, he would maintain the possession of those his Towns, against the Spaniards, and all other persons whatsoever.
That although perhaps the Money for maintenance of the Garrison might come out of the King of Spain's Purse, that yet he neither could, nor did acknowledge it from any other hands, than those of the Empresses his Aunt, and Sister, under whose authority the Treaty was concluded.
That as soon as ever he should be again possessor of that part of the Countrey which with too pparant an Injustice was kept from him by the Savoyard, and that he could freely make use of those Rents, as formerly he had done, without being prejudiced by that Treaty, against which he had so often protested as a thing never approved of by the House of Mantua, he would then maintain the Garrison, without assistance from any other, and therefore he conceived that for the accomplishment thereof, it were more proper to send unto the Court of Savoy, and imploy his Majestie's Authority with them, That they should without contradiction restore what they withheld, which h desi  alwayes to obtain rather by friendly means then by the way of force, where|by the Peace of Italy (a thing so much at all times desired, and endeavoured by the House of Mantua) might be preserved; it being very clear by what had passed, unto any that shall make impartial reflexions thereupon, who had been the disturbers of it. That the Sm offered could not be accepted, the Treaty not being consented un|to a aforesaid; and although those Articles should have been binding, yet they were then to have been performed when the places had not been enjoyed by Savoy, and not now when the Mean Profits of those places have been so long enjoyed by them, without account.
Monsieur du Plessis had already declared unto the Duke, and the Marquiss de La Vll his principal Minister, That satisfaction could not be given to France, otherwise then by putting Casal and Monferrat in the same condition they were in before his Highness had made use of the Spaniard to cause the French to quit the possession of it; but having found by the Answers he had received, as well by word of mouth, as writing, that 'twas a thing not to be hoped for, and conceiving that it might be a sufficient satisfaction to his Majesty (consi|dering the importance of the place) that it should be well fortified and pro|vided of an ordinary Garrison, that might be of a Nation, whose interest it was that the Spaniard might not upon any pretence whatsoever be let in there; he resolved to try what might be done, and proposed, That for the effecting this, a Garrison should be placed there, the one moyety of the Duke's Subjects, and the other moyety of Swisses, drawn from the Catholick Can|tons, to be under his Highnesse's Authority and Command, to be paid the one moyety by the Christian King, and the other by the other Princes and Potentates of Italy, his Confederates, who were also interessed in the Affair, under such reasonable conditions as should be adjusted, that the Duke might be at no expence, till the General Peace between the Crowns were conclu|ded, and yet not be enforced to take money from the Spaniard, a thing ill taken by those who had so oft maintained the Town against them, which might give occasion of many inconveniencies, absolutely contrary unto the quiet of his Subjects.
There was at the same time with the Duke Monsieur Iean Coxens, Secre|tary unto the Empress his Aunt, who came post, sent thither expresly by both the Empresses, to have an eye unto these Treaties.
The Duke having communicated this Proposition unto that person, he protested, That both his Aunt, and Sister, would have great occasion to complain, should be hearken to it; because they being obliged by promise unto his Catholick Majesty, that the Place should be alwayes kept free in the disposal of his Highness, and having thereupon procured from him a maintenance for the Garrison, there should be so little credit given to them, who were so much concerned for the main|tenance of his House, and States, the Interests whereof they had espoused alwayes as their own; and it would also be ill taken, that whilest his Highness desired the In|vestiture of Monferrat from the Emperour, he should receive into the same a Gar|rison or Money from any other Prince, without his Imperial Majestie's know|ledge, and consent, especially having herein disgusted the said Empresses, his Aunt, and Sister.
The Answers therefore of the Duke stuck to this Point, That when his Countries which were unjustly detained from him by Savoy, should be restored, he should then be able out of those Revenues, without any others assistance to secure himself, and keep those his Towns; and this being a thing well known to Monsieur Du Plessis, he doubted not but he would in his great Iudgment, upon consideration approve it, as the best Expedient, and represent it favourably to his Majesty, with the assurance of his most humble duty and respects, which he was resolved to pre|serve alwayes inviolably towards him.
This Answer gave no satisfaction to Du Plessis, who perceiving the effect of his Propositions to be desperate, after he had received many Honours, and demonstrations of Respect towards his Person, parted from Casal, refusing those Presents which the Duke's Generosity had destined for him, and re|turned unto Turin, from whence he gave account of his Negotiations to the King his Master; thence he went to Genoua, where he Negotiated with that Republick, unto their mutual satisfaction, from thence he took his way to Parma, and Modena, with the like success, and at last came to Venice upon the 24th of Iuly.
The substance of his Negotiations was to let those Princes understand of what importance it was, to have Pignorol kept in the French hands, that the Treaty of Chierasco should be observed, and that the Duke of Mantua should be forced to give satisfaction unto his Christian Majesty, touching the business of Casal, for avoiding of great stirres which might be much more dangerous to the quiet and liberty of Italy, when the King should be forced to march with his Forces into the heart of Lombardy, which he should other wise be absolutely forced to do.
The Command of the Army against the Spaniard in Flanders, was after|wards conferred upon the Mareschal Turenne, and the Marquiss d'Uelles, the Count Beauvais, and the Monsieurs Castlenau, and St. Mr, all Persons of great Experience, and high Repute, were appointed his Lieutenant Generals. There were sent under the Command of the Mareschal d'Oquincourt 7500 men, Horse and Foot, into Rousillon, and Catalonia, and the Count d' Ognon, being at last prevailed upon by the Bishop of Xantes, (a Person of Eminent Condition, and who had long before Treated with him): upon honourable and profitable Terms voluntarily quitted the Governments he held, as Lieu|tenant General to the Queen, in the Pais d' Aunais, the Isles of Oleron, and Rea, and the most Important Town of Brouges, receiving in lieu thereof the sum of 530000 Franks, and a Patent for Duke, Peer, and Mareschal of France.
This Cavalier's Mind was wrought upon by this discourse, that not being able to maintain himself, he must either put himself under the Protection of the Spaniard, or the English, or else return to the Obedience of his Ma|jesty.
Upon this consideration knowing well that he should at last become a prey to those who did support him, and being sensible that 'twas the part of a Wise man not to expect till he were brought unto necessity, he thought 'twas better to restore himself with safety to his Countrey, then expose himself unto the danger of a Precipice to the eternal dishonour of his Name, and Fa|mily.
The Lieutenancy of the said Governments were conferred by his Majestie upon Monsieur d' Estrade, a Person of known Experience and Loyalty; the Government of Brouges upon Monsieur de Champery; the Fort of Oleron up|on Monsieur de Saint Leonard; the Fort of Preda in the Isle of Oleron upon Monsieur de Louches, and the Towers of Rochel upon Monsieur d' Aunais, all of them the Cardinal's Confidents, to whose direction Fortune favourably corresponding, all things were thereby and by his own good Conduct so well ordered, that the effects which followed rendred all his Actions intirely commendable and praise-worthy.
They Negotiated also with the Count d' Harcourt to agree with him to deliver up Brisac, doubting that he might Treat with some Forraign Prince, and endanger thereby that most Important Place; but the Treaty being up|on the point of conclusion was interrupted, because whilest it was thought that Prince would content himself with the Government of Anjou, and the Fort of Fera, in exchange of his Command in Alsatia, he finding that they had some thoughts of Arresting the Prince of Armagnuc his eldest Son, who studied in Paris, caused him privately to withdraw thence, and come unto him to Brisac, which gave a stop to all Treaties, and renewed the former jea|lousies and distrusts of him.
It was then generally thought that Harcourt, being a Prince of great Va|lour, and having such a Fortress in his hands, would have driven things to an extremity, and taken his advantage upon agreeing with the Court, to have gotten the most that he could promise to himself for the restoring of it; but he did not, having a Mind too noble to stoop unto an Action which might shew want of Faith and Ingenuity, contenting himself with the payment of the Garrison, and his own security in that place, without making any other Proposition, though the first Treaty had been interrupted. The King's Councel on the other part did not much sollicit him, for several Reasons: The first was, Because they hoped that when he should want money, the Garrison being unpaid would revolt against him. The second, Because they would not engage themselves to Treat with him, till it appeared who was Master of the place, Charlevois being there, who gave sufficiently to under|stand that his Authority there was not absolute. And the third, Because knowing how great a Friend he was to his own Reputation, he would urely never undertake an Action which might lessen his Fame and Reputation, and therefore they thought not best to make a Treaty with Harcourt, lest they might have another to make with Charlevois. Which was the cause that when the Count renewed his Negotiation by the Baron de Milet, and the Abbot de la Charente, (who communicated all things with the Duke d' El|beuf, the Prince of Harcourt, the Duke d' Harpaion, the Marquiss d' Ampouz, and other Kindred and Friends) the Cardinal alwayes delayed the matter. Monsieur de Bess Captain of his Guard went to Brisac, upon pretence to conclude the Treaty, but instead of that (whereof he outwardly made shew) corrupted the Garrison of Philipsbourgh, into which Fort they suffered the Kings Troops to enter, publishing a thing very injurious to the Count his Loyalty, that they had done it, because the Count was in Treaty to sell it to the Duke of Lorrain; whereupon order was given to the King's Quer|ries not to receive his Orders any more, as Grand Escuyer of France; and

command was given to Mareschal de la Ferte Senneterre, to march with his Majestie's Forces into Alsatia, and make Warr against those Places which held for the Count, to enforce him unto those Capitulations which his Ma|jesty should think fit to grant him. The Mareschal besieged, and in a few daies took the Castle of Betford, defended valiantly by the Count de Susa, and gave notice unto the Count, That he should give up Brisac without other pre|tensions, and retire himself into his Government of Alsatia, or to Philipsbourgh, which should be restored unto him. Harecourt shewed himself willing to sub|mit unto his Majestie's pleasure, entred into a Treaty with the Mareschal, and accepted the Articles subscribed by him, the substance whereof was, That there should be paid unto him 40000 Doubloones, to pay Charlevois, and the Garrison of Brisac, and 10000 to himself, for a greater sum expended by him in maintaining the Garrisons of Brisac and Phillipsburgh.
This Treaty was by the Mareschal dispatch't away to Court to be ratified, and brought thither by Monsieur de Brinon his Nephew; but the Cardinal (being assured that the Count dHarcourt could not Treat with the Spaniard, as being not absolute Master of the place, and less with the Emperour, who would not listen to it, as well by reason of the 3000000 which France was to pay unto the Arch-Duke Charles Ferdinand of Inspurgh, granted by the Treaty of Munster, as because he would not give occasion unto the French to draw the Swedes again into Germany) refused to approve the Treaty made by the Mareschal; but the said de Brinon (and Monsieur Dautichamp (who had been sent along to Court by the Count for the said Ratification) were sent back with Orders to revoke all that had been granted, and Monsieur de Senneterre by the said de Brinon writ to the Mareschal his Son, That there was no cause for him to take offence at this disowning of his Articles, but he was to obey in all things.
The Mareschal observed punctually his Orders, and sent the said Brinon with his Letters of excuse unto the Count; letting him know, That his Ma|jesty had not approved the Treaty he had made; and that there remained therefore nothing to be done, but to submit unto his will, which was, That all things should be restored unto the former state; That he should forthwith give up Brisac into his hands, and that he would instantly advance into Alsatia, to reduce all those Places that should refuse to give Obedience. Harecourt at a news so unexpected was greatly troubled, and esteeming himself to be deluded, pretended that the Mareschal should make good his Parol to him, and upon that account kept Brinon prisoner; but it availed not, because the Mareschal caused Dautichamp to be forthwith Arrested in his return from Court, and sent Monsieur de Ca|stlenau his Lieutenant General to take in Tannes; Dautichamp seeing all his endeavours to be released fruitless, desired the Mareschal to consider him as a prisoner of Warr, and give him liberty upon his Parol; which being gran|ted, he continued his Journey towards Brisac, and came to Tannes at the same instant that Castlenau was about to attack the Suburb, which was trenched in, he wrote instantly unto the Mareschal, praying him that the Assault might be forborn; assuring him, That the Count d'Harcourt would command Mon|sieur de Grun, Governour of the place to open him the Gates. But the Mareschal taking it to be onely a delay for gaining time, gave order that they should give no farther time; whereupon the Suburb being taken by the King's Forces, and Castlenau having granted them a Truce till Dautichamp's return, who went with all diligence towards Brisac, and in his passage saw the Mareschal at Cernay, who made him hope for the continuance of that Truce until the 9th of March in the morning, that he might return from Brisac with an answer; but notwithstanding this the Truce was suddenly broken, and the Place vigorously assaulted: The Count d' Harcourt upon notice

hereof dispatcht presently Orders unto the said de Grun, to receive in the King's Forces without contest; which Orders Dautichamp sent away forth|with by a Souldier who went all night, and himself came thither the next morning: But the Mareschal not willing to receive from Harcourt a thing which he knew he could gain by himself, suffered them not to speak toge|ther, and so the City was Assaulted with great fury, Castlenau being hurt there with a Musket shot, and divers other Officers of either party.
The Governour trusting upon what had been treated with the Mareschal, coming out of the Town to discourse it with him, was made Prisoner, and the King's Souldiers entred the Town, plundered the Governour's own house, and himself was condemned to pay 3000 Dobloones to his great mor|tification and trouble, to have been betrayed under colour of the Publick Faith. Dautichamp having at last got to speak with the Mareschal, and the Regiment of Lorrain being brought into the Town, the Mareschal himself who at first had demanded onely the Town, and had (as the Count d' Har|court said) promised not to attack the Castle, demanded that should be also rendred, and gave onely four dayes time to the Commander, that he might have Count Harcourt's Orders, who that he might by this last Action take away all pretences could be made against the sincerity of his dealing, at the same time released Brinon, and sent back Dautichamp unto the Mareschal, and from thence to Court, to throw himself without reserve at his Majestie's Feet, declaring that he went to put himself into Phillipsbourgh, where he would expect his Majestie's Commands. And so this Prince quitted Brisac, and Charlevois, being at the same time satisfied what he had advanced, the Garrison was changed, and the said Monsieur de Besmenus was placed there as Commander, with other Officers depending entirely upon his Majestie.
This Action which succeeded just as the Cardinal (contrary to the opinion of many others) had foretold, much encreased the Reputation of his Mana|gery, and merits from the Crown. But the Cardinal declared notwith|standing unto the Duke d'Elbeuf, That he was sufficiently satisfied of the Count d'Harcourt's Ingenuity, and had him in the same Esteem as formerly; and that in case he would leave the care thereof to him, he would find a fit occasion to procure an entire satisfaction for the Count. The Court was well pleased with his re|spect, and the generosity of his proceedings; and his Enemies who had falsly slandered him with many imputations laid to his charge, were very much confounded and ashamed.
The Duke d' Anvil who a few dayes before had been banished the Court, was recalled, and restored unto his former degree of favour with his Majesty, and the Cardinal; he fell into this disgrace, because having promi|sed to surrender the Government of Limousin, destined to the Mareschal Tu|renne, for recompence of his Services, when it came to the point, he refu|sed, by the instigation of the Archbishop of Bourges, who suggested to him that he was not to quit it but upon other terms; whereupon the Court who were engaged unto Turenne, and could not let him want it without some shew of collusion, found themselves obliged to take this course as well to satisfie the Mareschal, as to let the Duke see how 'twas resented by his Majestie, which he perceiving, and performing what he promised, he was restored unto his former degree of Favour.
Whilest the Mareschal d'Hoquincourt was making preparation for his Voy|age into Catalonia, the meeting of the States of Languedoc was that Winter held at Pezenas, a City with a Castle situate upon the Point where the two Rivers of Peine and Erand do meet together, the Marquiss de Plessis Belliere was then quartered there, and finding the minds of that People, through the unhappi|ness of the Times, disposed rather to make Cabals, than contribute Money to

the King, did what possibly he could to make them sensible of their duty, and discovering at last, that the States would fall upon a resolution, not to give any thing unless the Troops were removed out of that Province, and knowing that the Money for accommodating of the Horse, and other things necessary for the provision of the Army in the Campagne, must be raised by what should be given by that Province, which would ail totally if they gave nothing, and that by consequence the Army would be disabled to march, he resolved to get into the Field, that something might be contributed to that purpose; which accordingly they did. He saw farther, that the Season of the year was advanced; and was informed, that there came unto the Spaniards Recruits of men from Italy; That the Enemies drew to a Rendezvouz; That they made preparation in Castile of Pieces of Battery, Powder, Bullet, Scaling Ladders, and all other Necessaries, and intended forthwith to besiege Roses; And believing that there would be no means of relieving it, in case they should finish their Line before his coming, he resolved to make a timely preparation for it.
He parted therefore from Pazenas the 25th of May, and advanced to Segean, and Rivesalta, where he made a halt, that he might draw together all his Troops, and to see what would be the last Resolution of the States; he knew well the importance of preserving Rossillon, to which purpose the Cardinal had written to him, and recommended that Province to his care, he therefore appointed Boulon for the general Rendezvouz of all the Troops, from whence he marched the 16th of Iune to pass the Hill of Pertus; his Army was com|posed of about 2500 Horse, and Three or four thousand Foot, all tried old Souldiers: That of the Spaniard was stronger by a Regiment of Foot, and was commanded by the Baron of Sabach, the Constable of Castile, and the Marquiss Serra, and it was therefore probably thought they would have opposed the French at that Pass; but they onely put a Guard in the Tower della Ionquiera, with a thought notwithstanding that the same would have stopped the French, until they might march up to charge them with advantage; but the Tower contrary to all expectation, yielded forthwith upon sight of two small Pieces of Canon, which the French had brought with them out of Rossillon; There they staid one day, to expect the Rear-Guard, and the Baggage, and from thence advanced into the Plain beyond Loustelnau: Plessis Belliere or|dered his Army into two Battails, having advice that the Enemy would ex|pect him towards Castillon; and to the end they might be stronger in the Field, they had burnt their Forts before Roses, and drawn the Garrison out of Feguieres. The French marched in good order towards the Spaniards, lea|ving Feguieres on their right hand; the Van-Guard saw the Spaniards in Bat|talia behind Castillon, covered by the Town, a Morasse, and by several Ditches and Cutts; but as soon as they saw Night draw near, and that the French Rear-Guard approached, the Baggage, and Foot marching behind with great diligence, they began to turn their backs, and by the benefit of the Night to retire, leaving in Castillon 1200 men, to hinder the advancing of the French.
The Marquiss of Blessis Belliere called then a Councel of Warr to consult what was fit to be resolved touching the pursuit of the Enemy; and it was resolved they should not follow him, because in a Country full of narrow Passes, as that was, 'twas not possible to fight him, unless he would himself and besides, the Provisions for the Army were not come, so as it would be necessary to retire back to have them, and would besides have much lessened their Reputation with the People, who are much guided by outward appea|rances, and whose Friendship was of great importance to them.
It was resolved therefore to take Castillon before they advanced farther, and to go on slowly, without ingaging themselves by their marches, where

they could not be followed by their Baggage, and in order thereunto, ha|ving brought two Pieces of Artillery from Roses, and viewed the place, they began forthwith to open a Trench, which was presently advanced to the Town-Ditch, notwithstanding the continual firing upon them by the Besieged.
Castillon is a Town invironed with a plain Wall, and a little dry Ditch; the Garrison consisted of Irish and Neapolitans, Commanded by Colonel Milon, who being made one of the Heads of the People of Naples in the late Revolution, had abandoned the Party; and put himself into the Spa|nish Service, where he gained great Reputation.
The Besieged made no Sally, because they had no Redoubts without to fa|vour them, but cast an infinite number of stones, which obliged the Assai|lants to make a Gallery over the Ditch, that they might with more security approach the Wall; where having in three days sunk a Mine in the corner of a Tower, the Besieged knowing the place was not longer to be defend|ed, made Articles, and were admitted unto an Honourable Capitulation, with a tye upon them to return into Spain by the way of Fontraby, being the farthest way about. The French found here six Pieces of Cannon, and 5000 pound of Powder, which came very seasonably to them, considering their present want, having ingaged themselves in this Enterprise, with a great scarcity of Ammunition. During this Siege, Plessis Belliere sent the Marquess de Bellefont with part of the Troops, to attaque Empouriers the Torne de Medas, and other little places, which were all yielded upon the same Terms with Castillon.
The French Commanders being informed before their entring into Cata|lonia, that the Irish were not well satisfied with the Spaniard, invited them unto their Party, and made them advantageous offers, which were accept|ed with a promise to come over with seven Regiments of that Nation, up|on the first occasion should be presented.
Notice was given during the Siege of Castillon to those within, that they should execute their promise; who answered, That they would not basely abandon the Spanish Service; that whilst they were in the Town, they would do their Duty like men of Honour, and when the Siege was over, they would make good their words; and so they did, assoon as they came to Rossillon, where they divided from the Neapolitans, and went into Quar|ters in the Daulphine, where they were forthwith followed by many others.
As soon as the Spaniards had quitted Castillon, Plessis Belliere renewed his Orders to all the neighbouring Villages, after the taking of Barcellona, to bring Victuals into Roses; and he gave farther Orders, that they should send in Workmen, to demolish the Forts built by the Spaniards about Rosa, and the Walls of Castillon, and left that charge with the Governour who remain|ed there, with a Regiment of Foot, and one of Horse, who having negle|cted the performance thereof, was severely punished. From thence (being informed that the Enemy was retired into Girone, and there intrenched) he marched thither without delay, with a resolution to fight them, he thought to march along the Coast, and put himself between the Enemies Camp and Barcellona; but finding it not practicable, he took along the River Fer, put|ting himself at the Head of the Forlorn-hope, that he might the better ob|serve the Enemy; where having discovered the Guard of Horse, which they kept at Ponte Maggiore, that was retiring towards Girone, the first Squadrons of the French leaving Ponte Maggiore on the left hand, and march|ing always up the River until they were beyond the City, found the Spa|nish Horse a forraging on the other side of the River, who were pre|sently

cast into Squadrons, and all the remainder of the Troops issuing out of Girone, and the Trenches with the Cannon, were drawn up into Bat|tailia, before the said Fortifications; and there whilst the Forlorn-hopes skirmished together on each side of the River, which was betwixt them, the French advanced, and drawing close together as they came up, disposed themselves to give a sudden charge upon the Spanish Army; whose Com|manders discovering the Enemies Design, drew back forthwith into their own Line, which was broad and deep enough, with a good Breast-work, flanked with four or five stone houses, and well lined with Musquettiers.
These Fortifications being regularly made, began at the Wall of an Hospi|tal in the Town, and ended at a Stream not foordable; Night in the mean time drew near, the greatest part of the Souldiers wanted Powder, and the Waggons which carried the little store they had, were not yet come up; not|withstanding which, the Souldiers shewed an earnest desire to fight, and Plessis Belliere (being unwilling to deny them that satisfaction) took with him all the Horse, and six hundred Musquetiers, and making each of them carry a Faggot, passed himself the River on the left hand, a little below the City, and the Marquess of Bellefond did the same 500 paces below that.
There were several other little cuts between the River and the Spanish Camp, so that it was midnight e're the Forlorn-hope of the Foot reached it, they found the Trench set with Maches, and drawing near knew that the Spaniards had abandoned it; Plessis Belliere sent them several little Parties upon all the ways to bring tidings of the Enemy, and the night being pas|sed over without making any discovery, the day at last discovered them up|on the Mountain behind the City.
The French had left their Baggage beyond the River with some Foot to guard it, and expect the Cannon. The Spaniards knowing it, made their Horse come down the Mountain, and passing through Girone thought to go and plunder it; but they missed of their Design, because as soon as they were seen to march that way, 7 or 8 Squadrons were forthwith sent to cross the Ri|ver; which caused the Spaniard to forbear the Attempt, and return unto the Mountain. The Baggage, Cannon, and remainder of the Foot being passed, the French encamped themselves in the open field, within half Cannot shot of the Town wall, with a Design to assault the Town, as soon as the Am|munition (which they expected from Narbonne) was come, that so in case the Enemy should put their Foot into Girone to defend it, they might at|taque the Mountain, and if they did it not, the Town might be with the more ease besieged and taken.
Girone is a great City, scituated upon the hanging of a Hill, encompassed with Walls, flanked with some little Towers, the Houses whereof served for Parapets unto that part of the River Fer, which glide on the right side of it; so as it would not be hard to take it if there were not in it a great Garri|son: The French were Masters of the Field, their Conveys came without danger, and in all Skirmishes and Encounters, which were frequent enough, the Spaniards always had the worst.
Belliere practised Intelligence by all the means he could; their Souldiers both Horse and Foot, came from time to time in good numbers to yield them|selves, so as the Officers themselves were forced very often to keep guard over their own Souldiers. The Irish had promised to come with their whole Companies into the French Service; the Besieged began already to suffer much, and some days were passed that the Horse had nothing to maintain them but the Grass and Weeds they got from the Parapet of the Town Walls.
The Spanish Generals perceiving that their Troops daily wasted, to preserve the said Mountain had built three Forts, and designed (as was gathered by

Letters which were intercepted) to pass a part of their Cavalry to Barcellon, to relieve them from their Sufferings there, and to joyn with the Army which the Constable of Castile was raising for the succour of Girone, so as the French were constrained to be extreamly vigilant, and to keep their Horse alwaies sadled in the Camp.
Whilest the Siege passed in this manner, Plessis Belliere Treated with the Inhabitants of San Feion, a little Town with a Castle indifferently strong, situate upon the Sea beyond Palamos, and Blanes; the Garrison whereof ha|ving no suspition of what happened kept not so good Watch as they ought to have done.
The Enterprise succeeded luckily, and Monsieur de Massarmes who was sent thither to effect it, took the Town, Castle and Garrison the 26th day of Iuly in the Night, he found there 7. Brass Pieces of Canon, and 4. of Iron, with some Ammunition, and for a complement of the good fortune, a Bark going to Barcellona loaded with divers Merchandises of value which lay there, was boarded before they heard the newes; and instead of Spaniards whom they expected, become a prey unto the French.
Things standing in this posture, the Mareschal d'Oquincourt taking leave at Coure went into Languedoc, where assembling the Souldiers appointed to serve under his Command, he provided to march, and joyn with the Army before Girone; Plessis Belliere as soon as he had notice of it, dispatched Mon|sieur de Rabaliere his Kinsman away to him, to complement him, and give him an account of what had passed in the Siege. He let him know the wnt there was of Powder, that it was necessary to send that which was to come unto Narbonne, and in the mean time to borrow a quantity from the Gover|nour of Perpignan, or Rose that in case he would force Girone; or continue the Siege, 'twas necessary to speed the Levies of the Catalonians in Rossillon and cause Monsieur Lochman his Regiment of Swisses which had stayed there to advance as also those of the Queen, of Anjou, and of Languedoc, who re|fused to march with the rest, by reason of the precedency challenged by those of Auvergne, who were in Conflans, under the Command of Monsieur de Tilly.
The Mareschal did what was desired of him by Belliere, he brought with him those Regiments who renewed their said Pretensions, and insisted so far upon them, that it was necessary to put all the Officers of Auvergne under Arrest upon that occasion, where they remained till Girone was relieved he brought 3000 pound weight of Powder from Perpignan, Belliere went to meet him, a League and half from the Camp, accompanied by all the prin|cipal Officers of the Army, and brought him thither upon the 27th of Iuly, informing him how all things stood. The Mareschal took the Command of all his Majestie's Forces in those Parts, and the Marquiss du Plessis Belliere fell sick of a continual Feaver, which enforced him to keep his bed for five weeks time.
Mean while the French being resolved upon the taking of Girone, battered the Walls, made a breach and tryed to gain it by Assault; but whether it were that the breach was not sufficiently large, or that the Parapets, and defences made to flank the Souldiers, were not well lined with Earth, o that those who were commanded upon the Assault, were wanting to their Duty in not following their Commanders, they failed in the Onset, and were forced to desist from any farther attempt, upon hopes that the besieged be|ing reduced unto necessity for want of Victuals, would of themselves yield; and in truth they were put unto the last extremity, when their relief began to appear, which entred into the Town upon the 24th of September, being Mules loaded with Corn upon that side of the Town which was of most

difficult access, where were placed the Sisses, and the Queens Regiment, se|conded by Monsieur Cariton's Regiment of Horse; who were no sooner charged by the Spaniard, but they fled, and thereby gave them opportunity to joyn with those of the City who allied out. The Mareschal was gone to visit certain Posts, where having notice that those Regiments were inga|ged, he went forthwith to relieve them, but coming thither he found his own men fled, and the enemy joyned. Plessis Belliere who had also notice of it, hastened thither, and meeting the Mareschal who gave him notice of the accident, and consulting together, they resolved to quit the Enterprise, which being to be forthwith executed, for avoyding loss of time, and of some difficulty; Oquincourt desired Belliere to take the charge thereof: In order whereunto he gave Orders forthwith unto his own Regiment of Foot, that of Poicto, and the Swisses, that they should keep the Posts which the French held at Pont Maggior, to facilitate their passage over the River; he caused afterwards the Army to march in good order, and pass the River to incamp at Madignan; as they advanced, and as soon as the Guard at Pont Maggior was drawn off, the Spaniards seised upon it, and the Constable of Castile drew about 400 horse over the River, and some Musquetiers, who placed themselves in the houses beyond the River: The Horse were no sooner drawn out into the field, but the French facing about, charg'd them so briskly, that they pursued them to the River side, taking a good number of them Prisoners; which defeat made the Enemy keep in his own bounds, and for|bear the farther following of the French.
From Madignan, Oquincourt marched to Barca, and the next morning being the 26th of September, he marched to the new Town of the Ampuries, where he sojourned some time to amass together all the Corn found there, and carry it to Roses, as he did, making every Company carry six Quarters of their Country measure.
After this having nothing more to do in the Countrey of Lampourdam, the Troops not being able longer to maintain themselves there, they made them pass the hill of Pertus upon the 28th of September, and leaving the Regi|ments of Anjou, Languedoc, Roquelare, Grammont, and Harcourt in Roses, they came unto Boulon, a place upon the River Tiech the 30th day, from whence the Mareschal sent his own men to quarter in Rossillon, and those of Plessis Belliere in Conflans.
All these Troops stayed in that little Country till the arrival of those of Guienne, Commanded by the Mareschal Marinville, and assoon as they were entred into Rossillon, Oquincourt resolved to pass a Convoy into Rosa.
He caused all things to be prepared for that purpose, and himself would have the conduct of it, together with all the General Officers, and the whole Militia, excepting only such as were thought necessary to be left for guard|ing of some Posts were to be maintained in Conflans: Upon the 29th of Octo|ber he passed the Mountain, and the next morning made the said Convoy enter into Rosa, and the French Army advancing, met the Spaniards near Loustelna in a bad posture; but because 'twas necessary to make haste that the Foot might pass the Mountain, they had the means to retire, the Mar|quess Marinville, who that day had the Van with his Troops of Guienne, followed them to Figuieres, from whence the Spaniards drew the Garrison; and the Inhabitants assoon as they saw Mariville's Troops, cried, Vive le France; the Garrison which also was in Castillon retired from thence in great disorder.
Upon the 6th of November, Plessis Belliere having the Vantguard, com|manded out 100 Horse to get Intelligence of the Enemies condition, by whom

having notice that they had discovered seven Squadrons of Spaniards, beyond the River towards Servia, Oquincourt being then with Belliere, they march|ed forthwith to the River side, where Belliere being acquainted with the Fords, by the Mareschal's Order passed, and marched after them, with so much swiftness and good success, that he came up to them, and fell upon their Rear, skirmishing with them till they came into Bourdilles, one of their Quar|ters, where they thought to make a stand, being seconded by those who were at that time in the Quarter; but being driven from it, and beaten unto an|other of their Quarters, and thence to Salt, which was their general Quar|ter, they made another stand by the assistance of the Troops there, but with the same ill success they had at first; being intirely routed and defeated, many being killed upon the place, and a number wounded, and taken Prisoners, all their Baggage, of the value of above 10000 Crowns lost, and their whole Army disordered, and in confusion; the French having only some few Souldiers hurt, and two Brothers of the Villavoir's Prisoners, who engaged themselves too far into a Troop of Officers, who were retreating owards Girone.
After this Noble and Famous Action, the French Troops lodged without disturbance in the same Quarters the Spaniards had taken up for themselves, and enlarged themselves something farther, that they might maintain themselves with more convenience, and for the longer time till the ar|rival of Monsien Picoy, who was expected from Court with the King's Orders for the French Armies Winter Quarters, and they staid thus about two Moneths in Lmpordam, the Spaniards not daring after the said Rout, to offer them the least disturbance, until at last about the 20th of De|cember Picoy came with the Winter Quarters, at which time the Mareschal held a Councel, where it was resolved to send the Army into Quarters.
Rosa was in the mean time furnished with all sorts of Victuals, and they transported thither whatsoever they could find in Lapordam. The 27th of December the French Army repassed the Mountain, and entring into Rossil|lon, the Mareschal gave Order to Plessis Belliere for quartering of his Troops, who having appointed them their Quarters, and sent them thither, took leave of the Mareschal to go to Court according to his Majestie's permission given him for so doing, and the Mareschal remained there to place the Soul|diers in their Quarters, and to make all such Provisions as he thought fi to be done, according to the Discipline of War.
Whilst these things were in Action, the Cardinal Mazarine was thinking upon the means which might be fittest for gaining of the discontented Spirits, rather by the way of gentleness than rigour, and yet neglected not to make Provisions as well of Mony, as Forces for continuance of the War, the Recruits of the old Troops, and raising new was not hard, because the Car|dinal's Credit prevailing with the men of War, beyond all other Interest, they imployed themselves with affection and diligence therein, that they might thereby make demonstration of their gratitude, and deserve his favour, a thing whereof the Souldiery (being infinitely obsequious and devoted to him) was most ambitious; by whose force he was after able to compass his de|signes, which (in spight of the contrary Opinion of those who envied him) took good effect, as will appear by that which follows.
The Cardinal's principal aim was to calm the Intestine Broyls, and re-unite the divided minds of all the French, wisely considering that all France be|ing at unity, and in obedience to the King, there was no Forreign Power whatsoever of Strangers was to be feared. He applied therefore his utmost diligence by Treaties, and Arms to reduce those of Guinne, not neglecting the Designes entertained with several Inhabitants of Bourdeaux, he gave Or|der, that before all things, they should block up the City from making use of

the Garonne, without which, it could neither receive supplies, nor continue its Commerce, and being harrassed by the King's Forces, 'twould in a short time be forced to yield without stroke strucken.
The Duke of Vandosme therefore having with his Majesties Fleet stopt up the mouth of the River, built Forts in the most important places, and dri|ven away the Prince's Forces from several Towns with the Land Forces; it was resolved in Council to publish a new Proclamation of Grace to those Ci|tizens, letting them know, That notwithstanding so many advantages, as rendred the Enterprize in manner certain, yet his Majestie's clemency was so great, that he was ready with open arms to receive them into his favour, who had with so much ingratitude risen against him.
This Act of Grace was published, and Registred in the Parliament, which was adjourned to Agen; upon occasion whereof many Assemblies were held, wherein the most moderate Persons spoke with great sense in favour of the Country, setting forth the prejudices it suffered, and the dangers in which these Subjects were involved, who upon the foundation of Forreign hopes, build up a structure of Contumacie, and Rebellion; but the incentive of Ambition were too powerful, and the rashness of the Common People incapa|ble of reason was too prevalent, so as they abandoned themselves to be wholly guided by presumption, and especially those of the Olmiera giving a sinister in|terpretation unto the counsels of good Citizens, terming those false who with the greatest candour, and strongest reason laboured for the Publick Good; and thereupon rejected all Advice and Counsel, and moreover threatned those who concurred not with them, and grew the prouder hereupon, as being gi|ven to understand that the Propositions made unto them, were not the effects of love and kindness, but were produced by fear and weakness.
The surest Props they thought to be those Promises made them by the Spaniard, who with Money and other Arts, had gained the Principal Persons of the Councils, and Factions; they thought also that the English would not ne|glect an occasion so favourable to them to advance their own Interests during the Divisions in France, by assisting that City which was establishing it self like another Rochel; they hoped the Prince of Conde with the Arms of Flanders would make an impression as far as Paris, and that he would make that way so powerful a diversion, as the King's Forces should be no more able to advance towards Bourdeaux, wherein the Princess, the Prince of Con|ty, and the Dutchess of Longueville by their presence gave some splendour of light unto the darkness wherewith they were overshadowed.
These considerations seemed likely, and the colours wherewith they were set out, were able to deceive a prudent eye, so as their obstinacie grew so obdurate, that 'twas thought difficult (if not impossible) to re-establish the King's Authority over that furious people, linked unto Spain, which omit|mitted no mean with the profuse expence of Gold to keep up that Party; that gave life unto their greatness. But for as much as particular Interests are generally preferred before the Publick, and those hopes which seem to flourish most in shew, fail oftnest in producing their effects; The Burdelois were disappointed in their expectations, and although they dispatcht Depu|ties to London to represent unto the Parliament, and General Cromwel, how important their subsistance was unto the Interests of England, and that the English well knew how much it concerned them to keep up the Divisions in France, and had also a will and desire to do it; yet were these reflexions so counterpoized by other considerations, that the regard to future things, had greater force to move them than the present.
The English had upon their hands a Warr with Holland, that tottering Go|vernment had not foundations strong enough to support a design of such im|portance;

and the consideration that by ruining France, the Power of Spain (most averse alwaies to their Religion) would be increased, made them know it suited not with the present state of things to break with France, which would be able (in that case) concluding a Peace with Spain, by the assistance of Holland, and intelligence with the English, (who obey that New Govern|ment onely because they want Power to oppose it) to bring their King Charles into the Kingdom, and let in amongst them those Confusions and Disorders which they endeavoured to produce amongst their Neighbours (in all pro|bability) unto their total ruine; so as they esteemed it better for them that the Discord between the two Crowns should be continued, that they might mutually weaken each other, than to turn onely against one of them, which could be no advantage to the English.
To these Reasons was added another Point of Policy, then a great Secret, and that was, The particular Design of Cromwell to reform that Government; which i the form it stood he knew could not continue, so as it was not fit to ingage in Forraign Quarrels, having occasion to make use of the Forces for himself, and to imploy his Thoughts in the first place about the stablishing of his own Dominion in those Kingdomes, full of Malecontents, of persons envious of his Fortune, and of people greedy of Novelties, so as he assured Monsieur Burdeu, who was then resident in London, from the Christian King, that he would preserve Peace, and good intelligence with France; The Burdelois notwithstanding did not totally despair of relief, being hopes given them that the Warr with the Hollander being ended, and a peace con|cluded with them which was now in Treaty, there should be some care taken of their Interests.
As for Spain, she did what possibly she could to keep up that advantage for her self, but the Indian Fleets, and other the Revenues of the Catholick King were not sufficient to satisfie so many Pretenders, and maintain War in so many places neither could his Kingdomes and Dominions exhausted of Men, furnish the Souldiers that were necessary, and therefore he was forced to move in England, for leave to raise some Irish, which was forthwith gran|ted, thereby to purge the Countrey from Catholicks, and persons ill-affected to the new Republick; from Germany no Souldiers could be had, because Money was wanting to supply the charge, (those Levies being more expen|sive) notwithstanding the favourable conjuncture of circumstances to their advantage, which was a great proof of the Spaniards weakness.
There were at several times above 2000 Irish sent to reinforce the Prince's Party in Guienne, the Marquiss de Santa Cruz had order to make ready the Fleet in Biscay, and the Baron of Batteville to draw together Men and Pro|visions, fit to make a return into the Garonne, and upon promises and other engagements of repayment, considerable Sums of Money were remitted, as well to Bourdeau's, as Flanders, for making of new Levies, and fitting out the Army that it might march with the Prince of Conde into France, on the one side; whilest the Burdelois should make a strong diversion on the other. But the Money which was remitted, was so well liked of by the persons into whose hands it came, that the part which they converted to their own par|ticular uses, was generally greater then what was laid out in the publick business, whereby the designs of the Catholick Court were not onely re|tarded, but sometimes also overthrown, the said Court not being able by reason of its distance from the Provinces, wherein the Warr was managed, to give those Orders and Directions, necessary to be taken according to ac|cidents, and the present conjuncture of Affairs, whereby great inconvenien|cies do sometimes happen, and the most prudent Orders and Designs are overthrown.
To this was also added, That the Spanish Councel was very often decei|ved by the different relatives of the French that served them, who magnify|ing the Forces, and intelligence of their own party, and vilifying and aba|sing that of their King, filled with vain hopes even th most Prudent per|sons, who grounding their deliberations thereupon, found themselves after to be involved in greater difficulties. Whereas on the contrary France be|ing an united Body, was able readily to give directions unto all its Members, and having for Steers-man to the Government Cardinal Mazarine, who had a most clear and perfect knowledge of the nature, and interests of all Nati|ons, we must not wonder that he was able to take all advantages, and to give a suddain cure to that disease which but for his care and fore-sight, had gan|grened, and grown to an incurable disease.
But whilest the Court of Spain was thinking of Expedients, whereby to nourish the French Troubles, and the Cardinal in France was casting in his mind how to restore the declined greatness of that Potent Kingdome, the Generals of the Forces were vigilant to make such progresses as they esteem|ed to be for the advantage of their Princes.
The Count Marsin General of the Prince of Conde's Forces in Guienne, de|sirous to enlarge his Souldiers Quarters, by taking of some Neighbouring places easie to be gotten, sent Colonel Baltasar with a Recruit of  Irish, to take Grenade upon the Garonne in the County of Gaure, thereby to faci|litate his Entry into the Countries of Armagnac, and Aches, Monsieur de Baz, Mareschal de Camp, endeavoured to possess a Pass upon the River of Ldon, whereby he hoped to oblige Monsieur d' Aeterr, to abandon that Countrey, and to gain a notable advantage unto himself, and his Souldiers, by getting thither but Abeterre being advertised of it, with 300 Horse, and 50 Musquetiers, marching speedily unto the place, chaged uriously 00 Horse, and so many Foot, who were already passed, that puting  to flight, part were drowned in the River, and others killed, and taken pri|soners, the Horse saved themselves in great disorders at Tartas, one of the best places which the Princes had thereabouts, being followed by the King's men to the Town Gates, where they took prisoner Monsieur de Fag, first Captain of Baltasar's Regiment, and Monsieur Doroin was mortally woun|ded.
This happy Encounter made the Inhabitants of Sarlat tae heart, who be|ing greatly discontented at the injuries they suffered from the Souldiers of the Regiment of Anguien, commanded by Monsieur Sagnac Governour of the Place, sent to the Marquiss de Sambeuf, That i afe he would  thi|ther with his Troops, they would give him Entrance at a Channel which rs un|der the Wall: But that design not taking, the same Tonmen Treated with certain Officers of the Garrison, who were discontented with Marsin, and having concluded with them, they gave notice thereof unto the Duke of Candale, who immediately sent Count Marin thither with 400 men.
The Inhabitants took Arms, and by the Assistance of the said Officers, hap|pily brought in the King's Souldiers, the 23. of March, an hour before day, where being met by Monsieur Boriel an Advocate, and Consul of the City, they went joyntly to assault the Bishop's Palace, where Svagnac was quar|tered, who hearing the noise, leaping out of bed, endeavoured to save him|self in his shirt by flight, but pursued by the Citizens, was taken prisoner, the Guard at the place of Arms made some small resistance, but Monsieur de Boisle Lieutenant of Agien, and three Captains, wih other Officers being killed, Monsieur de Chaelloy, Maistre de C, and Monsieur de a Roche, Major General, and all the other Officers who had barcadoed them|selves up in the house, yielded freely, and took Imployment under the King.
This good fortune was followed by the taking of several other Towns and walled places, where the Prince's men were quartered; so as the King's Forces always advancing towards Bourdeaux, and the City being thereby straitned, the sam was no small cause of fear and apprehension unto judici|ous persons, who considered of it.
They thought what end this thing would have, and saw a speedy and sea|noble succour was necessary, or otherwise the King's Party growing daily stronger in that Province would be afterwards much more difficult to hinder him from making farther progress there.
The Bourdelois could not then receive aid but from Spain, or England, Monsieur de Choppes, and the Count Marsin's Secretary were therefore sent away to Saint Sebastians, and from thence to the Court of Spain, to solicite the effect of the promises had been made unto them, for keeping up that Party, which being now forsaken by the other Cities and Provinces of France, there remained only Bourdeaux ready to become a Prey, either of those who defended it, or of those who fought against it.
Monsieur d' Agolin had not been wanting to sollicite continually in Spain, the sending of more Money, and of the Fleet, and at last protested in the Prince of Conde his Patrons Name, that in case no Money were advan|ced before the end of February, he would be gone, there had been already sent to Bourdeaux 10000 Crowns; but the Catholick Court being informed by the coming of Choppes, who was also followed by a Deputy of the Coun|cil d'Olmiere, of the danger Guienne ran by the endeavours used by Ma|zarine for the reduction of it, there were 30000 Doubloons forthwith dispatcht unto the Port of Passage, in Biscay, with order that they should forthwith put to Sea six great Vessels, and four Fire-ships to enter into the Ga|ronne, and make opposition to the French.
The said Envoye's had also farther satisfaction by 15000 Crowns for the Prince of Conde; and because there was an opinion that Monsieur Lenet did not observe the respect due to the Prince of Conty, by reason of the great dearness between him and Marsin, who did also fail in his duty towards the said Prince; there were therefore some Instructions given by the Spani|ards, touching the manner of their Conduct, that the Prince of Conde's Par|ty might be kept up.
But the Count d'Ognon's agreement with the King of France, gave a great trouble unto Don Lewis d' Aro, and the other Grandees of the Council, want|ing thereby that foundation which they had built on the adherence of that Cavalier, for supporting of the Troubles in Guienne, where the King's Forces daily increased, and those of the Prince's hourly lessened; and this being one of the greatest inconveniences apprehended by the Court of Spain, they failed not upon this occasion to send Orders and Instructions, and to con|tribute supplies of Men and Money, according to the extent of their abi|lities.
There was afterwards represented unto the Court by the Baron de Batte|ville, the difficulty of bringing Ships into the Garonne, unless they were re|inforced by a more considerable strength. Whereupon there were forth|with sent unto him 20000 Crowns, with Orders to take Sea immediately with those six Vessels, and to carry 500 Irish unto Bourdeaux; but as things daily change face, so was it necessary to vary also in their Counsels, and Batte|ville could not effect the Spanish Orders without being provided of a greater Force, which being wanting, it followed consequently, that the things re|solved upon, were spoken of, but could not be put in execution.
The Marquiss of Lusignan, was a while after sent from Bourdeaux to Ma|drid, in shew to congratulate with their Majesties for the recovery of the

Queen, who had been sick of the small Pox, and in great danger, and of his Ma|jesty, who had been for some days sick of a Feaver, who arrived there in May; but his true Errand was to sollicite for Supplies, because the French being Masters of the Garonne, did so fortifie themselves there, that 'twas very hard to drive them thence; and in case that were not done, it followed con|sequently, that Bourdeaux, in which the King's Party grew daily stronger; must be lost.
Lusignan had good words given him, there were 200000 Crowns consigned unto him, and at his parting the Order for the Vessels to set sail from the Port of Passage, were put into his hands; but that was afterward suspended by reason of the impossibility of putting it in execution; and in lieu of it, Batteville was commanded that he should with all speed possible get into Bourdeaux by the Lake of Archazon, to keep up the hearts of the people, and give some hopes unto the Prince of Conty, and the Principal Persons of the Party. He was there to propose three things to them; One, Whether they thought fit the Spanish Fleet should advance into the Garonne, and hazard a Battle: The Second, Whether they would have him lie in the Mouth of the River: And the Third, Whether they were willing he should sayl to Britanny, or Normandy, to divert the French, by giving disturbance in those Places.
There were also sent 900 Irish more towards Guienne, and the Archduke and Spanish Ministers in Flanders were written unto by the King, that they should forthwith draw into the Field, and pay 200000 Crowns more unto the Prince of Conde to re-inforce his Troops, that he might march into France, whereby the Cardinal being obliged to draw that way with all his Forces, should not be able to continue the Enterprize of Guienne, and that there might be during that time some fit means used for putting things into a good posture in that Province: But neither could these Orders be perform|ed, because the Ship which carried 300000 Rials into Flanders, falling into the English hands, they took the Money, although the King of Spain were then a friend to England, and kept for some time as lawful prize, it being in a Holland Bottom: But these Misfortunes are not to be imputed unto the ne|gligence of Ministers, but to the accidents of time, which often frustrates the success of prudent Counsels.
There were 30000 Doubloons more sent to the Fleet, and Batteville was Commanded to try all ways of getting into the Garonne, and opening the Pas|sage into Bourdeaux, and that he should make use of that Sum to corrupt some of the French Commanders; which notwithstanding prevailed no|thing, they being all of them loyal and constant in their Duty to his Ma|jesty.
The Count Fiesco, and divers others went again also into Spain, to repre|sent the Necessities, and solicite for Assistance unto Guienne; though 'twere conceived by some, 'twas rather to receive the Money and Rewards which by the Catholick King's generosity, were prodigally dispensed unto as many French as came to his Court; which caused many to endeavour more the getting of his Money, than his Service, whereby he was abused: And who|soever shall consider the Sums of Money distributed among the Male-con|tents of France, will find them to have been sufficient to have conquered a whole Kingdom; and notwithstanding were issued only upon expectati|ons, which either through treachery or ignorance were disappointed.
Mean while the Duke of Vendosme hastned the building of the Fort Ca?sar upon the Garonne, and of another in the Countrey, about the place where the two Rivers meet; beginning at the rising ground of the House of Alit, and from thence making Forts to hinder the Communication of the Places held by the Princes with Bourdeaux; and to take from them Lerns, a place situate

at the Point where the Dordogne, falls into the Garonne, which was garrison|ed by 500 Irish, under the Command of Colonel Dillon: To which purpose upon the 26th of May he shipped the Regiments Melleray and Normandy in Gallies and Brigantines, and by the favour of the Tide, the Cavalier Albret Mareschal de Camp, and the men under his Command, skirmished in passing by with the Gallies which lay under that Fort; there imbarked then the Count Cominges, Lieutenant-General, the Brothers Count and Baron of Mon|tesson, and the Lord Garteret, who treated with the said Colonel Dillon Go|vernour of the place, and perswaded him instead of defending himself, to change his Party, and to put himself and all his Souldiers into the King of France his Service; this happened, because the Irish Souldiers were extreme|ly discontented, as having been sold like slaves unto the Spaniard, and there|fore having no tie of Honour, or other Obligation lying upon them.
This Example had been seconded by others of that Nation, by reason of a scruple of Conscience they had to serve the Spaniard, who were so much united with the English, contrary to the Allegiance they owed their Prince; if Marsin foreseeing it, had not enforced the Officers of every Regiment to give Hostages into their hands.
The loss of Lermont was very grievous to the Bourdelois for the impor|tance of the place, whereby the Royallists took from them the benefit of the Rivers, in the Command of which consisted their safety or their ruine.
Notwithstanding all these advantages, the clemencie of his Majesty, and of his Ministers, made him continue still the Treaty of Peace with those who amongst that crowd of rebellious Spirits, seemed best affected to it, up|on perswassion that the hope of Pardon would work more than the fear of punishment. And therefore in the Month of May, another General Pardon and Oblivion was published for all in Bourdeaux, with Expressions, That his Majesty was more inclined to use Mercy, than Rigour. Upon this there was a general Assembly made in the Publick Palace, to consult whether it were bet|ter to accept thereof, and give an end unto the Publick miseries, or persist in their disobedience. 'Twas thought by men of the best Judgment, that 'twas much more expedient for Subjects to live in obedience under their own natu|ral Prince, than with the shadow of Liberty under a stranger.
The fear of the Olmiere kept every one in awe; there were notwithstand|ing several things debated amongst some of that Council; but the obstina|cie of those Plebeyans, could not be overcome with Politick considerations. They seemed to be all of them charmed by the Spaniard; they inclined to think they should be forthwith freed, they perswaded themselves what they desired; they believed nothing which thwarted their imaginations; and being conceited they had that in their hands, which by false colours was re|presented to them by the Princes, they concluded no other Oblivion or Am|nesty was to be accepted, but that wherein the Prince of Conde was inclu|ded, for whose cause they had taken Arms, and brought a War to their own Doors; and that whoever should speak contrary to this resolution, should as a Traytor to his Country be drowned in the River.
These Persons made account, the offers which the Court made, were an effect of weakness, proceeding from Necessity, and from thence drew great hopes of being able to maintain the Divorce they had made from the King's Obedience; they sollicited upon that score General Cromwel at London, that he would undertake the protection of them; and in case that succeeded ac|cording to their hopes, they thought they should be able to make good their own contumacy, and by the assistance of England, make themselves free, and independant of their own Sovereign. This Discourse was dictated ra|ther

by Fury, and Passion, then Solid Reason, and accordingly they found themselves in a short time deluded by those vain imaginations.
All wayes of sweetness therefore used by the Court of France, to mollifie the obdurate obstinacy of that fierce, untamed people, proving fruitless, they are resolved to use rigour, to prosecute the Warr vigorously against them; There were therefore express Orders sent that they should endeavour by all means to streighten the City on every side, thereby to enforce them by neces|sity to comply with their duty, since other means would not incline their wills; and above all, that the Maistry of the River should be made good against all attempts the Spaniard should make, which would reduce the City to despair, and specially if they could keep things in that posture, till the Vin|tage, and if the King's Forces could disturb them therein, it would be one of the great damages, and punishments, could be inflicted on them; the Revenues of that City consisting principally in the great plenty of Wines there made, by sale of which unto the English, Hollanders and others, they raise a very considerable profit.
But in respect 'twas also necessary to provide for the Frontiers towards Flanders, where the Prince of Conde, united with the Spaniards, made extra|ordinary preparations, and boasted that they would make a very advantageous Campagne, by reason of the Towns he held in Champagne, and the intelli|gence he had in Paris, towards which it was the publick talk he meant to march; The Cardinal therefore with no less diligence, sought to prevent the blow, by making all provisions itting for it. He considered, that all consisted in the uniting the Forces of the Kingdome, it being very hard to beware of a domestick Enemy; and that therefore if he could not reduce Conde (whose Mind was carried away with high pretences, and the advantages, and hopes, he drew from Spain) unto his duty, 'twas fit to deprive him of the Credit, and Party he had in France; which being done, he would be then reduced to the condition of being a private Captain onely, to the Spaniard.
The Cardinal therefore bent his thoughts in order thereunto, upon two things; the one, to take from him those Places he held in France; and the other, to deprive him of those Friends which followed him. Upon this de|sign, there was a General Amnestie granted unto all persons, who repenting their Errour would return unto the King's Obedience. Whereupon the Count of Tavannes, who had alwaies declared high for the Prince, and had worthily performed all parts of a Valiant, and undaunted Cavalier, being un|satisfied with him, left his Party, and retired to his own House; The same did also several other of his adherents, perceiving well that nothing can be an act of greater rashness, than to oppose the Soveraign Authority of ones own Prince, to submit unto the obedience of a stranger.
The Prince made shew not to be troubled at it, because he had not Forces sufficient to maintain his Friends, and repair the loss they suffered for him in their own Countrey, and that 'twas necessary for him to keep unto himself that little pittance he had from the Spaniard, which being far short of the vast promises were made, though hardly sufficed to maintain himself, in a condi|tion inferiour to his Birth and Quality.
He would also himself have made his Peace if the King's Council would have condescended to his Pretensions, which in such case he would have mo|derated. But as it was a thing very desireable to gain him, when he had a great Train of discontented French that followed him; so now when he was abandoned by all, and as it were a private Captain to the King of Spain, his Propositions were no more to be admitted, he being at that time rather a trouble, than advantage to the Spaniard, so as he would be able to do less harm abroad, than by returning into France.
As to the first, 'twas thought, that being covetous of Glory, and Reputa|tion, he would ill suit with the Spaniards, who are full of Ambition, and Pre|tensions; that the free and open carriage of a French-man, would never be well matcht with the reserved and close deportments of a Spaniard; that the imperious absolute demeanour of Conde, could not but make him odious un|to the Spanish Commanders, who are all upon punctilio's; that the Antipa|thy between the Nations, and difference in Language, would presently put him into disorder, who knew not how to command, and be punctually obey|ed, but by French-men.
If his Actions should meet with good Success, the Glory of them would make him envied, and suspected, as a Forraigner, in the same manner as Ma|zarine's had caused him to be in France; And if 'twere otherwise, the da|mage would be accompanied with scorn, there having been as much spent upon his single person, as would have served to keep an Army. The Jea|lousie which the Spaniards would alwayes have, That he who was not satis|fied with being the first Prince of France, could not content himself with be|ing a Servant to the King of Spain, would keep them in a continual distrust of him, which in a short time would destroy the grounds of Friendship; And this could not happen but with notable advantage unto France, because it would at last be brought to this, that either the Spaniards must destroy Conde, or he to revenge himself must destroy them; so as to leave the Prince in their hands, was a great charge unto them, which instead of being an ad|vantage to them, would puzzle all their Counsels and deliberations.
As to the second, if the Prince should be agreed with, and restored to Court, and that the Affairs should prosperously succeed, all the applause would be attributed only to his Direction, so as he would eclipse the Lustre of all others, with the splendour of his Glory; and re-assuming his first thoughts of giving Law to all, without receiving it himself from any, would consequently destroy the order of Government, which in a Monarchy must depend onely upon one single Person. Besides that, there would then be no occasion to shew the World, that France had other Captains no less Valiant, and Ministers of State as Prudent, as those the King of Spain could boast of.
The King would out of his own Clemency have condescended to restore him unto his former degree of Place, and Favour, if Conde without farther medling with the Affairs of the Kingdome, would have resolved quietly to retire himself, and enjoy the benefit of his Estate and Revenues in any Coun|try out of France, which was in amity therewith; but being in the flower of his Age, and enured to command, he was too passionately in love with Glory, which is not gained without toil and labour, to be content to fit down, and give himself unto repose and quiet.
France being therefore Regulated by these Maximes, and the Cardinal working by courteous means, and demonstrations of affection, rendred his Ministry full of sweetness, never pretending to take other revenge against his Enemies, but onely to let them know he was a good, and virtuous Per|son, whereby that bitterness against him which by a few seditious persons, Enemies unto the Publick Quiet, had been infused into the minds of many, was in a great measure allayed and sweetned. The first effects whereof were seen at Paris, where his Reputation having been more blasted, than in any other place, the Citizens by the remorse of their own Consciences, thought themselves bound to make a publick shew of their Repentance, by making him an open satisfaction, for the injuries they had by a publike Arrest done to his Reputation the Year before; and in order thereunto, invited him upon the 29th of March, unto a sumptuous Feast in the Town-House, being an Honour never used by them but to great Princes.
The Cardinal went thither, accompanied by the Dukes of Guise and Ar|paion, by the Mareschals of France, Estree, L'Ospitall, Villeroi, Grammont; Motte, Haudecourt, Ferte Senneterre, Aumont, Hoquincourt, and Granc, by the Count of Servient, by Monsieur de Fouquet Surintendant des Finances, Monsieur le Tellier, Secretary of State, six Counsellors of the Community, three Quatreneurs, and many others.
Then followed the Feast with great Pomp and Order, and with so much shew of affection in the people, of which the Piazza in the Greve was so full, that being my self there out of curiosity, I heard them publickly bless his Name, praise his management, blame those who had falsely slandered him, with divers other wonderful things, which happen when a people changes the extremity of hatred and contempt, into the excess of honour and esteem. The Cardinal came several times to the windows, and caused pieces of Money to be thrown amongst the people to his great applause; his health was often drunk by all those Citizens, and all those honours were done unto him, which can possibly be rendred unto a first Minister of so high a Condition; whilest he dined, the Seats and Hall were filled with as many of the City Dames as the place would hold, drawn thither by their curiosity, to see a Man they esteemed the Miracle of Nature.
The Cardinal used great Civility towards all, throwing about great quantities of Sweet-meats; at his going through the Hall at parting, he entertained sometimes one, sometimes another; and although he were in view of all in the Piazza, there was not amongst all that people heard one, that spake an ill word of him; but I observed, that all applauded, and wish|ed him good success; I heard more than one say, he was a good Friend to France, and the Spaniard's Scourge. Others said, he had given unto France a King, and to the King a good Minister of State, with such like sayings; they ran after his Coach, every one desiring to see him, and to shew himself; the Omen was surely good, and the events proved it to be so, the effects being correspondent to such good wishes.
The Count de Beaujeu held about this time Intelligence with one of the Inhabitants of Rhetel, and agreed to surprize that place through a hole in the Wall; he drew together 600 Foot and 400 Horse; and on the 4th of April at night, came privately thither, and caused some Souldiers to enter through the hole; but being discovered before a sufficient number were got in, the Design failed, and he notwithstanding took in hand another Enterprize.
The Count had been advertised that the Lorrenois Commanded by the Chevalier de Guise, Brother unto the Duke, leaving their Quarters beyond the Mose, and the Sambre, were drawing towards the Frontiers of France; he therefore advanced that way; and whilst he was at Charleville, consulting with the Marquiss of Noirmonstier Governour of that place, with Monsieur de Bussy Lamet, and others, they had news from Monsieur de Mentegu, Go|vernour of Rocroy, That the Count Coligny, Lieutenant-General to Conde, was gone to attaque Couvin, a little Town upon the River Noirau, three Leagues distant from Rocroy, in the Country of Liege, garrisoned by the French, who had beaten thence a Regiment of the Enemy, which had been quartered there; and that he had invested it with two Pieces of Cannon: Whereupon gathering together all the Troops which in so short a time could be assembled at Rocroy, they marched from thence unto a little rising, distant a quarter of a League from the Camp of those of Conde's Party, and put themselves in Battalia, under the covert of a Coppice, from whence Beaujeu and Mentegu, alighting to discover the posture of the Enemy, saw their Ca|valry drawn up in Order beyond the River, and the said Wood.
Beaujeu presently considered, That in case he should march with the whole Body, the Horse would then retire under the shelter of the Musquetiers, where the French would have much more difficulty to fight them, and there|fore thought 'twas best to make the Enemy believe their number was much less, so as believing it to be a small Party, they might ingage to fight them, and follow them into the whole Body behind the Wood; and so it punctually happened; for two Squadrons only being sent out, they were immediately charged by Coligny's Troops, the King's men began to skirmish, receiving the Charge with great dexterity.
Conde's men not doubting any Stratagem, advanced so far that they fell in among those by whom they were expected; Beaujeu, and the other Com|manders, when the time served fallied out, and charged the Enemy with so much fury, that they forthwith put them to flight, spurring hard towards their own Quarters. The Royallists in the Chase took several Prisoners; Monsr. de la Villetta at the same time fell upon the Foot, abandoned by their Horse, who were retiring to Bossat, but being charged, after they fired once, yielded forthwith, and throwing down their Arms, took Quarter as Prisoners of War; in which number was Coligny himself, after he had performed all the parts of a valiant Cavalier, in labouring to make those who fled, turn face against the Enemy; he was taken by Monsieur de Delore Cornet of the Troop of Rocroy; the Colonel Ghegy was taken by Monsieur de Rumelly; Monsieur de Buchol and several other Officers were also Prisoners; and in this Action Monsieur de Loan, Montreuil, and the Marquiss de Caufort, carried themselves nobly, they being the Persons who charged the Foot between Couvin and Bossat. This good Success, joyned to the other whereof we have before treated, gave great satisfaction to the Cardinal, as on the other side it brought great trouble to the Prince of Conde, who had there lost above a thousand good Souldiers, and the best of his Officers, amongst whom he heard with great grief of the imprisonment of Coligny, his Kinsman, a Person of great valour, and in whom he had great confidence; and the Court taking this as a Presage of good Success, Resolved that the Duke of Espernon, Gover|nour-General of Burgundy, should undertake the Enterprize of Bella|garde.
After the rendring of the Castle of Dijon, Burgundy had been ever in great trouble, by reason of the plunderings of that Garrison, which continu|ally infested that whole Countrey. The Duke had therefore Garrisoned the Castle of Pagny, near unto it; and wanting Force sufficient to take it, he had given ear to some Propositions made by the Prince of Conde's Friends to sell him the said Place, which was hard to keep, because it was so far within the King's Countries; but the Treaty being broken off, by reason of the too high demands of the Marquiss of Batteville Governour of the Place, Esper|non took order for making of Provisions fit for besieging of it; and conside|ring that those of the Franche Comt, notwithstanding their Neutrality, might send and succour it; he sent concerning the same unto the Marquiss of San Martin, and Monsieur de Cea, Principal managers of the Catholick King's Affairs in that Province, from whom being assured that they had no thought of doing any thing against the Neutrality established; and being also encouraged by the Burgundians, who to pull this Thorn out of their sides, offered to find Money and Provisions fit for the Siege; the Duke passed the Somme at San Iean de Losne the Marquiss d'Uxelles came from Chalons to Ver|dun, with what Souldiers he could draw from the Neighbouring places, and brought together about four thousand Souldiers, Horse and Foot, under the Command of the said Uxelles, and de Roncerelles, both Lieutenants-General: The Ninth of May, the Duke possessed the Posts of Campblanc, and de Pany,

whilest the others took up their Posts at Caselles, and San George, and open|ing the Trench, they made their Approaches to the place, and with their Artillery battered it on two sides, and a little below also on the other side of the River, where Monsieur de San Quintin lodged himself with four hundred Foot.
The Besieged defended themselves with great courage, and by their fre|quent Sallies endeavoured to hinder the King's Forces from advancing to|wards the Ditch; but Roncerelles advancing the Trench unto the Counter|scarp, drained the water out of the Ditch, filled it with Faggots, and sprang a Mine under the Bulwark towards the River.
Batteville having no hopes of Succour, and not being in a condition long to defend himself, sent to the Duke, and let him know, It had been never practised in a War amongst Christians, to assault a place without first giving a Sum|mons to know if they would freely yield; and therefore he desired to understand upon what ground, they proceeded so severely against him.
Espernon made answer to him, That this was usually practised against lawful Enemies, but not against Rebels to the King; and pretended he would not de|fer the Assault, for which all things were now ready; but being entreated by the Officers of his Army, not to use such severity which oftentimes casts men into dispair; he consented, rather for sparing the lives of his own Souldiers, than of the Enemy; and a Capitulation for the Surrender was agreed upon, Batteville marching on the 8th day of Iune out of the place, with 700 Souldiers with their Arms and Baggage, who were convoy'd unto Stenay: The Burgundians were much pleased with this Enterprise, having hereby quieted their Province, and Espernon, according to the promise he had made them, caused the place to be dismantell'd and uncovered, whereby the passage over the Somme became free, and those people were eased of the Contributions they were forced to pay unto that Garrison, to avoid being fired, and ill entreated by the Souldiers, and himself acquired much honour, and a general Commendations by the Action.
The Troops who had served in this Siege were sent, part unto Mare|schal Turenne, who was now ready to take the Field, and part unto the Mare|schal de la Ferte Seneterre, who was already quartered upon the Frontiers of Lorrain, and had taken divers Castles of the Territory of Verdun, which were held by the Enemy.
To these good Proludiums of fortunate Success, followed another Enter|prize very bold and unexpected, executed by Count Broglia, Governour of la Basse, a Captain of high repute, and experienced valour. He was adver|tised that the Troops which had been in the Quarters of Etere, la Gorgue, and the Neighbouring Posts, being appointed to serve in the Prince of Conde's Ar|my, were the most part of them drawn thence unto the general Rendezvouz, so as there were in those Quarters only Colonel Murphy, with about 700 Irish, and about 80 Horse, under the Command of the Baron de Lambes; he marched therefore from la Bassee, with 400 Fire-locks, and 100 Horse, with a Bridge of Boats to pass the River Lis, above Etere and Armentiers, that he might fall upon the Quarters of Etere where Murphy's Regiment lay. He Commanded Monsieur de Lavogadre, a Colonel of Piemontoi, to pas the Ri|ver with 350 Fire-locks, and himself staid on the hither side with the 100 Horse, and the remainder of the Foot, to succour and assist where need should be.
Monsieur de la Trenoy, Serjeant-Major of Bassee, advanced with 100 Fire-locks about midnight the 13th of Iune, and charged with so much va|lour, that notwithstanding the Assault was sustained with great courage by the Enemy, yet he drove them to the Church, where they fought two

hours, but at last the French having made themselves Masters of the Church Doors, constrained the Irish all to yield themselves prisoners of Warr, who were in number 300 Souldiers, 6 Captains, and all the other Officers, Mur|phy himself escaping by favour of the Night: From thence the same Night the Count advanced unto the Fort of la Gourgue, but found it quitted; and so having driven the Countrey thereabouts, and got some Booty, he returned to La Bassee, very well pleased to have destroyed that Fort, and taken all those Souldiers and Officers.
The Prince of Conde was startled with this News, and had without doubt forthwith taken the Field, had not the taking of the 300000 Ryals, before mentioned, by the English, retarded the Provisions which were thereby to be made, and in particular of Horses, to remount the Cavalry, and for Ar|tillery, which were afterwards provided with some difficulty in Holland.
The General Turenne, making use of this Conjuncture, having caused the Troops to march into the Countrey about Rheims, parted from Paris the 14th of Iune, and in a certain place not far distant from Chillery, in Cham|paigne, consulting with the Mareschal de la Ferte (who was yet drawing to|gether his Souldiers in the Countrey about Verdun) touching the course they were to hold, they concluded to besiege Rhetel, to take from the Enemy all means of advancing farther into Champagne, being an open Country, and full of Corn, as without doubt they would otherwise have done, to their very great advantage.
Turenne advanced to Chauteau Porcien, and placed himself beyond Rhetel, and Chaumont, that is a Castle where the Spaniards had a Regiment of Foot, that were recruiting, and 60 Horse in Quarters, who at first sight yielded themselves prisoners of Warr, without Colours or Baggage. The Mareschal de la Ferte, came by the Valley of Bourg, on t'other side of the River Aisne, and there in the Campagne of Chaumont, having drawn up all their Troops, they made their approaches to Rhetel, on both sides, where the same Night the Regiments of Picardy, of Turenne, and Palnau, possessed themselves of all the Out-Works, raising two Batteries, one near the Port of Rocroy, and the other at the River Gate where La Ferte was quartered.
There were in the Town 5 or 600 men, under the Command of the Mar|quiss de Persan, who in the Night, was in great danger of being made a pri|soner at the taking of the Out-works; they opened in two dayes two brea|ches, and whilest the French prepared to assault them, the besieged Capitu|lated, and agreed to march out with Arms, Baggage, and two Pieces of Ar|tillery, and to be convoy'd unto Stenay.
The Mareschals left there for Governour Monsieur de Boda, with his Re|giment of French Foot, and themselves went to observe the motions of Conde, and the Spaniards, who during the time of that Siege marched toge|ther towards Hayes d' Avennes, their taking the Field having been delayed as well for the said want of Horse, as for a Treaty they had with a certain Citizen of Arras, about surprizing of that City, he had intelligence with Cardinal Mazarine, and played the double spy to deceive the Spaniard, and get money from them.
The intelligence was begun the Year before, and continued untill Conde found himself abused, having parted with above 2000 Doubloons at several times upon that score. The French having notice that the Spaniards were not strong enough to fight their flourishing and numerous Army, marched up towards the Prince, being resolved to assault him before he was reinfor|ced with more men, which he carefully laboured to be; but he drew up his men in Battalia between two Woods, behind a straight Pass which prevented them from taking him in that place of advantage where he first was, and had

been found, if he had been but one half hour later advertised of the French Armies motion: Whereupon the Mareschals returned unto their Quarters, and from thence marched towards Vervins, into certain Villages near the Abbey of Fougny, from whence drawing to Vervins, they lodged near Poussy, and from thence Coasting by Guise, they encamped at Riplemont, to observe the Enemy who were reinforced by the Army of Lorrain, and some Troops from Flanders, with which their design was to enter France, upon hope that when they should appear there would many declare for them.
The French Generals therefore being much inferiour in number were to carry themselves very circumspectly, and not to hazard a Battel, which was much the more dangerous, by reason of the consequences would depend upon it, then for the present loss they could receive.
The French Courts aim was to gain time, to resettle the Affairs of the Kingdome by gaining Bourdeaux, to hinder Conde from raising new Stirres and Garboiles, by means of his party, and dependance, and to frustrate the Spaniards expectations of ruining France, grounded upon the Credit and Re|putation of Conde; which was the onely Butt unto which the Consultations of Spain tended, as believing that Crown with their Dominions and Coun|treys so divided, and void of Inhabitants, could not in any other manner get an advantage over France, an entire united Countrey, and therefore with|out sparing of Money, nay even with the prodigal lavishing away thereof, unto the Malecontents of France, they endeavoured to draw others, and by such arts obtain that, which by their own Forces they could not gain.
The Effects notwithstanding corresponded ill with the appearance, because the hopes being reduced unto a few particular persons, who were more gree|dy of their own profit, than that of others, they sought onely the means how to render themselves necessary unto the King of Spain's Service, and to draw thence advantages, grounded upon this Maxime, That to draw Rewards from Princes, they ought to make them rather hope for, than obtain the fruit of their Endeavours. Things being therefore thus managed, and the Spaniards having made their Provisions for that Years Campagne, there were divers Consul|tations held between the Princes, and Generals of the Armies, touching the several courses they ought to steer.
The Generals of Spain proposed to undertake some notable Design, and by taking some Town of Importance, by means thereof to make afterwards a farther progress; and upon that foundation to maintain a Warr in the Ene|mies Countrey, it was proposed, That Five or Six thousand of the best Soul|diers with Expert Captains, should be imbarked, and sent forthwith for Guienne, to re-inforce the Prince's Forces in that Province, give Courage unto those of Bourdeaux, and nourish that Warr, which was the powerfullest Diversion could be given to the Christian King's Forces. But the fears that the Succours of Spain would not be sufficient for that purpose, and the disorder would arise by dismembring the Forces of Flanders, made that Proposition to be laid aside.
The Prince of Conde magnifying the Correspondence he had in Paris, de|clared, and was very pressing with pregnant Reasons, That they should forth|with draw the Army together, pass the Somme, and marching as near as they could to Paris, invite their Partisans to raise some new Sedition in the City, wherewith the Court being startled, would easily quit it, and in that confusion marching to Mantes, they might seize upon Pontoise, Senlis, and some Neighbouring places, where their Party being strengthened by those Malecontents, would fall in with them, they might reap singular advantages, and keep the Warr alive in France.
This Proposition was specious in appearance, and so well represented, tht the Councel approved of it, thinking that Conde would be seconded by the

effects, as he seemed to be by the desires of many, who applauded his Actions, and could not stop the turbulency of his spirit.
Two notable Difficulties occurred in the execution, the one, that the hearts of many were very much cast down by the Successes of Bellegard, and Rhetel, who could never have imagined that the King in that Campagne could have Forces, and Conde want them; to suffer two Towns to be mise|rably lost under his nose, whereby the confidence they had in him was much diminished.
The other, That the French Army being drawn out into Campagne much stronger then was expected, 'twas very dangerous to pass Rivers, and en|gage ones self in an Enemie's Countrey, without a place of Retreat upon occasion, being Coasted by an Army (though inferiour in number, yet equal at least to them in valour) of Souldiers, being all French, Bold, and Expert, and a Body of 4000 German Horse, the remainder of the Renowned Forces of Saxon Weymar; and having also to Friend many great Cities, and strong Forts, all most affectionate to his Majestie. Notwithstanding as there is no|thing doth so much transport the imagination, as the value we put upon our selves, fomented by a vehement desire, Conde was so transported with the opinion of the great Esteem had of him by the People of France, that he be|lieved the same alone sufficed to make him Conquerour before he fought. It was therefore resolved to follow this advice; whereupon the Spanish Army advancing towards Cambray, and from thence to Crevecoeur, and Catelet, came at last without opposition to Fontz Somme, where the River Somme rises, be|ing onely two Leagues distant from the French Camp.
There were in the Spanish Army effectively 30000 men, the Troops of Lor|rain and Conde being taken in; Composed of Spaniards, Italians, Walloons, Germans, Burgundians, Flemmings, and other Nations, who by the diversity of their Languages, and Fashions, caused in that Camp on harmonious dis|cord: The Equipage was very great of Cannon, Baggage, and Ammuni|tion.
There Conde made a halt for some dayes, and faced the French Camp, pas|sing the time in frequent, but slight skirmishes, of the Light Horse, who beat about the Countrey with much diligence; His hopes were built upon the Friends, and Intelligence he had in Paris, which he thought would infallibly take fire; but he was mistaken in his account, because the King being in the City, and the Cardinal alwaies Vigilant to prevent any Novelty that might arise, there was no motion at all there; neither was there any of the banished persons, who (according to appointment) would come to Paris, and head the discontented Persons that remained there. So as the Prince's Designs vanish|ing, the opinion conceived of him by the Spanish Ministers, fell therewith al|so; finding him not to have that credit and dependance in France whereof he boasted, and by which he had promised the effecting of such great mat|ters, and therefore being no less perplexed then confounded, touching the course they were to take, the Armies kept their ground, and onely faced each other for some dayes.
Conde (as being stronger in Men) desired to come unto a General Battel; The French would not hazard it with so much disadvantage, but endeavou|red onely by Lodging in convenient places, and by the favour of Towns and Forts, to hinder his advance, and make him spend the time unprofitably; so as the one studied the means of coming to a Battel; and the other endeavour|ed onely to decline it.
This occasion shewed the Excellency and Valour of the two Captains, who made Warr with Courages emulous of Glory and Reputation, and therein the Conduct of him who was inferiour in Forces, proved, that wise Fore|sight hath the advantage over Courage.
But the Courts design was driven at another rate. The Cardinal had nothing more in his mind than the reducing of Bourdeaux unto obedience, he knew the quieting of that part, would be a certain preservation to the rest: his opinion was approved by all the Councel, and the resolution was taken to stop Conde upon the Frontiers of Picardy, or Champaigne, that the Affairs of Guienne might not be imbroiled, where all things tended to an happy issue, although the means used by Treaties, and Intelligence had not succeeded.
The Marquiss of Theubon, who had defended with Valour, and good Fortune, the new Town of Agenois against the Count d'Harcourt, being offended, that the Count Marsin Arrogated only to himself the glory of having freed that City, by putting into it 200 Horse, whilest the over|flowing of the Water had made the Royalists draw farther off, and that by Marsin's orders some of his kindreds Houses had been Plundred, amongst whom were those of Monsieur de Colongis, and the Widow Marchionesse of Ville Franche, belonging to Theubon himself by Substitution, came to Bourdeaux; and expressing his discontent, was desired by Conty to lay aside all Rancour, and thought of Revenge, which he professed to bear in mind towards Marsin; but notwithstanding that, and the Sum of 500 Crowns given him towards his losses, he sent Monsieur de Mondevis to Blaye, to Negotiate some agreement with the Duke de San Simon, and also with the Duke of Vendosme, who was lately before arrived there.
The business took well, and gave good hope of a happy issue, but the banishment at that time of one Litherie, an Advocate who had a hand in it, upon other suspitions, (although this Plot were not discovered) did for the present give a stop unto it; Theubon was sollicited by his friends, and those who wished well unto the King, to stay in Bourdeaux, to serve them for a Head, not to be Reconciled unto Marsin, but to endeavour by all means to be Revenged, because in case he could effect it, and take away his life, the War it self would dye together with him, and upon pretence of a pri|vate quarrell, he should do great Service to the publick, and accomplish his own ends by it.
Notwithstanding which he left the Town, as being too much observed in it, leaving there good correspondence, communicated his thoughts unto the Duke of Candale, and they agreed, that the Army advancing to Lormont, he would get them to be let in, by means of Monsieur Mousnier, and Mon|sieur du Sault, who were disgusted, and weary of the Princes Government, and by the assistance of a Counsellor of Bourdeaux, who was much offended that he had been imprisoned by Conty's orders, although he had been af|terwards Released, and received by him with great Courtesie.
These three Monsieurs, were all of them principal Frondeurs, and of great Authority, so as 'twas easily by their means, to have struck the stroke, and the rather, because several of the Olmiera joyned also with them, and in particular one Cot, a great man amongst the Rabble, and one called Cavalier, son to a Proctor of the Pallace served for the Messenger, or Carrier of the Letters which passed between the Conspirators, and the King's party.
The Army appeared at Lormont ready to have effected the enterprize, but Cot having been bribed by the Princes, and Cavalier, being taken with the Letters about him, he was as a Spy put to death before the Palace Gate, and all entercourse was broken off; at the same time Monsieur de Chambon, who had been by the Prince of Conde sent into Guienne, to hin|der the Count d'Ognon from agreeing with the Court, by the offer of 300000 Crowns in Money, and one of his Townes with the Title of Duke,

ran a fortune not much unlike to this; for having found all his Negoti|ations fruitless, and being willing to go to Bourdeaux, where they had an ill opinion of him, for having rendred the City of Xantes the year before, he was by the Rabble taken and Tyed to the same Gibbet, where they had hanged him, if in the time allowed him for Confession, he had not been relieved by the Prince of Conty, who caused him to be forth|with released, and withdrawn from so infamous a death.
Theubon gave not over for all this to set a fort new Engines, for com|passing his ends, and together with Count Maria one of the King's Mareschal's de Camp, had frequent intelligence with all those whom he thought fit to serve in this occasion, amongst which pitching upon a Treasurer of France called Filiot, a Person very bold, and zealous, who passed to and from the City, he made choice of him to Confide in, and to keep a foot the correspondence Marin held with the two Brothers de Chateau, and with the Counseller de Sault, Son to the Advocate General, who grow|ing desperate to see the Authority of Parliament, submitted to the imper|tinences of the Olmiera, was entred into the party, and determined to put himself in the Head of some Citizens, and open one of the Gates to the King's forces.
The business was wisely carried, and the success was in a manner cer|tain, as being managed by Persons in whom the People put their trust, but for as much, as 'tis a Maxime of the French Nation, (more frank and open than any other) That secrets in the Breasts of Young Men, are kept like Water in a Sieve, Chatein, one of the Brothers, having discovered the business to the Count d'Autell Governour to the Duke d' Anguien, 'twas discovered by means of a young Citizen, of whom the Count was Ena|moured; Filiot was taken, and the Counseller de Sault, and both im|prisoned: the other Brother, who knew nothing of this discovery, was gone to advertise the Duke of Candale, that he should draw to Bourdeaux with the forces, believing 'twas impossible it should miscarry. The King's forces advanced with so much secrecy and speed, that notwithstanding the discovery of the Plot, if the Prince of Conty had not been in person at the Port, they had entered in that Confusion, without the help of any other Complices. This March of Candale, did so confirm the certainty there was a Plot, and filled those of the Olmiera with so much Rage, that like Fools, and Mad-men, they all ran about furiously in Arms, crying, that better 'twere to suffer Death a thousand times with Armes in their hands, then to be betrayed with so much baseness.
They made presently a Solemn procession to give thanks to God, and charged a Franciscan Fryer to make a Sermon exhorting to Union, and Loyalty unto the Country; the Fryer went into the Pulpit, and although he were by Faction a Frondeur, and of that judgment, yet being in that moment enlightned by the Eternal Wisdom, he spake in presence of the Princes, Princesses, Frondeurs, and those of the Olmiera, so well to dispose them unto Peace, that all were marvellously touched, and confounded, and the People wonderfully Edified at his great Eloquence, and Learning. Whereby 'tis seen that the Divine Providence Concurrs both to the settle|ing, and overthrow of Crownes. The Innocence, and goodness of his Ma|jesty being protected, and the ingratitude of Subjects being there opposed by the Divine Justice.
Filiot's Process was after made, and no sufficient proofs coming against him, he was put upon the Torture, which was Cruelly given him, in the presence of Duratesta head of the Olmiera, and of the Advocate Pontellier. When he was first put upon it he swooned; but having implored the help

of God, and of the blessed Virgin, he found himself so much comforted, and strengthened, that he endured it Valliantly, without discovering any of his Complices. There was no farther proceeding against de Sault; the Teares of his Father, and Services done by the Son unto the Fronda, prevailing against the punishment due for a Treason against the Princes, which had it taken, would have exposed them unto the fury of the Souldiers without Capitulation.
Conspiracies and Plots having all failed to reduce Bourdeaux under the King's obedience, and the Forces which Vendosme and Candale had being of themselves too weak, to overcome a City so strong and obstinate; The Cardinal gave order unto Monsieur d'Estrades, Lieutenant General in Rochel, to draw what Souldiers he could out of the bordering places, and to March up with them forthwith unto the Duke of Vendosme; Estrades was ex|treamly diligent, and being a Person very expert in War, and affectionate unto his Majestie's Service, came thither speedily with a good Strength of Men near Bourg; the taking of which Place, as necessary towards that of Bourdeaux, was enterprised by his counsel: But there being a necessity for the vigorous carrying on thereof, to invest it on three sides, and the Foot being sufficient onely to do it upon two, the Duke of Candale was desired, That he would furnish Forces necessary for that purpose. The Duke corresponded with all readiness to the Desire of the other Generals, and coming to discourse it with the Duke of Vendosme, and d'Estrades, in the Fort Casar, he gave Or|ders to his own Regiment, with that of Lorrain, and Champaigne, to march, and he himself would be of the Party, having agreed with Vendosme touch|ing the Command.
Bourg was Attack't, and on the 29th of Iune they broke ground on three sides; On the first the Duke of Vendosme was with the Regiment of Britan|ny, and that of Monsieur de Rozacerviere, Mareschal; on the second the Duke of Candale, with the Regiment of Champaigne, and that of Monsieur de Saint German; on the third Monsieur d'Estrades, with the Regiment of Douglas, and that of Monsieur Saint Romain; This last Approach was so vigorously advanced, that on the fourth day, Monsieur Delas Mareschal de Camp, lodged on the brink of the Fosse, and cut in sunder a great Pallisadoe in the middle of it, notwithstanding a perpetual shower of Musquet Bullets, and a multi|tude of Bombo's, Granadoes, and other wild-fires, which were continually rained from the Walls to hinder his attempt. This advance was made by the King's Forces without the help of any Battery, by the negligence of the Canoneers, and the failing of the Pieces, which were but twice dis|charged.
The besieged were so astonished with this extraordinary Courage of the French, and so cowed with the lustre of their Arms and Cloaths, trimmed after the new Mode, that they were in such confusion, it seemed they could do nothing else but gaze upon that gayety, which perhaps was new unto their eyes. Don Ioseph Osorio, who Commanded there without thinking farther then on his own safety, and to get out of these broils, Capitulated the Third of Iuly, and marched out from thence the 5th, with 800 Men, Arms, Bag|gage, and two Pieces of Cannon, but to his great blame of Cowardise and baseness, and as such he was by order of the King of Spain imprisoned after at St. Sebastians, although he justified himself by reason of want of Vi|ctuals.
This Important Place being then lost by the Spaniards in five dayes onely, for keeping whereof they had laid out a great Sum of Money in fortifying it a la Royalle, and circling of it with strong Walls, the Generals and Captains of that People were not onely troubled, but all the Malecontents of the

Prince's Party were above measure disturbed, foreseeing that this loss was a true prefage of their utter ruine. The French on the other side, proud of so fortunate Success, resolved to make a farther progress, and without making stop, resolved to take Libourne, and thereupon whilest the Duke of Vendosme staid in Bourg, to give such Orders as were necessary, and to dispatch away Artillery, and Provisions fitting for the Enterprise; Monsieur d'Estrades with 1200 Foot, and 400 Horse, after two dayes stay, marched towards it, and in his passage took the Castles of Savagnac, and Laubardemont, and passed the River Iolla the 9th of Iuly, the Foot in Boats at Guistres, and the Horse a League from thence at the Foord of Coustras.
The Place was next day viewed, and Quarters set out for the Troops, until the coming of Vendosme, who the 11th day at Night arrived with the Can|non and Ammunition, going up the Dordogne, and passing happily under the Enemies Fort, not above half Pistol shot off, by the assistance of the Galley, (being one of those appointed for his Guard) which was commanded by Mon|sieur de la Monnerie, Commissary General of the Admiralty; after which the Trench was begun on that side of the River where the Duke of Vendosme was lodged; and the care of this Attack was given to the Count of Montesson, Colonel of the Regiment of Bretagne, and a Battery of two pieces of Cannon; d' Estrades attacked on the other side of the River Ille, and Monsieur de St. Ro|main, assisted in making the Approaches, and another Battery with the Regi|ment of Douglass.
In this mean time the besieged made a great Salley on that side, with Horse and Foot, but were so briskly repulsed, that they durst never after peep abroad. Both the Attacks were advanced with so much vigour, that the se|cond day the French were Masters of two Half-Moons, in one of which they took 17 prisoners, and a breach being there opened on the Duke's side, and a Mine ready to be sprung on that of d' Estrades, the besieged upon the 17th of Iuly founded a Parley, and demanded the same Terms as were granted unto Bourg; but 'twas refused them, the French thinking it not reasonable that Libourne should think it self'equal to Bourg; at last it was agreed, That as to the French and Irish Souldiers, they should be Prisoners of Warr; the Officers should have liberty to return to their own houses, and twelve onely should have li|berty to carry the Baggage away with them. The Souldiers who were about 800, divided themselves under the King's colours, where they voluntarily entred themselves into Service.
The Justice of the King's Cause was visibly approved by the facility where|with these two Important Places were gained by his Forces, and the diligence and abilities of his Captains appeared likewise to be very great, and particu|larly in the Enterprise of Libourne, which being Garrison'd by more than 800 Souldiers in pay, was besieged, and taken by an Army of 2200 Foot, and Four hundred Horse, the remainder of the Troops being divided, part of them placed in Garrison at Bourg; part part left to make good the Posts of Castillon, and Monreal, and the rest Commanded upon seve|ral Parties by the Generals, upon the notice they got by Letters of Marsin intercepted, and undeciphered, that his Lieutenants marched with some Troops of Perigord and Quercy, unto the relief of that place, which being the principal foundation of the subsistance of Bourdeaux, was furnished with all things necessary for the holding out of a long Siege.
This second loss put all the Inhabitants into a wonderful apprehension, and the Prince's Party lost much of their first Credit, the people crying out, That in lieu of the Succour which they hoped for, they were contriving to cast them into the slavery abominated by them.
The Citizens therefore made several Assemblies, and examining the state

of their Affairs, found clearly that their hopes of subsistence were very small without speedy Succour, which could not be elsewhere had but from Spain, or England; they therefore sent away to sollicite the Catholique King's Ge|nerals for their promised Succours; and failed not to request of General Cromwell, That he would open the Passage of the River, and give maintenance un|to that City which would bring so great advantages to England. But the Spaniards who desired very much to perform this Request, wanted Forces, and the English who could with ease have done it, had no thoughts of putting it in execution.
The French who saw well that Expedition was the Mother of Success and were sensible that either the Spaniard might get Forces, or the English an inclination to succour Bourdeaux, disposed themselves with extraordinary diligence, to put in execution all those things which might serve to reduce that People speedily under obedience, and therefore Libourne being taken, they quarter'd their Troops as near as possibly they could to Bourdeaux, that they might incommodate the Citizens, and deprive them of all communi|cation with the Countrey.
The Duke of Vendosme held the Castle of Lermont, all the Countrey be|tween the two Seas, and by means of the Fleet, was Master of the River; The Duke of Candale, with his Forces divided upon the principal Passes, was Master of all the Avenues, having to back them the Fort Casar, the Bourg of Blanquefort, and the Quarter of Begle, and thereby hindred the City from receiving any Relief on that side, where they had before got it, and expected it afresh from Spain, and the Count de Marin was sent to take the Castle de la Teste de Certes, wherein was that Garrison which had facilitated the Count de Fiesco his passage formerly.
But although 'twere certain, that Force was the securest means to restore the King's Authority within that City; yet considering it might be long first, 'twas thought fit to try the means for reducing the Inhabitants unto a voluntary submission. The House of Espernon had in it a great number of Creatures, and well-affected persons, gained by their long abiding in those Parts, who notwithstanding the Seditious Cabals, had alwaies retained their good affections; Which made it easie for the Duke of Candale (a Prince ge|nerally beloved for his Virtuous and Noble Qualities) to set on foot a Treaty upon this design, with the well disposed Citizens.
By means therefore of Friends and Confidents, (there being many others disposed to Peace) they thought fit to attempt the means of bringing it about.
The multitudes of Country people running into the City for fear of the Souldiers, served wonderfully to make the scarcity of Provisions appear, be|cause the Corn being with great dexterity bought up, and hidden in private houses, and the Mills being out of order by biding of the stones, and other implements, the Bakers were not able to find Bread sufficient to furnish such a multitude; whereupon the throng of people, who were present at the distribution of it, began to think that the want was extream great, and that therefore the publick safety was more to be considered, then private inte|rests. The Provision for the Hospitals was also neglected, and those Poor were sent unto their doors, who were thought to be most interested in the continuance of the Warr; which was so done, that with their pitiful Out|cryes, they might let them see 'twas necessary (not being able to resist longer against so great an extremity of Miseries) to moderate their own particular obstinacy, which had been the cause of bringing it upon them.
The fight of this Crowd of Poor, and Beggars, whispering at their doors who were looked on as the beginners of the Warr, wrought very much to|wards

the disposing of them unto Peace, beginning now to fear that those very persons of whom they had made use to disturb the publick quiet, would fall upon themselves, and plunder their houses, it was also proposed to the Religious, That they would expose the Blessed Sacrament in their Churches cover|ed with a black Vail, to the end it should appear that God detested and abhorred this Warr. But the Prince's Councel, and the Frondeurs, having notice thereof, caused it to be exposed in the Great Church, and supplications to be made for a general Peace; which was the pretence they made use of, to abuse the ig|norant multitude.
This Revolution lasted until Wednesday the 9th of Iuly, on which day af|ter many private Conferences, several Merchants met in the Palace de la Bourse, saying 'Twas necessary to shut up Shop, considering there could be no farther business done during the Warr.
The Prince of Conty having notice of these Murmurings; made a Cavalcade through the City, but it passed no farther; and the next day one du Bas, ha|ving been seised on by his order for having cryed out, Peace, before the Palace of Justice, all the Neighbouring Quarter took Arms, and required his en|largement.
This du Bas plotted with a Conventual Frier Minim, called Frier Romain, who having made some intelligence with the Count d' Autel, shewed unto several of the Citizens a Paper which he said was from the Prince of Conty, whereby he gave him liberty to have meetings, that he might give him no|tice of all things that might concern his Party; but the matter was other|wise handled, in regard the Frier had no design but to discover thereby who were good subjects, and who were ill-affected to the King, whereof Bas and others taking notice, they were reserved, and would not communicate any thing of importance to the Frier.
The good Repute du Bas had in the publick Vogue, moved the Citizens to make that stirre, and to demand his release, threatning some novelty in case case they were not satisfied herein; Conty and Marsin got to Horse, together with the greatest part of the Nobility, and Officers of the Army, all the City Companies were commanded to take Arms, the greatest part of whom had some of the Olmiera for their Captains; but it so happened, that the Butchers under Command of Gilbert, and one Master Isaac, armed with Musquets and other Arms, cryed out for Peace, and that if any had particular disgusts, they should revenge themselves by their own Arms, without ingaging therein the Lives of the whole City. And a Hollander, married in Bourdeaux, told Marsin to his face, That they knew how to dye, but would not dye unrevenged; and that being free, they would not dye tamely. Wherewithal being started, they con|cluded that after Dinner all those of the Olmiera should meet in the Town|House.
There several Expedients were proposed, and the plurality of voices agreed in this, That the Citizens dwelling in the Quarter called de la Rochelle, and the New Street, should be assaulted, and Cannon drawn up against them. The Prince of Conty liked not the Advice, and thought it better to expect the Judges, and Consuls of the Exchange, who with much submission, came to Petition him, That he would not suffer the good Citizens to be outraged, nor comply with those of the Olmeira, who were about him, and made their boasts that they would plunder their houses. The Merchants appeared, and Petitioned for Peace. That they might avoid greater disorders. The Prince answered, That he desired not to keep any in subjection by force, which he could with case do; but that if they were constant to his Brother the Prince of Conde, and himself, he would protect their Interests; and by being united, all those difficulties would be overcome; which whilest they were at variance among themselves, daily augmented, and would cast them into inextri|cable

difficulties; but that he would consider with his Council, what was fit to be re|solved upon in this Conjuncture.
The Count de Fiesco was in this interim dispatched from the Court of Spain, and imbarking himself upon a Frigat at St. Sebastians, he was come unto the Port of the Teste de Busch, there finding all the Countrey in Arms for the King, he landed, and had much ado to save himself, leaving the Frigat to the discretion of those Countrymen, by whom she was seised, and all the persons in her made prisoners: The great Guns in her were made use of to batter the Castle of the Teste de Busch, and another place near thereunto called Sertes, garrisoned by the Prince's Souldiers, that they might keep open this Pass for those that went, and returned from Biscay. To these Countrey Forces, were sent a Recruit of 600 Foot, under the Command of the Count de Marin, by whom these two Castles (which much favoured the Spaniards landing) were in five or six dayes taken.
Fiesco coming to Bourdeaux the 12th of Iuly, went instantly with the Prince of Conty unto the Town-House, and highly magnifying the Catholick King's Power, he assured those of the Olmiera, Of a Speedy, and Powerful supply of Men, Money, Shipping, and all other manner of Provisions, which he had seen himself all in good order, and left under sayl in their course at the heighth of the Port of Passage, so as the Wind blowing fair, it could not be far behind. Upon this News it was resolved to have a General Meeting of the Companies of the City, where Fiesco made the same relation, assuring them, That this was no relation of a Gazet, but an assured certainty; himself having been present at Council, and at the execution of the Orders which were thereupon given from the Court of Spain.
These Passages were by well-meaning men listened unto with horrour; yet some Counsellers of Parliament being revived with these hopes, said, They ought not to proceed farther in the Proposals for Peace, made by a Party of the Citizens, for fear of abusing the Favours of his Catholick Majesty under whose protection all things would surely be concluded with an entire Liberty, and Quiet. But notwithstanding this, the Presidial (which is a Magistracy composed of above Thirty Counsellers, and Officers of Note, to whom belongs the ordi|nary administration of Justice) next morning made a deputation unto the Prince of Conty, desiring him that Peace might be concluded; and that belief should not be given so lightly to the report of Fiesco, transported with the Passion he had for upholding of the disobedience against his natural Soveraign. After which, all the Religious went to perform the same Office, for the Publick safety, and repose.
The Chapter of the Cathedral Church of St. Andrew made the same Re|quest, but their Deputies were threatned by Granant the Goldsmith, a prin|cipal person amongst the Seditious; there came also Ministers from the Hu|gonots, who in all these occasions shewed themselves very zealous and affe|ctionate to the King's Service. The Prince of Conty answered to all, That himself also desired Peace, but such, as should be lasting and secure; that when the same could be obtained with fit security, he would be more ready than any other to imbrace it. At which time he also sent unto the Marquess de Santa Cruz (General of the Spanish Army) several Expresses, to represent unto him the Necessity of a speedy Succour, any small delay whereof would bring all things unto the utmost extremity, and therefore the resolution was to be forthwith taken; that himself was ready, and resolved if any new Stirrs happened, in case Baltissar would march out with some Troops of Horse, to go with the Duke of Anguien his Nephew unto Tartas, and so by Land unto the Frontiers of Spain.
This was a bold and hazardous Attempt, and as such was opposed not onely by the Princesses, but by Lenet and Marsin himself. Mean while the

Citizens being weary of the Indiscretions and Tyranny of the Rabble of the Olmiera, by the advice of the Vilconte de Virlade, a Councellor of State, and of Monsieur de Bacalan, Advocate General du Chambre des Edicts, and several other persons, devoted to the King's Service, took a resolution to make them|selves Masters of the City Gates, by being present at the changing of the Guards with their Servants armed, that so they might be stronger in num|ber, as they were superiours in valour to the Captains of the Guards, who were all of them of the Olmeira, who were lifted by the Prince of Conde, and paid by him, that he might have them true and faithful to him; these were extraordinarily astonished and amazed, seeing a number of Persons of Qua|lity, with Halberts on their shoulders, Pistols, and other Arms about them, to lift themselves, and serve in the same manner as the meanest of the common people; whereupon some of the Captains of the Olmeira offered to go along with them, and demand Peace.
There were some of the Citizens who seeing themselves Masters of the Ports, desired to bring in the King's Forces that they might with more ease shake off the Yoke; but the rest who were as willing to preserve the Prince of Conty, and his Family, as to free their Countrey, opposed such violent courses, and endeavoured to have the Peace concluded upon Honourable Terms, and not by falshood, and conspiracies, whereby the City might be exposed unto the fury of the Souldiers, with danger to the Prince's life, who being of a bold undaunted spirit, would according to his wonted custome, run upon the least noise, and expose himself unto the greatest danger.
And therefore these moderate Persons insisted, That the things resolved upon were to be executed vigorously, but with good order, rendring to the Prince and his Family the Respects due to their Royal Birth, and endeavour|ing to gain all persons by sweet means, such as might procure most advantage to their Countrey, and gain most Glory to their Actions.
In the mean time Marsin, and Fiesco, had resolved to bring Souldiers into the City, that might reduce the Inhabitants by force unto their wills; and to the end they might more freely vent their fury, had a design upon the Prince of Conty his liberty, and the lives of Monsieur de Saracin, and the Ab|bot of Colnac, his Confidents.
The Prince was advertised thereof by the Fathers of the Society, and de|sired, That for his safety he would please to lye either in the Town-Honse, or retire himself into their Colledge which was near unto it.
But the Visconte de Virlade being advertised of all this, was the first who took Arms, and with his Friends seised upon the Port de Chapelle Rouge, through which they were to have let in the said Forces. He Treated also with the Irish, who were the persons that should have struck the stroke, and by perswading them that Marsin intended to put them into the hands of the English their Enemies and Persecutors (with whom he Treated by means of Francars, and Blaru, Deputies of the Olmiera who were in England) brought them to take imployment under his Majestie.
The Disgusts between the Prince of Conty, and Marsin, sprang from Mar|sin's ever growing in his Pretensions, whereby Lenet and he, arrogating to themselves all the Authority, treated the Prince as he had been a liveless Statue; so as Conty and the Dutchess of Longueville his Sister, not being able longer to support the insolence of these two persons, wrote Letters testify|ing their resentments to the Prince of Conde, That he might take some order for their satisfaction, which could not be otherwise but by removal of those two persons; or by permitting them to retire themselves.
The Prince was two moneths ere he returned an answer, and then did it contrary to what they expected, writing onely in general terms, desiring

them to lay aside all animosities, and study Peace; and declaring, That he intended Marsin should Command all things relating to the Warr, and Lenet those touching the Finances; and Monsieur de Chouppes having also written to him touch|ing the abuses of Marsin and Lenet, he sent unto them the Original Let|ters.
This was sufficient to have given occasion unto the Prince and Dutchess, to leave their Brother's Party, who besides seemed not to confide in them; but these Princes used more prudence and moderation than they were bound unto, and quite contrary to what Conde had done, would never Treat about any Union with the Court for themselves separately, as the Prince their Brother had done, who without acquainting them therewith, (by means of the Dutchess of Chastillon, the Duke of Rochefaucaut, and Monsieur de Gau|court) had the Year before held a secret Treaty for making his own peace. But they remained constant even to the last extremity, having besides Mon|sieur de Chouppes, and the Marquiss de Lusignan, dispatched Monsieur de Bre|quigny unto the Catholick Court, and Monsieur de Fay unto the Marquiss de Santa Cruz, then at St. Sebastians, where the Baron de Batteville, unsatisfied that any other should enjoy the fruit and honour of his Labours, cast in new difficulties to the Resolutions of the Spanish Court, who according to their usual delayes, entertained the Princes and their Party onely with hopes.
These differences continuing between the Princes, and the Ministers of Conde, were in part the means that gave more life, and boldness, to the Merchants Meetings in the Common Burse, that being thought the most convenient place (because the Town House was taken up by the Counsel of the Olmiera, and the Palace of Justice by the Frondeurs) Monsieur Lenet went twice to speak with them, to sowe divisions amongst them, by insinuating to the Merchants that he approved what they went about, so it were done without ingaging therein the Advocates, and others of the Long-Robe, who as Interested Persons, would draw all the glory of the Action to themselves, and leave the trouble of it unto them; he represented to others their own interests, the power of Conde, and his good affections towards the City, endeavouring to gain all Parties, partly by Terrour, and partly by jealou|sies, and hopes; but all these endeavours, and Negotiations hindred not the concourse, and meeting, of the well affected Party in this Assembly; Wherefore finding that all things went cross to his intentions, and that the Citizens were altogether bent to Peace, instead of confiding in the Prince of Conty, who stood firm unto the Interests of his Brother and Fa|mily, notwithstanding his ill usage by him, he raised several suspitions of him with the Princesses, and (which was the worst Counsel could be taken as things then stood) being himself Universally hated, cast forth many slanders against the said Prince, to discredit the onley stay that could sup|port them, sowing discords in his House, and amongst the People well af|fected to him, and endeavouring and by paltry means to Circumvent them. Fiesco took a Lodging in the New street amongst the Merchants, that he might be nearer at hand to perswade them, that to make a secure Peace, 'twas necessary to follow the Counsels of Marsin, a Person of tried experience; and not those of Conty a raw young man.
They caused also some of the Frondeurs in whom they most confided, to be present at those Assemblies in the Burse, amongst whom were also some of the Counsellors of the Parliament that staid at Bourdeaux; to occasion some differences, and trouble amongst them, thereby to gain time wherein they had placed all their hopes; and they wrought also with one Ramont, who stood Sentinel in the Town-House, to stop one Doriol from entring there, though he was one of the Olmiera, because he did not second their opinions,

which was so ill taken by his his Companions, and all the Olmiera, that they commanded him out of the City, and having discovered that Marsin had tampered with many of the People, they made by common consent, a ge|neral meeting in the Burse upon the 19th day of Iuly, of all the Companies of the City.
Being met, there was present among them the Cavalier Todias, a Jurate, and occasion being thereupon taken that a City Magistrate rendred the meeting Legal, they enjoyned him to accept a deputation from them to the Prince of Conty, to signifie unto him the good Citizens resolution to Treat a Peace, to desire he would approve the design, and consent that the Ob|stacle which both within and without the City was a hindrance to it (which was the Olmiera) might be removed, and abolished. That the Cap|tains and Officers might be changed, it being a thing very unseemly, and unreasonable, that so many Persons of Birth, and Quality, who went Perso|nally to the Guard for the publick security, should be commanded by those Mean, Seditious, Plebians, and that Persons of worth, and merit, might sup|ply their places. It was afterwards concluded, that all those who were there present, should be esteemed as Deputies from all the Companies of the City, and should from day to day assemble together as principal Counsellors of the same.
These to the number of 30, together with several of the principal Arti|ficers, went together towards the Dutchess of Longuevilles House, where the Prince of Conty then was, a small number of them staying behind in the Burse. Where Monsieur de Virlada, Monsieur de Bacalan, together with the Baron de la Mogarolla, and young erang, Son to the Hugonot Minister, con|cluded, that 'twas necessary to do some bold thing; and thereupon whilest the Deputies were going thither, they cryed out to as many as they saw in the Court and street before the Palace of Justice, and in the Market-place, Vive la Roy,  a la paix distributing to all they met, pieces of White Ribon for a Sign. The Deputies were encouraged by this noise, and the Cavalier Todias, with much freedome represented unto the Prince of Conty, the mise|ries, which were occasioned as well by the King's forces, as by those of the Princes who were lodged under the Walls, and principally by the tumultu|ous Osts, who in one year had committed so many Scandalous Actions, as would remain a stain upon them for many Ages. That the good and peaceable Citizens, could no longer suffer the Licentious carriage of the Souldiery, and therefore besought him in the name of all, to take some fit expedient for the general comfort, and relief, assuring him of the affection, and constancy of all the Citizens towards his Highness, and the interests of the Prince his Brother, the Duke of Anguien his Nephew, the Princess of Conde, and the Dutchess of Longueville his Sister.
The Princes Answer was, That he desired them next day to meet at the Arch|Bishops Palace, to agree upon the means how a durable Peace might be concluded. As the Deputies went out of Longueville House, they met with those who cryed out, Peace, with whom they joyned, every one taking some white Sign, and in a moment there was nothing heard throughout the City, but Vive le Roy  la paix,  meure L'Olmiere; the Women, Children, and all others, took some white mark, and who had nothing else, got a piece of Rag, or white Paper; and on the contrary the Olmeists, and those of the Princes party, got a piece of Sky Colour, or Isabella, for a distinction.
The Sandry following by the Princes order, there met in Counsel, the Counts , de More, Fiesco, Mata d' Aubell, the Marquiss of Lusiguan, the Colonel Bhasar, the Counsellors Ramont, du Duc, and Espagnet, who had met at the Burse. There was also called unto this Counsel the President de

Tresne, who upon pretence either of a True, or Feigned disease, had kept himself for two years concealed at home, the affairs was there discoursed up|on, and debated, with variety of opinions. Some of the Frondeurs to keep the Matter from comming to a resolution, either through ignorance, or ma|lice, desired to delay the time that the matter might not come unto a Vote, which being suspected by Virlade, who was sufficiently informed of Mar|sin's Arts, and knew of what importance the time was which was unprofi|tably wasted, he staid with some of his friends in the Burse, and besides those who were with him the day before, got together the Monsieurs, Lacrup, Fa|ther and Son, the Brothers of the Lestriges, Cosages, and several Persons fit for Action, with whom (that he might encourage the Deputies then in the Arch-Bishops Palace, and give some fright unto Marsin, and his party) toge|ther with about 2000 Persons gottogether by their perswasions, he caused the House of Blaru, who was the Deputy in England, to be assaulted, that so the report which he had caused to be given out being increased, might be a motive unto the Prince of Conty, and the whole Assembly, to satisfie the Citi|zens desires; but the People fickle and changing like the Wind, quickly gave proof of their inconstancy, and abandoned them in the middle of the Action.
The Heads of the enterprize, endeavoured to Rally the People but in vain, and in the mean time Night drew on, no resolution being taken; Virlade be|thought himself to give some Doubloons unto Monsieur de Cabanieux his Kins|man, that he should Assemble some of his Companions, and go unto St. Mi|chaels Steeple, where taking down the Red Banner advanced there by those of the Olmiera, he should in Lieu of that Bloody, and Fatal Colour, fix there a White Banner with the Armes of France, which being punctually executed there, and upon the Steeples of San Remy, and San Pierre, by the Parish Priests there who were well affected to the King, as also upon the Gate near to the Burse, gave them so great an apprehension, that even Marsin himself, who was averse from Peace, condescended unto all that was required by the Merchants Deputies, upon the apprehension he had of some surprize intended towards him.
Twelve Deputies were thereupon picked out to consult together with the Princes Councel, touching the terms fit for the concluding of a Peace; But Marsin perceiving the fear he had to have been groundless, meeting the same Night in the Town-House (where the Prince of Conty lodged) with the officers of the Army, and other heads of the Olmiera, they Treated together touching the means to distrub the designes of those, who were well affected to his Majesty.
Those of the Olmiera proposed to have all persons to be Seised, and Execu|ted, who had Assembled in the Burse; Marsin, and Fiesco, would have a mid|dle course taken, that they should stand upon their defence, and bringing Forces into the City, should lodge them in the streets about the Town-house, unto the quarter of Sant Eulalia towards the Bishops Palace, and the Castle de Ha, where the inhabitants were not suspected; they resolved also to make use of an arrest of Parliament made about the Frondeurs, which prohibited all Assemblies as unlawful and Seditious, which were made upon pretence of ma|king remonstrances unto the King for Peace, that so the Olmiera might Unite themselves with the remainder of the Parliament against the other Citizens.
The Prince of Conty liked not the bringing in of Forces, as a thing which would make the Citizens desperate, and oblige them to let in the Dukes of Vendosme, and Candale, which would be the utter Ruine, and Desolation of the City. But 'twas concluded that they should make use of the resolutions of the Parliament, the Councellors whereof going to meet next Morning, were hindred by a Company of Citizens, who told them, that the Parlia|ment

was now in Agen, and not at Bourdeaux. Virlade caused a Corps de Guard to be put upon the Palace of Justice, to hinder the Councellors from meeting there, and at the Burse Gate, caused Monsieur Lovergnac an Advocate to read a Letter from the Duke of Candale, wherein he proffered them his Mediation, and a general Act of Oblivion. The people though they accept|ed not thereof, prayed Virlade and Bacalan, to appear as their Tribunes, in those Councells which were held for publick Affairs in the Archbishops Pa|lace.
Affairs in Bourdeaux standing in this posture, and the major part of the Citizens being for Peace, the French Generals thought fit for strengthen|ing of those good intentions, and disabling the seditious persons of the Ol|miera, from interrupting of them, to advance the Troops from the Quarter de la Begle, towards the Port de San Iulian, and at the same time to draw up the Fleet towards Lormont.
This Resolution was forth with put in execution, Candale's Troops march|ing before by Land, who were about 4000 Foot, and 200 Horse, under the Command of three Lieutenants General Canillac, Marin, and Bougy; and of Coudray Monpensier, who Commanded the Horse, because the Count de Marinville, who was Lieutenant General, under whom were 1500 Foot, and about 1200 Horse, who came from Catalonia, stirred not from his Quarters at Blanquefort; the dust which the Horse marching raised mounting into the Aire in Clouds, and the noise of the Artillery from the Ships, and Gal|leys, against the Post of Bacalan, was seen, and heard with so much confu|sion and terrour, that the Frondeurs, and some Counsellours of Parliament who were at the Burse, presently broke up the Assembly, all pale, and trou|bled, reproaching the rest that under colour of Peace, they endeavoured a Surprize and Desolation of the City.
Virlade used his utmost endeavours to have the Officers at the Ports (who were of the Olmiera) to be changed; but he, and the Advocate Dalon, were the onely men of that opinion; and consulting with him finding their de|signs were now discovered, and that the people were in a rage against them, he resolved to go unto the Town-House, and there with some of his Friends to endeavour the naming of new Captains. He found there the Prince of Conty, and represented to him the Confusion wherein the City was, disor|dered within, and attacked by the King's Forces without, that the Citizens not being willing to obey those who were now Captains, nor the Sergeant Major Periera, he besought him for his own security, to accept of those few Captains whom in the Cities name he tendered to him, giving him some jealousie of the Jurates pretensions against his authority, in case they should have the power to choose those persons as they desired.
The Prince to free himself from him, in a time wherein Surprises were to be feared, received their Oaths; they then went to Councel in the Arch|Bishop's Palace, and Treated upon the Expedients for having Peace. Vir|lada offered himself to go, and negotiate with the Duke of Candale, without expecting a Passport, or losing time: Marsin thought to spoil his design, by giving him Monsieur de Baz, a Colonel, and his great Confident, for a Com|panion; But Virlada went away at Midnight, onely with the Prince's Pass, without de Baz. Monsieur de Bacalan was also named to go unto the Duke of Vendosme, together with Monsieur de Calapian, Brother of the Marquiss of Lusignan, a Colonel, in whom Marsin had also a great interest.
Virlada declared unto Candale the Intentions of the City, who were ready to return unto his Majestie's Obedience, and presented unto him the Com|mission he had from them to Treat with him, as also a Letter of Credence from the Prince of Conty, whereby to prevent a Conspiracy against his life,

and liberty, by some who have absented themselves from Bourdeaux, but were now returned unto it; he declared his willingness to Treat with the Duke, being his particular Friend, for the security of all those of his Party; and did farther humbly beseech him, That he would interpose his Authority, that the good Citizens might receive Effects rather of the Clemency, than of the Iustice of his Majestie.
The Duke received these Expressions with much Courtesie, and professing himself to be a Friend, and Servant, of the Prince of Conty, made unto him all demonstrations of Esteem which were requisite to a good correspondence. But there being a necessity that in order to Treating of a Peace, a Truce should first precede, Virlada being earnest with him to grant it, the Duke answered, That he would resolve nothing therein without the Duke of Vendosme, with whom he had a perfect good intelligence. But whilest these things were acting, the Souldiers were strictly charged not to stirre out of their Quarters, nor commit any act of Hostility against the Lives or Goods of the Burde|lois.
He sent also the Cavalier de Muns, Captain of his Guard, to complement the Prince, and assure the Citizens of his good Inclinations towards them, and of a sincere interposition with his Majestie in their favour; from thence the said Captain passed to the Duke of Vendosme, to give him an account of what was doing: Monsieur de Bacalan made the same submissions and pro|tests unto the Duke of Vendosme, in the name of the Citizens; which were received by him with all expressions of Kindness and Favour, which were natural unto him.
The same day Monsieur de Gourville came from Court into the Duke of Vendosme's Quarters, and desiring to pass over unto the Duke of Candale, sent into Bourdeaux to demand a Pass, that being much the shorter way; the curiosity of the Commanders was the cause they sent him a Passport to come through the City, every one being desirous to hear some News, of what had happened since their separation from the Prince of Conde; and because the house where Monsieur Lenet lay was next unto the place where he alighted, he visited him first, and staid all Night with him, which gave some suspition unto the Prince of Conty, and the Dutchess of Longueville, they thought that coming from Court he might bring some Orders to Treat with Marsin, and Lenet, who stood then upon very bad terms with Conty, and Longueville; who being visited by him the next morning, were very earnest to know what Orders he brought: but Gourville professing that he would not have med|led in any thing of that kind, without acquainting them, and that they ought to consider him as a person depending solely upon his Majesty's Service, the same did very much increase their jealousie and apprehension.
The curiosity of these Princes kept him in a long discourse of several things, which wrought the same effect in the minds of Marsin, and Lenet, as his conversation before with Lenet had done in theirs; and the rather, be|cause having treated of nothing at all with them, they fancied, the Orders were to treat onely with the Prince, so as both the one, and the other, re|mained equally suspitious of each other; Gourville went on in his Journey, and together with Monsieur de Bas, (the Colonel who was by Marsin sent to take notice of Virlada's actings) came to the Duke of Candale, by whom he was most civilly received, and communicating with him touching those things were to be done for the King's Service in Bourdeaux, and by agree|ment with Virlada, got a suspension of Arms for three dayes, in which time the Duke pretended that he would confer personally with Vendosme, to adjust the Articles for a Truce, not onely for the City, but also for the whole Province of Guienne. Mean while the Prince of Conty went to the Burse,

and there took a white Riband with the general satisfaction; but being in|formed of the great inconveniences occasioned by the frequent commerce of the King's Officers and Souldiers in the City, he prohibited by advice of the Citizens, that any should be admitted without Passports.
Virlada being returned to Bourdeaux, informed the Prince of his Negotia|tions with Candale, and communicated the same also unto the Citizens; Marsin being troubled to see that Treaty near a conclusion, which by so ma|ny artifices he had endeavoured to protract, or quite break off, would not consent that any answer should be made out of the Archbishop's Palace; whereupon Virlada to animate the people, and make them fond of Peace, published another Writing from the Duke of Candale, whereby he gave per|mission unto the Citizens to go securely unto their Country houses, about their Vintage, and distributed Passes to as many as required them.
The Duke of Vendosme sent also Monsieur de Butin, his Secretary, into Bur|deaux, to acquaint the Citizens with the good inclinations he had to favour them, but that he would not Treat without the Duke of Candale his consent, and to the end the Propositions might be with the more ease examined; and agreed, That the Duke of Candale and he would meet together, and not part till the Treaty were concluded, or broken off; Butin was received with great applause, but Cavalier Todias principal Jurate declared, It was against the Rules of Warr, and their own interest, to make a shew of so much fondness after Peace. The Secretary was also sent again, and Vendosme's Letter was directed to the Prince of Conty. Marsin appearing at the Councel called in the Archbishop's Palace, reproved Virlada, That he had suffered in his pre|sence, Feran the Hugonot Minister to speak unto the Duke of Candale, against the Princes Party; and added, That 'twas a demonstration made it evident, that the Hugonots hated the Spaniard, which was against the Common interest, considering there was no Succour to be expected from any other place then Spain; but that both be, and Feran, would be therein disowned by the other Townesmen.
Virlada answered, That he was Servant to the King, and a good French-man, and therefore he assured himself that honest men would never blame him; and what the bad said be little cared. The relations which Virlada and Bacalan made of their Negotiations, were a great trouble to Marsin, who foresaw therein the loss of his cause, and that the major part of the Inhabitants were disposed to return unto his Majestie's obedience.
There was a Passport then demanded for Vendosme's Galleysto go and bring the Duke of Candale unto Begle; Marsin opposed it, saying there might be some Treason therein, and offered that he should be carried in the Town-Shipping. Virlada, and Bacalan, disliked that Proposition, and said, That 'twas not reasonable the King's General should be carried by any other Shipping than his Majesties: Wherewith Marsin being more incensed, there passed a Contest, and high words between the parties, and he made instance that the said Deputies might be changed; but they being well liked of by the Loyal Party, were not removed but confirmed in their Imployment, and the Articles of the Truce were set down, the substance whereof was, That all Hostility should cease till the conclusion or breach of the Treaty; That the Souldiers should not have Commerce with the Inhabitants, unless they Pass-Ports from the Generals. That after the King's Forces were drawn off, Quarters should be given to those of the Princes 4. Leagues from Bourdeaux. That during the Truce Privisions should go freely into the City. That Pass-Ports should be given to some for Flanders, to give notice hereof unto the Prince of Conde; and for Spain, unto the Catholick King, That Balthasar with his Troops might retire to Tartas. There was a dispute about the Article touching Pass-Ports for Spain, and 'twas changed by the Prince of Conty, who agreed, That notice

should be given to the Spanish Admiral, with a desire that he would not set sayl for Bourdeaux, because he should be there neither assisted, nor received.
All these things were wonderfully displeasing to Marsin, and to all the other constant Servants of Conde, and such as were averse unto the Peace; they therefore caused new whispers and divisions to arise in the City, set|ting afoot Cabals to overthrow all good concord and agreement; these re|presented that there was sufficient store of Corn in the Town for three Moneths; that the want of provisions, and Diseases got into the King's Army daily increased, so as they could not long subsist, nor make head against the least attack of the Spanish Fleet, which was hourly expected stored with all provisions of Victuals, Money, and Souldiers, so as holding of but some few dayes, they might obtain a much more advantageous Peace. That in Flanders, the Prince of Conde with a powerful Army was able to march up even to Paris, without hinderance, by reason of the weakness of the King's Army, and disaffection of the people to Mazarine. They went on detesting the Propositions of the Peace now in hand, as unworthy the name of their Union,  contrary unto their promises, so often reiterated unto the Prince of Conde not to abandon him; That this was onely the effect of a Conspiracy by some few persons, corrupted by the Court, and disposed to better their own Fortunes by the publick ruine; That they were to beware of their offers as of the Syrens Song, and that when one hath highly displeased his Prince, there was no better counsel then to endeavour never to see him but in Picture.
On the other side, those who knew the artifices of the Seditious persons, held forth other Reasons, they alledged; That things were now brought near to the extremity, which was, that they should through inadvertence either fall into the hands, and under the insupportable Yoke of the Spaniard, or become a mise|rable prey to the Arms, and Indignation of their own King, that the Town could not fall under a greater Tyranny then was exercised among them by the Prince's Troops, who in fine sought nothing else then to satisfie the furious raging desire they had to deprive them of their Goods and Honour, and leave them in a languish|ing and miserable condition. That being 'twas impossible the City should be redu|ced unto worse terms, they ought to lay hold on the fair opportunity offered to re|deem them from such evident danger, whilest the Generals with unexpected kind|ness offered to all the favours of his Majestie's Clemency, and esteemed it a glory to themselves rather to have obtained their Pardon, than to have been the instru|ments of his Majestie's revenge upon them; That the time was now come wherein they might cancell all the dishonourable blemishes of Rebellion, by making it appear that 'twas rather the violent effects of a few turbulent spirits, than the inclination of the generality.
That Marsin as a stranger, for his own interest (whereof he plainly shew|ed himself much carefuller then of the Princes) endeavoured to bring things unto the extremity, by the false and counterfeit pretences of a relief, which were rather to be abhorred, then entertained, since by giving a farther nou|rishment unto the War, it would precipitate the people into an Eternal in|extricable confusion, wherein their own Revenues would be totally destroy|ed, the same consisting in their Traffick with strangers, and their Vintage, whereof the one was now shut up, and interrupted, and the other would be totally destroyed if they were hindred from gathering of their Grapes. They added, That the Princes professing to have care of the peoples good, would not desire that for the interest of a few Partisans of theirs, so many Innocent Persons should be destroyed, and they being of so high Birth, and Quality, might when they would submit, be restored unto their former greatness, and Authority in France, wherein whoever was a French-man,

had an Antipathy against the Spaniard, who rejoyced at these troubles, and sought his own advantage by it, alluring the unwary with the Lustre of his Gold, and flattering hopes, rather than by strong effective Succours; and they concluded, that having a Soveraign bestowed upon them by God Almigh|ty, they were not to doubt but he would perform those Great and Magnani|mous Actions, which consisted principally in forgetting injuries, and pardon|ing offences.
These reasons which were avowed by almost all the Citizens in publick declarations, added to the fear of being again outraged by those of the Olmi|era, if they should by the assistance of Forraign Forces rise again, made them to issue out a Total prohibition of any Assembly of the Olmiera, and with much diligence to renew all the Captaines of the Quarters, and keep a strick Watch at the Gates, to hinder the entry of all stranger Souldiers.
The Colonel Balthasar was also privately Treated withal in the Duke of Candal's name, that they might gain him, he being a frank and generous Person, who in case he were re-united with Marsin, could do more hurt then any other, but by reason of several disgusts received, was not then in good intelligence with him.
Virlada being in this mean while returned to Begle, that he might accom|pany the Duke of Candale to Lormont, and be present at the Treaty of the general Truce; the Duke had notice sent him at Mid-night by an express Courrier from Vendosme, that 35 Sail of Spaniards were in sight of Blaye, whereupon the Truce of 3 days being now expired, Candale thought fit to give them another without limitation of time, which should continue till the conclusion of the Peace, and publications of the Amnestie; this he did to in|gage the Citizens in a Treaty, before they were advertised of the Arrival of the Spanish Fleet, least otherwise they might change their opinion, and concur with the heads of the contrary party.
He therefore concluded, and carefully settled the same, and dispatched Virlada into Bourdeaux, to draw from the Prince of Conty a precise resoluti|on, and a publick declaration for the King's service.
Being come unto the City he found it in great Commotion, by the Arti|fices of Marsin, who having been at the Burse together with Lenet, to excuse themselves from the practices imputed to them, had in part satisfied them, and removed the jealousies conceived of them, and by distributing Money amongst the common people, had gained a good part of them, and par|ticularly those of the Confraternity of St. Iames, being there numerous enough above 1500 Persons, in the procession usually made on that Saint's day, and had thereupon caused them to tye Red Ribons in their Hats, and ap|pointed them to cry through the streets, and in the Procession it self, Vive tes Princes.
Virlada being much troubled with this Novelty, went to them with the Trumpet from Candale, from some of them he took their Red strings, giving them White in lieu thereof, and by distributing Money amongst them, made them cry Vive le Roy  la paix, from thence going to the Town-house where the Prince of Conty was, he was earnest with him to declare himself either for Peace or War, that he as his servant could not choose but let him know, the danger wherein he stood was very great, Marsin desiring to make himself Master of the Town, though with the Ruine of his Highness, and therefore he desired him to continue the suspension of Arms which be|ing to last till the conclusion of the Peace, rendred him secure, and took from the King's Generals all occasions to attempt any Enterprize, or Plot, which in that troublesome time might with ease be put in execution, to the endangering of himself, aud his friends, or at least with very little honour to him.
These occasions entred far into the Prince's mind, replete with genero|sity, and greatness, and therefore much inclined to receive such Counsels as were fortified with reason, and with justice, which together with the perswasions of Gourville, who had about the same time been very earnest with him to cast off all thoughts to the contrary, made him at last resolve to underwrite the suspension of Arms, which was published, and the Prince went unto the Burse, to make a publick declaration of the Treaties.
There was afterwards read the Articles of Peace which were to be pro|posed, as also a Renuntiation from the Citizens of all Treaties with the English, or Spaniards; and this was done in publick with much frankness by the Prince, and followed by great acclamations from the people.
The Arrival of the Spanish Fleet was not yet known in Bourdeaux, and those who knew the inconstancy o'th' people, used all possible means to hide it from them; the Duke of Candale went to Lormont, and together with the Duke of Vendosme, signed the Articles of the Truce in the same Terms they were presented, excepting onely the giving of quarters unto the Princes Troops, the passport for Baltissar, and Licence to bring Victuals, and provisions into the City.
The time was afterwards agreed upon when they should meet with the Deputies to Treat upon the Articles of Peace; and the designes of the Se|ditious persons, and of the Spaniards being thus broken, the French Gene|rals were highly satisfied, and the rather because 'twas much to be sus|pected that if the Sprnish Fleet had appeared sooner, they might have easily relieved Bourdeaux, and ruined all the King's Affairs in Guienne, whose in|terest would also have suffered very much in other parts of the Kingdom, by so potent a diversion.
The Spanish Shipping cast Anchor at the mouth of the Garonne, and the Generals thereof being advertised of the Bourdelois their resolutions, as they were ready by the Tide of Flood to attempt relieving of them, were con|founded, and astonished, and that they might not with so much danger in|gage themselves into the River not being certain to be received as friends, but rather to be used as Enemies, continued still at Anchor, sending with all care unto the Court of Spain, to give them notice of this alteration of Affairs, and receive orders what was to be done in this Conjuncture, they dispatched also news of it unto the Spanish Ministers in Flanders, and to the Prince of Conde, who then found all his hopes were blasted, as being well assured the Spanish Shipping would never pass into Bourdeaux, nor get any advantage in case they Fought.
Upon the 27th of Iuly the Deputies being in number 12, to whom was added the foresaid Viscount de Virlada, to Negotiate with the Generals, proposed the Articles of Peace, the chief amongst them being the Cavalier Todias. One of the Citizens called Baratau, was by the Prince of Conty's permission sent to give notice unto the Spanish Fleet, that the City had quitted all Leagues, and Confederacies concluded with the King of Spain, and renounced all succours promised by him.
The Articles of Peace being read by the Generals, there were found amongst some demands so prejudicial to the King's Authority, that they were upon the point of dismissing the Deputies without a word speaking; but it being doubted that the Bourdelois would desperately throw them|selves upon the Spaniards, who were now so near at hand, they took a mid|dle course which was more proper, that is to continue the Treaty, and come unto a conference, in which those things which could not be granted should be referred unto his Majesty, rather then dismiss the Deputies, which would have given great boldness to Marsin, and disgust unto the people,

and when the well affected Citizens should find their hopes deluded, 'twas thought they would be easily induced, to admit the Spanish succours.
They therefore recalled the Deputies, and after they had offered them a general Oblivion for the inhabitants, in the same form 'twas granted to the Parisians, and as 'twas Registred in the Parliament transferred to Agen, unto the Princes, and Princesses, and all others of their party, such Passports as they could desire, unto the Generals, and French Officers, Licence to re|tire themselves unto their Houses, and to the foraign Forces leave to de|part the Kingdom, they promised the next day to examine in a Confe|rence the Articles of the peace, which being made known to the Prince of Conty, and the inhabitants in an Assembly at the Burse, all the Articles were in two Sessions agreed, and set down in manner following.
Upon the first, and second, after reading of the King's Declaration in 1650, it was agreed that a General Pardon and Oblivion should be granted to all the Bourdelois, together with a confirmation of their Priviledges: Upon the third, which concerned the person of the Prince of Conde, and his indempnity, 'twas referred unto the King; but to the end he might have notice of the present Treaty, a Courrier was to go with a Pass-Port unto the Court, and from thence with his Majestie's Pass unto him in Flanders. In ease the Prince of Conty, and the Dutchess of Longueville would be compre|hended in the Amnestie of Bourdeaux, 'twas allowed unto them; or if they desired it apart, it should be granted to them in the best form, and verified for them, and those who depended on them, in the Parliament of Paris; as also that for the Bourdelois, in the Parliament of Guienne: To the Duke of Angaren, and the Princess his Mother, Passports should be granted for their security, or stay, in case they would settle their abode in any part of the Kingdom. Unto Marsin, Licence to go unto the Country of Liege, whereof he was a Native, either by Sea or Land; The like unto the Count de Mora, the Marquess of Lusignan, Lenet, and others, in case they refused the Am|nestie.
There grew some difficulty about the Gens d' Armes of the Prince's Guard, and the Regiment of Anguien, the Generals pretending that those being the King's Troops ought to be disbanded, or take pay under his Majesty; but the example of the Capitulation at Bellagarde, made them consent to give them Billet for Quarters in France unto the Frontiers, the Regiment of Marche, and de Marcousse, together with all others of the Princes party were disbanded.
Unto the Irish was licence also given to retire into Spain, but they had privately (as hath been said) agreed already with the French Generals. The Castles were restored, the prisoners freed, but the demolition of the Fort Caesar, Bourg, Libourne, and other places, was referred to the King's plea|sure.
There was a long dispute touching the returning of the Parliament to Bourdeaux, and upon the Article for taking off the imposition settled at Blaye, of two Crowns upon every Tun of Wines, the reimbursement of Debts con|tracted during the Warr, upon Rents, and Merchandises, touching the revo|cation of the discharge of Taxes, and Tithes, for ten years, and the suppres|sion of the Court of Aides; all which Articles being of high importance, were referred to his Majesty, that such course might be taken in them, as to his Majesty should seem most fitting.
The Generals also refused to include in this Treaty the New Town d' Age|nois, and other Cities of the Princes party, saying, They were at their own free|dome to accept the Amnesty, and submit voluntarily unto his Majestie's Autho|rity.
After this Conference the Duke of Vendosme asked of the Deputies, How the City would be satisfied, these Articles being agreed unto, the King's Amnestie being granted in that manner, and the Souldiery being retired. This was for a long time debated in the Town-House upon the 29th of Iuly, where the Prince of Conty, together with the Duke of Anguien; and Lenet, being present, the Proposition from the Generals was examined. The Contents thereof was, That these Articles being under-written, they should rely upon their words as Per|sons of Honour; and that in regard time would be spent in writing, and receiving an answer with the King's confirmation, the Generals should forthwith enter into the City, and they would then allow them Victuals, and safe Conducts for the Prin|ces, and Licence for their Troops to retire; but in case they would expect his Ma|jestie's Declaration before they suffered them to enter, they intended not in such case to permit them to be relieved with Victuals, nor to suffer any to go out of the City but their Deputies.
Upon this the Councellors of Parliament that remained in Bourdeaux; be|ing all of them Frondeurs, and principally Monsieurs d' Espagnet, and de Saux, maintained, That in this case 'twas better to have Warr, than a doubtful incertain Peace; and that they ought not to consent that the King's Declaration should be re|gistred elsewhere than in the Parliament sitting at Bourdeaux, or that the Gene|rals should be permitted to enter into the City.
In this Intrigue, they took for the best Expedient to cause the Peace to be forthwith published, to expect the King's Ratification thereof, and give Ho|stages mutually, but not to permit the Generals to enter the City. They added to this (because the people began to rise in Tumults, desiring an end of the Treaty, and of their miseries) a Request, That the Troops might draw off, and that some dayes might be allowed unto the Princes for adjusting of their busi|nesses. But the French Generals refusing to condescend to this Demand, an|swered, That unless the Peace were intirely settled, the King's Forces could not draw off from Bourdeaux; and that as long as the Princes, Princesses, Marsin, Lenet, and others, were in the City, they could grant them nothing but the Cessation of Arms agreed by the Truce of the 30th of July.
The Prince of Conty, who had signed a Treaty for himself, and all his Family with Gourville, declared in the Assembly of the Burse, That he would trust un|to the General's Parol, and desired not that for any interest of his, or of his Fami|ly, the Citizens should be hindred from coming to an end of their Miseries, by draw|ing off their Forces from them; That as for himself, he was resolved forthwith to leave the City, and retire himself to Cadillac. It was also declared by the Ca|valier Todias, That the Princess of Conde would retire her self unto L'Esparre, and the Dutchess of Longueville to Plassac, there to expect Passports or the Am|nesty. Which coming after, Longueville by consent of the Duke her Husband, went to reside out of the noise of Troubles in a Monastery of Nuns, in the Fauxbourg of the City of Moulins, in the Burbonese.
The Deputies therefore returning that day, they concluded, That the Dukes might conformably to the Conditions, their own Quality, and the Honour due to the King's Commands, enter into the City whensoever they should please, and that the Princes Souldiers should retire as they desired. The Passports were brought un|to the Princess of Conde, Duke d' Anguien, Marsin, and Lenet, by Monsieur de Comminges.
The same day the Duke of Vendosme sent the Count of Montesson; and the Duke of Candale, the Count of Marinville to Court, for the Ratifications which were necessary. The manner of the General's Entry into the City, and of their Reception there, being afterwards agreed upon the first of Au|gust: Virlada brought from the Duke of Candale unto the Citizens, a general freedom for their Goods in the Countrey, and liberty for bringing in provi|sions

although the Generals made not their Entry untill the third of August; The Prince of Conty being the day before retired to Cadillac, the Princess of Conde towards Castillon upon Medoc, to take Shipping, and the Dutchess of Longueville attended by Monsieur de Comminges, went to Plassac.
After this, Courriers were dispatched unto the King, the Queen; and the Cardinal, to give them notice of this agreement. The Entry of the Gene|rals being then agreed, they came thither upon the third of August, Vendosme from Lormont, and Candale from Begle, accompanied with the principal Commanders of the Army, and their Guards of Horse and Foot, and alighted in the Convent of the discalced Carmelites, where they were received by the whole Body of the City out of the Port de Chappelle Rouge, and brought with Acclamations of Vive le Roy, through the City Companies standing in Arms, which made up above 12000 Foot, unto the Cathedral Church of St. Andrew, where Te Deum was sung, and an Eloquent Sermon preached by the Father Ythier, Exhorting all to continue constant in his Majestie's Ser|vice, and to enjoy the sweets of Peace: From thence the Dukes were con|ducted unto the Lodgings prepared for them, comforting with their lovely and grateful presence, that whole City, wherein the Sun (having as it were a horrour of the passed tumults) seemed not to shine forth with his ac|customed cheerful splendour.
There each of the Dukes received severally the complements of all the Companies of the City, and were Treated with a huge Supper, with so great abundance of all delicacies, as made it evident, that not want, but abundance of Affection and Loyalty, had occasioned the opening of the Gates unto them.
On the other side the Dukes to shew a grateful correspondence, presently discharged their own Guards, and gave order that the Citizens should mount the Guards at their Lodgings, and did what they could to make it appear that they confided in them; that being the principal thing which nourishes good will in subjects, and with letting them see the Force of their affection, obliges them to a return of love for those, who are desirous of their safety.
The next day in presence of the Bishop of Tule six new Jurates were cho|sen, all persons of worth, who during the late Revolutions had rendred them|selves very remarkable for their Loyalty; afterwards the Assemblies in the Burse being now ended, they returned again unto the usual place in the Town-house, new purged of all that Infamy, and the Plangues, which had been practised there, during the meetings of the Olmiera.
The Princess of Conde having in this interim left Bourdeaux, imbarked in the Ship called Saint Sauveur, to go unto Castillon upon Medoc, with the Duke of Anguien her Son, accompanied by Monsieur Lenet, and convoyed till she took Ship by Monsieur de Bousquet, Savagnac with 200 Horse, Marsin went into Spain by Sea, and the Count Fiesco took Post thither.
The Prince of Conty (who would not conclude any Treaty apart from his Family, without comprehending therein the Prince his Brother, so as a time might be allowed unto him to accept the Amnestie) seeing that the Dutchess of Longueville, Marsin, and Lenet himself, were ready to conclude one for themselves without including him therein; He therefore proposed to conclude with Monsieur Gourville, that the Princess of Conde, and Duke d' Anguien, should with security Retire to Stenay, or any other place depend|ing upon the Prince her Husband; that Lenet should have the same Liberty to go away either by Sea, or Land; and also that Marsin might likewise go into Holland, or the Country of Leige, leaving his Wife in Normandy. That it should be Lawful for the Prince of Conty himself, to Retire unto any of his Houses so he accepted of the Amnestie, which was also to be ac|cepted

by the Dutchess of Longueville, who was to have Licence to go un|to Newcastle in Switzerland, or any other place where she should be direct|ed by the Duke her Husband. He on his part promised that he, and the Princesses, would by themselves, their friends, and dependents, co-operate to the submission of Bourdeaux, and give the Citizens free Liberty to make their agreements; but that in case the Peace were not concluded upon by the Town before the 17th day of August, that yet the Prince, and those of his party should Bona fide execute their parts; which agreement was subscribed by them and by the Duke of Candale upon the 25th of Iuly.
The Prince of Conty coming to Cadillac, found there Monsieur de Lang|lade, Secretary to Cardinal Mazarine sent about the Treaties at Bourdeaux, but falling sick he could not be present at the conclusion in the City.
Mean while Colonel Baltasser finding that things went very ill with the Princes, and his disgusts with Marsin still encreasing, entred into a Treaty after the Citizens by permission from the Princes had begun theirs, and came over to the King's Service together with 600 Foot, and 400 Horse. This was concluded at the same time with that of Bourdeaux, and the Irish also at the same time entred themselves into his Majestie's pay; Baltasser had received great disgusts from the Prince of Conde, all things being com|municated onely with Marsin, himself being in the mean time ill paid, and less regarded by the Prince's Ministers. Baltasser did also another ser|vice of importance to the King's interests, by causing Monsieur de la Roche, who was in the City of Perigueux, with 100 Foot, and 60 Dragoons, to re|turn under his Majestie's Command.
He by reason of a suspition entred into his mind that the Marquess of Chanlo Governour of the place, intended to clap him up, came out with se|veral of his friends and joyned with the King's Forces, and was in a great measure the cause of a Treaty which began with the inhabitants of the said City, to reduce it under his Majestie's Obedience.
The Brother of Father Ythier the Jesuite guided the Hall, who went about not only disposing the minds of the Citizens, but watching narrowly for all occasions; Father Bertaut was his partner in this imployment, who Offici|ated for the said Father Ythier being then sick: There was also a secret Treaty begun with the Irish of the Garrison; but the Goverour who suspected, and therefore kept a watchful Eye over them, upon some jealousie conceived, caused the Captains to be arrested, and divided the Common Souldiers amongst his Confidents.
The Duke of Candale who being of a generous Soul, hated to overcome even Enemies by Deceit, and Treachery, liked not these ways, but resolved to besiege the City, and have the Glory to have won it by the Sword in a fair War. He had already caused Cannon to be Shipped, and sent away the Mar|quess de Saufbeuf to invest it with part of the Forces, Commanded by the Mar|quess of Cavillac, and Count of St. Germans. But the Citizens knowing how great a prejudice the City would suffer by expecting a Siege, resolved according to the example of the Bourdelois, to put themselves in Arms, and take the Guard of the Ports from the Souldiers of the Garrison.
The Governour having notice of this Novelty, who was upon a Treaty about quitting that Country, and getting leave to march his men unto the Prince of Conde his Patrone, presently drew all his men into a Body, put them in Battalia in the great Piazza, and being something heated with Wine as com|ing from a Wedding Feast, went hastily accompanied only with his Page, and one of the Consuls of the Town, unto the House of Monsieur de Budon procureur General, to know what Assembly was made upon such occasions without his privity He was kept out of Budon's house, and told there was

no meeting there, but endeavouring to come in by Force, some Pistols were discharged upon him by friends of the Procureur General who were then with him, and he fell dead. Whereupon the inhabitants taking heart began to run about the streets, and cry Vive le Roy,  la paix, and committed Bar|barous outrages upon the Body.
The Souldiers by this sad dismal change were so confounded and dishear|tened, that although Monsieur de la Baune Lieutenant Colonel of the Regi|ment of Conde, endeavoured with much Gallantry to keep in a Body, and oppose the peoples fury, yet in a short time they threw down their Arms, and disbanded, some here, some there, the Town remaining without oppo|sition in the hands of the Citizens, who forthwith writ unto the Marquess de la Douze, one of the prime Lords of that Country, desiring him that he would procure their Deputies access unto the Duke of Candale, from whose hands they would receive the Amnestie and put themselves under his Ma|jesties obedience, which was done; one called Magot being Broken upon the Wheel; 16 of the most Seditious persons banished, and a new Election being made of Officers, and Captains of the Quarters.
Perigeaux lyes upon the River Isle, which divides the City into two parts; the Situation of it is something raised, upon a rising ground in a Champane Country, compassed with good fortifications made by the Prince of Conde's care, who repaired it with the addition of new works; the people Fierce, and War-like, as are all the Gascons, who become good, and stout Souldi|ers; this City is numbred amongst the most Antient, and Noble Towns of Guienne.
The Villeneuf d' Agenois, which was grown Proud with having resisted, and broken the designs of Count d'Harcourt against it, after it had been quit|ted by the Marquess de Theubon (emulating the fury of the Olmiera, in imi|tation of those inhabitants had taken some Companies into their pay, made their brags that they would by that means keep themselves free) was also in great likelihood of being surprised by the Count de Valliac, who had made an agreement with some Citizens, that having seised upon a Tower thought to have brought him in, but the design being discovered took no effect.
The Troops conducted by the Marquess d' Aubeterre chanced to draw neer unto it, at the time when their Corn being Ripe (wherein the Town is very rich) the people were just going out to Harvest, whereupon they fear|ing to be deprived of their Rents, without which they could not live at ease, preferred the fear of Misery, before the Ambition of being free, and sent Deputies unto the Prince of Conty, desiring him either to send them relief, or make their Peace; but Bourdeaux being now reduced, and the Prince ha|ving retired to Cavillac, and laid down Arms, the persons employed were brought to the said Count Valliac, and from thence unto the Duke of Can|dale, who sent thither Monsieur de Ribere, a Councellor of State, and Offi|cer of the Army, with whom the Amnestie was concluded, but upon con|dition, that the Walls should be thrown down, the fortifications dismantled, and the Citizens who had offended because they were Purse-proud, should pay 4000 Doubloons, reserving also a Liberty to dispose of 20 persons Pri|soners, two of which were hanged up by the Neck upon the publick Gal|lows.
Villeneuf d' Agenois stands in a spatious Plain, compassed with Antient, but strong Walls, bathed by the Loth, a River which rising in the Mountain of Geodan, after it hath with a Rapid course passed through the Provinces of Rovergne, and Quercy, comes to run calmely in Agenois, and loose its Name in the Garronne; not being Navigable before it comes to the Villeneuf. It

was heretofore very plentiful of excellent Fish, and particularly of Pikes, but after the Fishing of them was forbidden by St. Ambrose Bishop of Cahors, and that the people refused to obey him, it hath been constantly observed, and found true, that there hath never more been any there. The people is there very numerous, because the Commerce for Corn, and fruits, is more abundant there than in any other part, and the Citizens being thereby wonderfully enriched, were swelled to a great heighth of Pride and Inso|lence.
Whilest the Dukes of Vendosme and Candale were ordering the Affairs of Bourdeaux, with all mildness and sweetness possible, being notwithstanding watchful over the Actions of some, who full of perfidiousness were by the sweet harmony of their Virtues rendred more Barbarous and Savage; the Chevalier Carteret, an English-man, had notice that one Edward sent from the Parliament of England, was hid somewhere about the Countrey, pri|vately blowing the coals of that Rebellion, which was not yet totally ex|tinguished, in the minds of some Seditious persons, whereupon a little Fe|louke being by chance taken with Letters from Lenet to this same Edward, which invited him unto a Councel was to held aboard the Admiral of Spain: There were also taken two Citizens of Bourdeaux, with Billets from Lenet to several persons in that City, and particularly unto some Women, in which their intentions of re-uniting themselves with the Spaniard, and fomenting the hopes of the Frondeurs, being sufficiently manifested, the same gave oc|casion to the said Dukes to open their Eyes, and apply themselves with all diligence to minister fitting Remedies, for making up those Wounds which were not as yet sufficiently healed.
Espagnet, after the Procession of the 15th of August, was imprisoned, and with a good Guard sent unto the Castle of Angoulesme. There were Pass|ports given unto divers persons suspected of plotting some new Conspiracy, and amongst these were the Counsellors de Duc, Morpin, and La Chese. Some Troops were ordered to march into the Meiau, that they might go aboard the King's Shipping, and fight the Spanish Fleet which rid at Anchor in sight of Royan, a little place, but wonderfully strong, with a Castle seated upon a rising ground, which makes it more defensible, being a place of great Im|portance, having on the right hand Xaintonge, and on the left, the Country of Medoc: Other Souldiers were put into Xaintonge it self, where all the Countrey was in Arms, for fear the Spaniards should land; and all other the inconveniences which might happen, were so well provided against, that Rebellion could take no footing, nor disturb the publick quiet and content|ment, which was generally in Bourdeaux, where they were grown wise at their own costs; the conveniences of good order being no where so well known, as where disorders have been experienced.
Whilest the Affairs in Guienne passed in the manner above rehearsed, the two Armies encamped upon the Frontiers of Flanders, with different designs. The Spaniards, and the Prince of Conde, having a great confidence in their Forces, which consisted in an Army of above 30000 Combatants, took up large Quarters, and endeavoured to draw the French Army unto a Battel, because in case they got the Victory, they thought they might march unto the Gates of Paris, to give countenance unto those whose minds were yet set upon Troubles, and fill all the Countrey with terrour and confusion, by breaking into the heart of France, before any thing could be done in Guienne to the advantage of the King.
But the number of Counsellors differed in their Opinions touching the way they were to take for the effecting of it; because, although the Prince of Conde was firm in his Opinion, That they ought to advance, without ingaging

themselves in the attacking of any Place before they came unto the Seine; the Spa|niards notwithstanding, were very wary in concurring with the bold ven|trous thoughts of this Warlike Prince, being loth either to engage their Army into some dangerous Pass, or to elevate Conde himself with too much Glory, as being jealous of his inconstancy. After many consults touching the course they were to hold, it was at last unanimously resolved, To endea|vour by all means the forcing of the Enemy unto a Battel, according to the event whereof, they might afterwards proceed to farther resolutions. With these De|signs therefore the Armies advancing, and confronting of each other, taid eight or ten dayes, having no other obstacle to hinder their encountring, but the River Oyse which ran between them.
The Mareschal Turenne (although inferiour in number to the Spanish Ar|my) would have have accepted of the Battel, to which his noble Courage did provoke him, had not his daring spirit been restrained by that staid Ex|perience which (though young in years) he had (to his great glory) gained in Two and twenty pitch'd Battels, wherein he had commanded; and he was forbidden by express Orders from the Cardinal, who seeing the Fortune of the Kingdom to depend upon that Army, would not expose to the uncer|tainty of an Encounter upon so much disadvantage, all his past labours, pre|sent condition, and future hopes. And thereupon following the opinion of that wise Roman, who destroyed the Carthaginian Army with holding it at a bay, without concerning himself for publick rumours, he contented himself with galling them sometimes in the flank, sometimes in front, and sometimes in the rear; with enforcing them sometimes to Quarter close together, some|times to enlarge themselves; to hinder their Marches, reduce them into want of Victuals, and finally to overthrow all the designs they had projected against France.
But there being in Turenne, as well as the Prince of Conde, a most ardent desire of glory, he could not satisfie his Mind without giving some proof of his Courage upon some occasion, and therefore he passed the River one day with between 700 and 800 Horse, and joyning with the great Guard he kept beyond the River, charged that of the Enemy kept upon the head of the Marsh of Fonsomma, beat them into the gross of the Spanish Army, took many prisoners, and with incomparable Courage and Conduct made a safe retreat to his own Quarters.
Upon the 24th of Iuly, the King, Cardinal, and the whole Court came to the Army, where he was received with extraordinary Duty and Applause, by 100 Squadrons of Horse, and 18 Battalions of Foot drawn out, which made up in all 16000 Combatants, consisting of Old Souldiers inured unto the Warr, Expert Officers, and Noble Persons, who were Volunteers. Tu|renne being willing to give them the Divertisement of a Skirmish, which was wonderfully desired by his Majesty, who was full of Lively Martial thoughts, passed the Oyse at a Foord, with the Guard of Cavalry, Gens d' Arms, and about 1000 Horse drawn out of the Army, charged upon, and beat up the same Guard of Conde, who taking it for granted, that the French Generals upon his Majesty's arrival were resolved to give Battel, drew up all his Ar|my, and stood firm, observing the motion of the French until the King re|tired, and that 'twas known to have been onely a party, at which time they were troubled, they had not advanced and tried their Fortune.
His Majesty staid all that day in the Camp, filling all persons, by the Ma|jesty of his presence, with Courage and Desire, to do something which might signalize them in his Service.
He Dined that day in Turenne's Quarters with a good number of the prin|cipal Commanders, who sate at Table with him; at Night he Supped in

those of the Mareschal de la Ferte Senneterre with the same order, and lodged in Turenne's Quarters in the middest of the Army, and went the next day from thence towards Paris.
Two or three dayes after the King's departure, the Spanish Army rose from these Posts, and took their March directly towards San Simon, and Se|rocourt, Passes upon the River Somme, between Ham, and San Quintin; That of France followed it, marching the way of Fera, lodged at Chery, and Maiou, and passing the Oyse in the same place where it makes a little Island; and a little higher at Verduel, it drew up in Battalia a little above Travessy, where it encamped, alwayes observing the Enemy that he might not have time to invest any place, or throw up Works about it as they desired to have done, after they perceived the difficulty of drawing the French to a pitched Bat|tail.
Conde doubting least Turenne should be upon his Back as they filed along by San Simon, was careful in the passage, and took up Quarters onely a league from Ham, which gave great apprehension that he thought of besieging that most Important place, situated upon the Somme between St. Quintin, and Peronne.
This Motion obliged the French Generals to advance unto Chauny, a Town upon the Oyse, and from thence to coast unto Noyon, chief Town of a Coun|ty, strong in Men, and situate upon the same River, where they made a halt some dayes, during which (the Spaniards making head against them) the Prince of Conde went with 6000 men to Magny, and from thence to Roye, a walled Town upon the head of the River Moreul, and approaching it on three sides, got it by Surrender in 15 hours, there being none but the Inhabitants, and some Gentlemen of the Countrey thereabouts who ran in, to defend it; and being without Parapets, or other Fortifications.
The taking of this being understood by the French Generals, they suspect|ing the Attack of some place upon the Somme, marched to Magny. Conde designing the Enterprise of Corbie, a most Important place Royally built, sea|ted upon the Somme, between Peronne and Amiens, made shew of marching with part of the Army and Artillery upon the way of Beauvais, a City, the Metropolis of a rich County, one of the strongest and wealthiest of France, bathed by the River Therin, that he might cause the French to draw off from the Post which they had taken, and at the same time clap about Corbie.
Turenne who by long experience was able to discover the Prince's Arts, and knew full well that he would not engage himself into France with so many strong Towns behind him, and an Army in flanck, instead of marching after him, as it might seem probable he should have done, after he had con|sulted with the Mareschal his Collegue, upon the 9th of August marched that very Night to Magny, where they made the rejoycings due for the good News of the Reduction of Bourdeaux; which filled all their Minds with confidence of good success, and presently passing the River, dispatched the Count Schomberg, Lieutenant of the Company of the Scotch Guard, with 400 Horse, and 200 Foot, to reinforce Corbie, and prevent the Prince's designs upon it.
All the French Army marched at the same time towards Ham, passed the River by night, and quartered on the other side, where having notice, that the Count de Maile, with a great Convoy of Ammunition, and Victuals, 4000 men drawn out of the Garrisons of Flanders, and 6000 Freebooters, was parted from Cambray, to reinforce the Spanish Camp before any place they should besiege; presently with the best part of the Horse, and a party of choice Foot, Turenne at break of day, put himself upon his march that way

where the said Convoy was to pass, to look for, and Fight it; which was the best thing he could have done, and would have spoiled all the Enemies de|signes.
Conde perceiving the French march, as he that had a perfect knowledg of the manner of proceeding of Turenne, and the best part of the other Cap|tains, who had formerly served under his Command, perceived that his design was discovered, and suspecting what the Enemy might Enterprize, made a sudden turn, and with the lightest of the Horse marched presently to|wards the Somme, sending notice by Polinet his Ajutant di Camera to the said Count de Maile, to return unto Cambray without passing farther: Polinet in his return the same day, was taken Prisoner by a party of the King's Forces, and it being known by him, and after confirmed by the Scouts, who had been to discover even to the Gates of Cambray, that Maile was retired, and that the Prince having cast two Bridges of Boats over the Somme, had passed it, and was Lodged upon the banks thereof between Corbie, and Bre, Turenne with all speed returned unto his Camp, which was now advancing towards him, and together with the Mareschal Ferte Senneterre, secured their Baggage under the Walls of Peronne, and encamped about a little Village not far di|stant thence, and neer the Spanish Army, from whence they took the advan|tage of a Scite proper for them to fight in, if they should be enforced unto a Battel.
The Prince verily thought to have then taken Turenne unprovided, and force him to fight, and with that belief he marched hastily all Night so long a march, that the next morning in sight of Peronne, he found the Enemies altogether unadvertised of his coming, as having thought it unpossible he should have come so soon, but he forbore to attack the French Camp, not so much because his men were extraordinarily tired, and weary, as because Fuensaldagne would not give way to it, doubting the Lorainois would not Fight, it having been insinuated to him by some Letters received from France, that Cardinal Mazarine by great promises of Money, and other means, had under-hand gained the Duke of Lorrain, so as from thence grew the beginning of the Disgusts between Conde, and the Count; Conde pre|tending that the opposition made unto those earnest desires of his to make use of the opportunity, proceeded from fear, not from a prudent foresight or just reason.
The Prince took up his Post at Mount St. Quintin, an Abby upon a Hill, but found it so well provided that he thought not fit to assault it with so much disadvantage, Conde notwithstanding made shew of being come expressly to attack it, to stop Turenne there untill he might receive the Convoy from Cam|bray, without which there was no likelihood of being able to lay Siege to any place, and in the mean time, whilst with slight skirmishes he endeavoured to give credit to that report, he caused his Van to march the straight way to|wards St. Quintin, leaving the King's Army on the right hand, and a great Wood between them.
Turenne being watchful to all occasions, not willing that the Enemy should advance before him, which was the design of Conde, marched with so much hast, as he got before unto that Post which he intended to have seized, and by that means obliged him to make a stand, and so the Armies were again brought to front each other, separated by nothing but a little Valley easie of access, upon which the French put a great guard over against a Wood, which ended near to the Spanish Camp not above a Musket shot from it.
There the two Armies made a halt three or four days, which they passed with great care, and watchfulness; Conde, and the Spanish Generalls, not be|ing willing to make any attempt upon that place the Mareschals of France had chosen.

The 14th day of August there happened a great Skirmish wherein the two Counts de Russy ingaged themselves too far, and Turenne's Lieutenant Colonel was killed; the same day the Prince of Taranto, the Marquess de Batteville, and the Count Duraz, were upon Conde's out Guard, and being desirous to see and salute the Mareschal Turenne, who was advanced to his main Guard, they desired that favour by a Trumpet, which was civilly granted to them, receiv|ing them with his wonted affability, and they discoursed and complemented each other Reciprocally: Some Gentlemen also of the King's Camp went to sa|lute the Prince of Conde, who came within 200 paces of Turenne, with a desire of speaking to him; but he making shew of business, set spurs to his Horse, and went thence without expecting the invitation, which the Prince gave order should be sent unto him to that purpose, by one of his Gentlemen.
The 25th day of August two hours before day the Prince raised his Camp, and took his march towards St. Quintin, of which Turenne having notice, and suspecting the attack of some of those places, he caused the Count Beaujeu pre|sently to repass the Somme with 1200 Horse, and 600 Foot, with orders to keep near unto Ham, and St. Quintin, that he might relieve any Town should be invested, and the French Generals repassed the River at Peronne, march|ing all Night, and the next day strait to Ham. Beaujeu coming to St. Quin|tin, heard that the Count Duraz had drawn out 2000 of the Enemies Horse, and was advanced with them to invest Guise; whereupon with great dili|gence crossing the Fere, he put into that Town a seasonable Recruit of a good number of men, whereof Conde having notice, suddenly recalled the Count after he had held that Town invested for 12 hours space.
The Prince finding that his designs were still defeated, and much con|founded to find in the King's Captains Wit, and Valour, equal to that where|in till then he had conceived hinself unmatched by any, resolved to make ano|ther trial, advancing the Army within a League of Ham, and extending it in length along a little River which there falls into the Somme, with a resolution to attack that place; or in case the King's forces should come to relieve it, to fall upon them, and with Sword in hand to determine their emulation and differences, upon that Campagne. He was no sooner come to the designed Post, but that he saw all the French Army in his flank, and the Count Beau|jeu on his Rear, who having repassed the Oyse, had taken up his Post at Farg|ny, to be ready at hand upon all accidents.
The Armies rested there looking on each other three weeks without ma|king any attempt, because Conde, and the Spanish Generals, being now hope|less to break into France as they imagined, to give Battle, nor take any place upon the Somme, by reason of the great vigilancy, and wariness of the French Commanders, their counsels were very confused and variable! Conde had insinuated unto the Spanish Ministers and Captains, that when they entred into France he should meet with the applause, and assistance of the people, so as their way should be made, rather by their voluntary yielding, than the Sword; but they not only failed therein, but exasperating the Countrey by the rapine, and violence, used by the Armies, had caused an Universal hatred of the people against him, which being discovered by the Spaniard, they aban|doned the thoughts of advancing, and the rather because distrusts, or emula|tion falling between the Prince, and the Count Fuensaldagne, they seemed not to proceed with the usual agreement, their bloods being stirred, and jea|lousies between them being rekindled, by some brisk words and threatning gesture used by the Prince unto the Count.
'Twas a great corrosive unto the Princes generous mind, when he consider|ed that his former credit, which was much lessened by the said unfortunate rencounters, would be totally lost, if with so great Forces, and such prepa|ration,

a Campagne should be unprofitably spent, which in its first beginning seemed to promise so great advantages, and glory unto Spain, and so much ruine and destruction to France, and thereupon in a full Councel of Warr, he proposed the Enterprise of Rocroy, and brought Warlick and Politick Reasons for the maintenance of his Opinion: He said, He had been informed the Garrison was very weak, because the Chevalier Montaign, Governour of the place, upon the confidence he should not be attacked, had sent out the King's Regi|ment unto Rhetel, that in 12 dayes at farthest they might win it; that 'twas not hard to invest it, there being no River to pass, and the Siege would be very easie, the place standing between great Woods, so as whoever could first gain the entrance of them, would defend them with much ease, and make good the Field Line; and that Rocroy was a place of great Importance, being a Key unto the Frontier of Picardy, by which (although France could receive small damage, yet) the Interests of Spain would be much advantaged, because the French by means of that Town, brought all the Neighbouring Countrey, and the moyety of Luxembourg Province under Contribution.
The Considerations of the Prince were very good, and his words (by rea|son of the great Esteem had of his Valour) were received by all the Cap|tains as an Oracle; but the Spaniards, who use not to put their feet into the water, till they have sounded the bottom, and who have prudence for the unseparable companion of all their Actions, though they inclined unto the Proposition, yet seemed not totally to approve it, considering that a Siege, consuming Men, Money, and the patience of their Souldiers, if it should last longer than was expected, would so lessen their Army, as they should be no longer Masters of the Field, wherein was placed the sole hopes of those, who upon that ground were endeavouring new Cabals in France.
Some were of the opinion, that the Army living upon the Enemies cost in his Countrey, they should endeavour by money and promises, to make use of the intelligence they had, and gain thereby a profitable Conquest; which could not be entire without penetrating into the Bowels of France, and di|viding the great, and opulent City of Paris, from a Union with the King. But this design having been at first attempted took no effect, and now there was no ground to hope it, the rather, because by the Pacification of Guienne, the Prince's party was much declined, and the Cardinal's credit highly en|creased. Wherefore the Enterprise of Rocroy was resolved, and to that pur|pose the Count of Ligneville went with 3000 Horse upon the 5th of Septem|ber by break of day to invest it at unawares, being followed by the gross of the Army, which was a thing so unexpected, and little foreseen by the Go|vernour, that 100 of the best Souldiers of the Garrison who were gone out to scour the Countrey according to their usual custome, were excluded. The French Generals used their utmost diligence to put in some supply of Men but wayes being narrow, and hard to pass, they could not do it.
All Passes being taken by the Spaniard, the Prince of Conde lodged himself in a place called L'Unhue, the Count Fuensaldagne sate down in the Field, where heretofore had been fought that Famous Battel got by the French, extending his Quarters from the place of Battail to Getdessu; The Lorenois shut up all the space from thence unto the Prince of Conde's Post: The Quar|ters of the Army being thus disposed, the Circumvallation was presently begun, which in four dayes was entirely finished, and the 11th of Septem|ber they began to open the Trenches, and at the same time attacked the Bulwarks du Chene, del Perdu, and the Half-Moon or Ravelin between them.
In the Besegers Camp there commanded over the Spaniards, the Count Fuensaldagne General, Count Garcies Liutenant General, the Prince of Ligny

in the third place, and the Prince Ulric of Wittemburgh Captain General of the German Horse: Over the Lorain Troops the Count of Ligneville; And over those of the Prince of Conde, the Marquiss of Batteville, the Counts of Briole, and Duraz, together with the Prince of Taranto, who after left the Camp, being disgusted with the Spaniard because they would not admit him into a Command, which had been conferr'd upon him by the Prince. Rocroy was very well provided with Victuals, Munition, Artillery, and good thick Walls, but thin of defendants, the Garrison consisting onely of 450 Foot, 50 Horse, and 30 Townesmen armed, to which were added 90 Peasants, that were run in thither for relief; the Ditch full of Water, the Earth without be|ing all spungy, and as it were moorish, but 4 or 5 foot deep, all a chalk clay.
The French Generals upon the first motion of the Enemies Army, saw presently they could have no design but upon Rocroy, and therefore it being impossible to hinder the Siege, and much more to relieve it, they marched presently unto the Fera, crossed the River, and by the way of Heppe, d' Au|chenne, and Polineux, came to Armely, from whence they sent away a Body of Men to joyn with the Count de Grand Pre, who was already from the Fera advanced to invest Mouson; The Prince of Conde foresaw that Turenne to recompence the loss of Rocroy, would endeavour to take Mouson, and therefore gave order unto the Count de Briole, to go before-hand with 400 Horse, and 1200 Foot unto Stenay, and joyn with the Forces of the Marquiss of Persan, who were gone thither after the rendring of Rhetel, and together with them to be watchful unto the preservation of all the Neighbouring pla|ces, which were held by his Forces; and thereupon as soon as they had no|tice of the King's Armies march, Briole went to Beamont, a Town distant from Mouson about a league, and from thence put with care some Compa|nies of Foot into the Town, returning with the remainder into Stenay, that he might be ready upon occasion to re-inforce the Garrisons of Clermont, and St. Menaud, if the French finding the Garrison of Mouson to be well mann'd, should turn their Forces upon either of these Towns; But notwithstanding this, all the French Army went before it, dividing themselves into four Quar|ters, one in Amblemont where Turenne lodged; the second at Vaux where Ferte Senneterre placed himself; the third by the River, commanded by the Marquiss d'Uxelles, Lieutenant-General; and the fourth in the Fauxbourg be|yond the Mose, into which the Count de Plessis, Son to the Mareschal of that name, entred with his Regiment of Foot, and some Dragoons.
And in regard 'twas necessary for keeping of that Fauxbourg, to secure themselves from the damage they might receive from the besieged, by means of a great Redoubt which they kept at the end of the Bridge, Turenne passed the Mose, and caused it to be assaulted with so much courage, and good or|der, that they carried it, the defendants retiring themselves into the Town; by taking of which Redoubt, the Bridge being rendred altogether useless to the Enemy, and the Quarters in the said Fauxbourg being secured, the Count Beaujeu who with a Body of Horse was lodged at Lobbe, four leagues from Ro|croy, to observe the motion of the Spaniard, came also to Mouson, and with his Horse took up his Quarters in the said Fauxbourg.
Mouson lyes upon the River Mose, a branch of which runs through the Town, and the other runs on the right side of it. There is a fair Bridge, at the head of which was the said Redoubt, that commanded the Fauxbourg; which was a little divided from it: It is encompassed with strong Walls and Towers, built after the ancient manner, lined with Earth in several places, and flancked with several Bulwarks and Ravelins, after the ancient manner, the Ditches are on the one side, watered by the River it self which runs into them with a gentle current; it is besides encompassed with out-works, which

reach from one side, to the other of the River, with Bulwarks and Half-Moons; There was within it 1500 Foot, good men, and 200 Horse, under the com|mand of Colonel Volse, a German, with sufficient provision of all things, and 18 Pieces of Artillery.
The French having taken the Redoubt, and secured the Fauxbourg, opened their Trenches, and in four or five dayes made themselves Masters of the out|works, and lodged upon the Bank of the Ditch, on two sides whereof they planted three Batteries. The Marquess of Castlenan Lieutenant General, lodged at the side of the Ditch towards the River, possessing a Half-Moon which was abandoned by those that had the keeping of it, and endeavoured to get unto the foot of the Wall to undermine it; but he was then hindred, by the Valiant defence which those within made with Fire-works, and Granado's, which forced the Assailants to break the Counterscarf made up of Stone, and to pass the Ditch covered by Galleries unto the Pallisado: in which Action the Vidame de Laon, Son of the Count Boussy, Nephew to the Mareschal Tu|renne, a bold couragious young man, of about 17 or 18 years of Age, was killed with a Musket shot. The French also made another attempt against a great Tower, and passing the Ditch without a Gallery undermined a Corner of it, and giving Fire thereto, by means thereof lodged in a part of the said Tower, continuing their Mine to blow it absolutely up; as they did also on the other side with an extraordinary diligence, that they might carry this place before Rocroy were lost: And the Mines being now brought unto a good pass, and ready to have Fire given to them, the besieged, fearing they should not be able to resist an assault, resolved to make Terms, and render the Town, which was done the 26th day of September, 18 days after the Siege, the Go|vernour marching out with about 1400 Souldiers, all well appointed.
Whilst the French were intent upon the taking of this Town, the Spaniards were not wanting in their careabout the business of Rocroy, hoping to com|pel the besieged to yield it before the taking of Mouson; which had it happen|ed, they would then with ease have compassed their desires: having therefore finished their trenches, their approaches, and raised their Batteries, on which were placed 23 pieces of Cannon, two planted upon the brink of the Ditch, and three in the Campagne, the 16th of September the Prince of Conde caused the hollow way to be attacked by 4000 Souldiers, and a post to be taken up upon the Counterscarf, assaulting the half Moon between the said two Bul|works, which was worthily defended by the besieged; the Governour wan|ting neither Experience, nor Valour, by frequent Sallies rendred the access more difficult, than was imagined by the Spanish Captains; between whom, and Conde, some difference arising by reason of the misunderstandings be|tween him, and Fuensaldagne. The Arch-Duke himself came to the Camp, to remove by his presence and dexterity, all bitterness out of the Prince's mind; but if on the one side this coming quieted the trouble of Conde's mind, it raised notwithstanding on the other side a greater discontentment in his Breast, as thinking that his presence diminished that Glory, which he thought in taking of that place was due onely unto himself, whereof he gave apparent sign, refusing to take the word from the Arch-Duke: at which he being not a little troubled, gave order to the Prince of Wirtenburg, who was lodged in Conde's Quarters, not to obey his orders. But this business was adjusted by the Duke of Lorrain, who was at that time in the Spanish Camp by this expedi|ent, That the word should be given neither by the Arch-Duke, nor Prince, but by a Person appointed for that purpose by them both.
The first sally which the besieged made, was upon the said lodging taken up upon the Counterscarf towards the point of the Half-Moon, being of 60 able men all Armed with Sythes, put upon strong Poles, with which Entring

into that work they cut in pieces all those who were the foremost in it.
These men were led by the Chevalier de Cuma, seconded by Monsieur de Champigne, and Monsieur de Bournonville Major of the Town, whom the Go|vernour himself countenanced, and assisted, by the Artillery of the Neigh|bouring ramparts; there sallied out also after this, Captain Delvincourt with 45 Souldiers, and two that threw Granado's, and entring into another Post, advanced by the besieged against the Bulwark de Chene, under the Pallisado at the entrance into the Ditch, put to Sword all he found in it.
But notwithstanding these good Encounters, the besiegers ceased not to redouble their Forces, and to advance against the Walls of the Bulwark's, to make breaches by Mining, and so to give an assault: The besieged also made another Sally upon the Spaniards quarters, where they did great da|mage, and took a Lieutenant Colonel, and a Spanish Captain Prisoners; all which notwithstanding, the besiegers next day made two Bridges of Fag|gots over the Ditch, got over it, and Mined the Walls on the face of the said Bulwarks, one of which was countermined by those within; the other in the Bulwark de Chene was fired, and took good effect, the Governour was also shot in the head with a Musket Bullet, but he ceased not for all that to cause him|self to be carried in a Seat, wheresoever his presence was necessary.
In the mean time two breaches in the face of the Bulwarks were made, and fiercely assaulted by the besiegers, and with no less constancy defended by the besieged. The same Night after they had been repulsed from another assault given to the Half-Moon, having lodged themselves upon the point thereof they became Masters of it, because the besieged not being able to maintain it, thought fit to quit it; especially because there was no Port of Communication, which made them doubt that not being able to defend it, those men would be all lost; which was a matter of great consequence, con|sidering the need which they had of them. Finally the Governour having taken view of his men which were fit for Service, and finding they exceeded not 300, seeing the breaches in the Bulwarks opened, and an attack begun upon the Curtain, which had only a dry Ditch, the same Night when they were ready to give the assault, resolved to Capitulate, and yield the Town, which was concluded the 30th of September, and he marched out the first of October with 220 Souldiers, upon Honourable Terms, and was convoy'd to Charleville.
This Enterprise cost the Spaniards dear, because according to the common opinion they lost 2000 men who were killed, and 7000, or 8000 by sickness, and that ran away, so as in the last assaults they were forced to bring the Horse up to the breaches, who dismounted came to fight with Boots on their Legs, and Pistols in their hands, whereby 'twas thought the Conquest was rather hurtful, than profitable, considering that in the beginning of the Cam|pagne with such a numerous, and well appointed Army, they might have gone into the heart of France, and thereby have given Fuel unto the intestine discontents, which had been much more advantageous unto the Catholick King's Interests, than the taking of one simple Town, with the loss of so great a number of men, and the expence of so much Money, and Amunition, it being computed that there past no day wherein there was not at least 500 great shot made, so as all things being considered, the taking of Mouson by the French, with the loss of a few men, and with that Reputation which in War is looked on as the Life, and Soul of Armies, was esteemed to be a thing of greater consequence.
Mean while the pang's wherewith the resolute couragious heart of Conde was tormented, were very great, who blamed the Count of Fuensaldagne, that he had taken an entire, and secure Victory out of his hands, he said his prudence was void of daring, that he was envious of his Glory, and distrust|ful

of his Actions, and among his friends he would make his complaints, that he had engaged himself with a Nation, whose manners, and Genius, were so different from the French; and sigh to be i'th' head of 10000 of his own Countrymen, with whom he could have done more service than with 15000 Strangers, and to be kept from it by engaging himself amongst a people, where never any stranger was exempt from Envy, and from Emulation, and where no French-man could ever yet Enjoy a lasting quiet.
This Town was after put into the Prince's own hands, Garrison'd by the Forces depending on him, and the Government thereof given unto the Duke of Anguien his Son, not without some resentment, of divers who had ser|ved the Crown of Spain, who discoursing politickly amongst themselves would say, that they had lost Mouson, and were not Masters of Rocroy, be|cause it being in the hands of Conde, 'twould rather be a means to encrease his pretensions, by the jealousie would be had of him that he might the better make his peace with France by being Master of that Town, than any way make him more constant to the Spanish Service. The Spaniards were forced to take this course because (conceiving that after those disgusts which he had taken, he did not press things with his wonted earnestness, and that in case that Enterprize could not be suddenly effected there might happen some disaster to the Army) they thought fit to engage him with the promise of that place, to give a quick dispatch unto the Siege; Rocroy being taken, the Spanish Army staid there some days, to throw down the Line of Circumval|lation, and repair the Breaches, and after (in regard it was much weakened and harrassed out) retired into the Country d' Avennes, to refresh them|selves, the Prince of Conde remaining in Rocroy, sick of a quartane Ague.
The Court made this Voyage to Amiens, to take the Government of that City and Cittadel, from the Duke de Channes, who had thrust himself into the possession of it after his Brother's death, and seemed willing to keep it against the will of the King's Councel; and although the said Duke, having a great estate in France, and his mind well affected to the King's Service, was not conceived to have any other design but onely to give some jealousie unto the Court, and make his profit thereby (being a thing much more usually pra|ctised in France than elsewhere) yet 'twas thought good Policy to secure themselves against the very shadow of those, who might by their change of thoughts, any way prejudice the Soveraign Authority.
And although the Duke had sent to Court the Letters written to him by the Prince of Conde full of promises, and hopes, if he would enter into his party, yet 'twas however esteemed to be a seasonable Service, to be entirely secured of that most important Town, which was by this means done with|out noise, the Duke himself being content to quit it unto Monsieur de Bar, and accept the Government of Dourlans, which the said Bar had, with the ad|dition of the Title of his Majestie's Lieutenant General in that part of the Pro|vince which lyes about the said Town, and being paid for all the Armes, and Ammunition, which were bought into the Cittadel upon his account.
Mouson being in this manner gained, the Mareschal Turenne left there a Garrison of 500, or 600 Foot, with the Count de Grand Pre his Regiment, and made him Governour, and he with the Army past the Mose, and marched directly towards Maziers, and being lodged thereabouts, he had news of the taking of Rocroy, at the same time the Count de Navailles, advanced to Vervins with 1500 Combatants; and Turenne, after the said taking, marched near to Aubigny, that he might be near at hand to observe the motion of the Enemy, and hinder him from making of any other attempt, and there he made a halt two days: Turenne being at Maziers, sent the Marquess d'Uxelles from the Army with 1200 men, unto the Castle of Bousancy, which being

not to be relieved from the Garrisons of Stenay, Clermont, and St. Menhaud (because they were watched by Monsieur de St. Maur with a body of Horse) presently yielded, without expecting the coming of the Cannon.
The King who was the first of September come out of Paris, and after the Voyage of Amiens had been at Soissons, came the 30th of the Month unto Laon, to give countenance unto the relief of Rocroy, which was intended to have been attempted, and for which purpose the Duke of Elbeuf had been sent for from Picardy, who with about 3000 men incamped thereabouts, and with them also joyned the most part of his Majesties Guards, b the Town being rendred before all things were in a readiness, the thoughts of that Enterprize ceased, and they changed them for another design, under|taken by the Cardinal with great courage, and undaunted boldness.
The Court thought good to entertain themselves out of Paris, that they might more vigorously assist the Army with Forces, and with Counsel. The resolutions being soon made, and a great number of Nobility following the King, besides his ordinary Guards of Horse, and Foot, both which would be ready to assist on all occasions.
It had not been amiss that their Majesties had staid in Paris, to crush the ac|cidents might happen in that City, where the sinister intentions of some against the Government were not entirely quelled; principally because the Arch-Bishop, being in a declining Age, and Retz being to succeed him, the same might cause new motions amongst the people, upon pretence they could not be without their Pastour, who was highly valued, and esteemed, for his generosity. But there being a necessity of going into the Campagne, the Court thought that they might prevent all accidents, and deprive Paris of that Prelate, who had such high and wandring thoughts, by offering him his liberty, and the King's favour, upon condition he would renounce the hope of his future succession, and would go to Rome with promise to stay there without returning into France; in recompence whereof there was something offered him of equal value, although his Uncle were yet living, and an Aiuda de Costa that he might live splendidly.
The Cardinal although he suffered the troubles of a Prison, preferred the glory of constancy, before his own private gains, and being full of hope to see the face of things changed quickly, either by the Arch-Bishops death, or endeavour of his friends at Rome, who were emulous of Cardinal Mazarine, was fixed not to quit his Dignity, declaring that he would for his Majesty do that, or any other thing, to the effusion of his blood; but that knowing it to be only the Artifice, and interest of Mazarine, he could not swallow so bitter a Pill presented to him by his mortal Enemy. The Pope notwith|standing he inclined not much unto the satisfaction of France, declared, that the proposition seemed to him fair, and fit to be embraced, and the Prisoner had notice of it; but this would not suffice to make him lay aside the bitter|ness he had conceived in his mind, which by constant suffering of the blows of adverse fortune, increased in him the opinion of being more generous and daring; and having found means to write unto the Congregation of Car|dinals in Rome Letters full of complaint, and earnest desires to be assisted by their protection, whereof he thought he ought not to be deprived, by reason of that prejudice the example might bring unto the Dignity of Cardinals; One of the Cardinals of great credit, seeing they were about to answer him,  to think of some expedient in his favour, declar'd in givnig his opinion, That he could not see any reason why they should ingage themselves in that Affaire, which was rather to prejudice the Dignity of Holy Church, then advantage the Prisoner, since they could give him no other assistance but by words, which would perswade much better by the way of sweetness, then of rigour.
He said farther, That although the Cardinal Mazarine had fallen into the same, and worse intrigues with the Parliament, there was nothing done for his assistance, although the Service of the King his Master were also concern'd in it, and that therefore they had much less reason to interest themselves in behalf of Retz, who stood in opposition against his Majesty.
The said Cardinals advice being considered, and approved of as the best, the resolution taken was, That his Holiness should be desired, to exhort the King, by Fatherly admonitions to grant his liberty. His most Christian Majesty shew|ed himself most ready to do it, and after several Negotiations, at last the Dut|chess of Chevreux undertook it, together with that of Charles Duke of Lorrain, and although he was afterwards, as shall be shewed, arrested by the Spaniard, yet that for the Cardinal was not intermitted, but was at last concluded up|on this condition, That he should renounce the Office of being Coadjutor of Paris, other benefices of the value of the Arch-Bishoprick of Paris (which amounted to a considerable Sum) being conferred upon him in lieu thereof.
This affair was upon the point of being ended, and all the difficulty rested only upon two points, one was touching the number of the benefices, and the other about the security to be given for performance of his Parole. The death of the Arch-Bishop his Uncle brought some change in it, the Curates of Paris (being all of his Faction) and his friends having spread abroad some new rumours; but de Retz notwithstanding resolved to accept of the con|ditions offered to him, and coming out of the Bois de Vincennes, was consign|ed into the hands of the Mareschal de Mallery, who brought him to Nantes, to abide there till the conditions were performed, after which it was resolved to send him unto Rome, and give him money for his Voyage, and for an Ayuda de Costa; but he going afterwards privately from the said City, all things were left at large, as in its proper place shall be declared.
In the mean time Cardinal Mazarine's Enemies seeing all the Artifices, and Cabals used by them to ruine him were come to nothing, resolved by fraud, and treachery to take away his life, which being effected, and he once out o'th' way, they hoped then to compass their ends, which by the Cardinal's providence had hitherto been disappointed; and 'twas a publick report that the Prince of Conde made use of such means, upon the knowledge, or at least suspition, that the Cardinal had made the like attempt upon him; which time notwithstanding shewed to be false, and an invention onely of the common Enemy.
For the giving of this stroke there were hired, or perswaded, one Rigau,' and another called Bertau, who being resolved to attempt it, began to haunt the Lowvre, that they might spy out a fit time, and place for puting it in Execution. It happened that some Letters were casually intercepted which gave cause of suspition sufficient to seise upon them, after which upon Exa|mination they confessed they had resolved to kill the Cardinal by stabbing him with Knives, as he went up (which he did every night) to the King's lodgings by a private narrow pair of stairs.
They were condemned unto the deserved punishment of the Gallows, and being broken upon the Wheel in Paris, near the Bastile, the 11th of October in the great street of St. Anthony.
The Cardinal Mazarine (who by reason of the mildness of his nature and the Character he bears of being a Prince of Holy Church) abhorres these bloody Spectacles, did what lay in him to procure their pardon, and would surely have obtained it, if being so enormious a Crime, it had been grant|able without a notable prejudice to justice, which in such cases must not at all give way to pity.
There followed after divers other Executions in Paris, done upon several

persons who were imprisoned for heynous Crimes; but without doubt the effects of the King's clemency were much the greater; those being many more in number who were pardoned, then who were punished.
I cannot here omit the mentioning of one, who being condemned to be beheaded, pretended by his Ambition to Triumph over death, he before he was brought out to Execution, with an undaunted boldness, as if he had been going to a Wedding, dressed himself up, shaved, turned up his Musta|ccio's, powdred his hair, and made his boasts, That Civil Men, though suffering Ignominious death, ought to dye honourable.
And although to encourage subjects by too much levity to a relapse into their former errours, be by some qualified with the name of a false Maxime, yet that could not discourage the King's Ministers from using it, because to generous minds the occasions of meriting the thanks of such as are obliged are much more welcome then the imprecations of those who suffer; which having drawn down Heavenly favours on them, hath let us see those miracles which have rendred his Government most happy, who having inherited the Title of Most Christian, hath joyned unto it the glorious appellation of Most Clement.
Truly they may be well called miracles which were seen in France in the year 1653, because whilst it seemed likely that the Kingdom combated eve|ry way by furious storms should fall in pieces, it became suddenly more se|rene, and every way more glorious then before, because being (by the quie|ting of Bourdeaux, and all Guienne) freed from that powerful diversion which imployed so many Forces, those being now at liberty, have secured all the borders from those dangers wherewith they were threatned, and marching into Catalonia, and Lombardy, have interrupted all those designs the Spanish party hoped for from their precedent Victories. The Ministers of which Crown, were thought to have committed a great oversight, in that they had not four years before agreed unto a general Peace, the ease whereof temper|ing the fierce, and stirring nature of the French, would have proved much more useful to them, then the necessitating of them to a War, which raising the desires of it in a youthful King, and so a great number of young Nobility, may probably make the effects thereof bitter unto them, it being certain that no Victories are so severely prosecuted, as those which are in prosecution of a just revenge.
The same time that the Affairs of Warr in Catalonia, Guienne, and Cham|paigne, passed in the manner before related, the French concerns also in Pied|mont put on a better face; so as there was no farther cause of fear that the Piemontois should for want of considerable assistance, be forced to free them|selves from the Inconveniences of Warr, by making some agreement with the Spaniard, for that the Count de Quinc being gone (as hath been said) in|to Piedmont, and some French Troops being joyned to him, he advanced in|to the Enemies Countrey with between 5000 and 6000 Men, and incamping at Annone, upon the Banks of the Tanaro, for about a moneths time, during which he staid there, he infested continually the Countrey about Alexan|dria with frequent parties sent into those parts; after which quitting that Post, he returned to Monferrat, and passing the Po at Verna, went to in|camp above Crescentino, to observe the Marquiss Caracene, who having taken the Field with 8000 Souldiers, was marched to Fontant, and Palaz|zuolo, three miles distant, where the Armies stayed some dayes, observing each other, in which mean time the French sent abroad several parties, and particularly one even to Vercelli of 1500 Horse. Before he dislodged thence, drawing up all his Horse in the Plain of Bertola, about a Cannon shot from the Spanish Camp, he sent to defie the Marquiss Caracene to fight a Battel;

but he holding a Maxime, That the French Fury was to be stopped by the Spanish Gravity, made a mock of him.
These attempts of the French being vanished without effect, Quinc re|passed the Po in Iuly, and entred again into Monferrat, crossing the Tanaro upon a Bridge of Boats near Asti, and from thence staying two dayes at Ro|chetta, went to encamp at Monbersel.
Upon notice of this march by the French, the Marquiss Caracene passed the Po again with his Forces near to Pontestura, and having marched cross Monferrat, went to lodge at Felizzano, intending to cross Tanaro at Rochet|ta; but finding opposition from the Enemy, he went to pass lower towards Alexandria, advancing unto Nizza della Paglia: Quinc stayed at Castel Nuo|vo Brusato, observing his motions about 15 dayes, there being daily skir|mishes between the Horse of either party. But Caracene being at last resol|ved to break into Piedmont, and by that diversion to make the French quit Monferrat, passing the Po at Pontestura, he began to scour over the Coun|trey thereabouts; but that sufficed not to make Quinc stirre, who judging that it would be of great prejudice to his Affairs to bring his men to make the Warr in a Friends Countrey, took a contrary course, he sent his Bag|gage into Asti, and foording over the Tanaro at Rochetta, and after passing Bormida, came by the way of Novi, unto Saravalle, a great Town above Alexandria in the Confines of the Genouese Countrey, between the Rivers of Sirvia, and Orba, and having sacked it, went towards Tortona, and Castel nuo|vo de Scrivia, taking great Booties in those Towns where he was not expect|ed. Caracene was thereby forced to quit his designs in Piedmont, and march in all hast to Alexandria, gathering together all the Garrisons, and forraign Souldiers to cut off the retreat of the French towards Nizza; but Quinc advertised thereof, marched by Cassino de Strada, by Aicqui, and by the Valley of Bistagno, to the said Town of Nizza, whither the Spanish Army was al|ready come; for which cause the French retired that Night to St. Spefaro, and went with great care to get the Pass of Our Lady at Tenello, and prevent the Enemy, who came thither just as the French had seised it with their Vantguard, where they began to skirmish, but with great reservedness of the Spanish side, because they would not engage in a Battel with the French, who although they were inferiour in number, had the advantage in the Ex|perience and valour of their Horse. Quinc went from thence directly to|wards Alba, and thence between Alba and Asti, quartering his Troops all along the Banks of Tanaro, and there the French staid till the arrival of the Mareschal de Granc, who passing the Alpes with a Recruit of 1200 good Men, upon the 18th of September came to the Army, where informing him|self of the condition wherein the Spanish stood, which incamped upon the same Frontier, and endeavoured to get farther into Piedmont, he had notice that Caracene having left Montenego, was upon his march to gain a Pass over Tanaro, at a place called La Rochetta, with design to go to Felizzano.
He thereupon presently called a Councel of War, wherein it was resolved not onely to hinder his advance, but also to enforce him unto a general Bat|tel, and put all unto a hazard; whereupon he sent the Marquiss Monpesat, Lieutenant General, and Commander of the Rear-Guard, upon the 23. of September, to seize upon the places of most advantage, and having himself put the rest of the Army into order of Battail upon the Campagne, which is sufficiently spacious, he advanced with 4. Squadrons to take notice how many passed, being accompanied by the Marquiss Vardes, who was that day of the Guard, and commanded as Lieutenant General.
He came without contest unto the rising ground, which commands all the Neighbouring Campagne, and having there discovered that Caracene began

to pass with the Van-guard over a Bridge of Boats, and was followed by the Foot, led by the Lieutenant General Don Vincenzo Monsury, the Horse foord|ing over the River a little lower with the Duke de Sesto, General of the Gens d' Arms, and Count Galeazzo Trotti, General of the Neapolitan Horse, he thought he would not give the Spaniards time to pass with all their men, be|cause they might then seise upon the Campagne, and either force the French to retreat, or fight with disadvantage; and therefore advanced presently with the Gross of the Army.
Caracene not being able to prevent the French by reason of the time spent in passing of the River, and two hours lost in expectation of the Bridge of Boats, pretended to make a halt there, and expect him in the advantage of those Posts he thought most convenient to defend his Camp, which had now passed the River; and because he had not time to draw out his Army into the Plain, and that the place beyond the Tanaro was something narrow, ac|commodating himself unto the time and place, he drew his Horse up in Squa|drons behind his Foot. He then presently seised upon two Houses, and pla|ced there the Regiments of Don Lewis, and Don Inigo de Velandia, and in the space between the Houses, the Regiments of Don Ioseph Velasco, and Don Diego d' Arragon, and de Beltin, with a design of uniting them together by a Breast work to be cast up; but that for want of time was left unperfect.
The Mareschal considering the posture of the Enemy, and that his Vant|guard which was advanced, might by the advantage of the Hill put some disorder into the Spanish Camp, which was commanded by it, yet not within Musquet shot, though he had onely two small Pieces, which were not very proper for that business, put his Army presently in order into two Divi|sions.
Unto the Marquiss of Monpesat, he gave the care of the Right Wing thereof, composed of the Regiments of Navarre, Peirault, Aiguebonne, the King's Guards of Swisses, the Squadron of the Mareschal's own Guard, the Regi|ments of Orleans, Feron, Prince Maurice of Savoy, Marcouss, Fernes, and Epinchat.
The Left was Commanded by the Marquiss de Vardes, consisting of the Re|giments of Foot of Orleans, Lionois, and Quinc; and the Horse were the Re|giments of St. Andr, Bregi, and Villa Francesi, on the left hand of which stood all the Free Companies, the Troops of the Savoy Horse under the Com|mand of their General the Marquiss de Monte, a Veronnois, to whom were al|so joyned the Foot of the Regiments of the Marquess Monpesat, and of the Marquess de Villa, Lieutenant General of the Savoy Horse.
In the second division stood the Regiment de Saux, to second the Regiment of Navarre, with the Regiments of Carignan, and de Sault, and on the left that of Granc, seconded the Regiments of Orleans, and Lionnois, having with them in the same division the Guards of Savoy, the Gens d' Armes d'ordinance of France, together with the Regiments of Ris, Deuncly, and St. Aignan.
In this order the French marched on, and charged briskly upon three Companies of light Horse, and some Files of Musquetiers that were advanced unto the top of the Hill, and pursued them into the Gross of Benavides, Vel|landia, and Beltin, who received the French with so much courage and fierce|ness, with their Pikes, and with Musket shot through divers holes in the Walls of the said houses, which flanked upon them, that Monpesat, perceiv|ing 'twas impossible to make any farther impression upon them retired, and the French resolved to endeavour the gaining of a little Church, or Chappel, which stood towards the River, not above 20 paces distant from the Houses, where Caracena had placed two Files of Musquetiers, Spaniards, and Italians, to guard it, with orders that if they were attacked they should retire unto a

body drawn up in Battle-ray, and composed of the Regiments of Don Carlo d' Este, Don Ioseph Brancario, Daniel Asti, the Count de Santillana, and the forraign Souldiers of the state of Milan.
Granc caused the said Chappel to be attacked by 200 chosen Foot, second|ed by some Horse, and forthwith took it, the Musquetiers who were placed there retiring themselves (according to their orders) unto the gross which stood firm, and kept their Post; he then drew out his Company of Gens d' Armes, about 30 paces from the left Wing of the Spanish Troops, and at the same time gave a vigorous charge with his Foot, hoping that if they could make any impression upon the Enemy; the French Cavalry might break in, and total confound them; but meeting with a certain Slough, made by a Brook which runs into the Tanaro, he was constrained to make a stop, at the same time when the Troops of Savoy charged between the River, and the Spaniards right Wing, in a place that was more open, where with the first volley of the Enemies shot, the Marquess de Monte, a Cavalier of great con|duct, by reason of his long experience, and much renowned for his many fa|mous Actions, was unhappily shot by a Musket Bullet in his head, where|of he forthwith died; the Marquess Villa was slightly hurt in the Arm, be|sides the Count de Medavy, Son to the Mareschal, Monsieur de Bussy Major General of a Brigade, and several other officers who were also hurt. Where|upon Grance finding the constancy, and resolution of the Spaniards, animated by the presence of Caracene their General, (who like a Valiant Captain en|gaged himself in the first ranks where greatest danger was) drew up the second division with the two field pieces, one of which at the first shot, was rendred useless by the breaking of the Carriage, and the French continued shooting with the other, but to so little purpose, that being every where Nobly repulsed, at last with the declining of the Sun their fury flacked, wanting also Artillery, and Ammunition, it being observed that the Swissers for want of Bullets, shot away almost all the Buttons from their Coats, and they retired to the Campagne upon the Hill, where they encamped that night in Battalia, and the next morning marched towards Montemagno, and Grana; there died of French in this action, the said Marquess Monte, and 4 Captains, and divers Officers, together with some considerable number of Souldiers, which was not precisely known, and above 100 wounded, amongst whom were several Commanders.
The Marquess Monpesat had his horse killed under him, and his Hat shot through with a Musket Bullet, and so had also Monsieur d' Epinchat, and the Captain of the Mareschal's Guard. The Spaniards lost fewer Souldiers, and few or no Officers, but there were many hurt, and amongst others the Mar|quess himself, received a slight hurt with a Musket Bullet.
After this Action the French Army staid 17 days at Montemagno, and nei|ther party being in a condition to do any considerable thing, all this Cam|pagne was spent in marches, and Countermarches, from one place to ano|ther: The French desiring to live in the Territory of Milan upon their Ene|mies Country, and the Spaniards to hinder them from doing of it; during which time there fell out several Skirmishes between them, with various success.
The French after disldoged from Montemagno, and went to Fubine, being always coasted by the Spanish Army, who at the same time leaving Feliz|zano were a front of them, and there some Burgundian Officers, having a de|sire to wait upon the Mareschal Granc, as being known unto him, and his friends, by Licence of the Marquess Caracene went, and spoke with him, as did also afterwards the Marquess himself, and the Mareschal, both the one, and the other, being accompanied by the prime men in either Army; they

continued together in conference about two hours, with much civility, and complements. The French being all of them much taken as well with the Valour, as great courtesie of Caracene, by whom he was highly valued, as a generous and prudent Captain, so as many of the French said to the Spani|ards themselves, That t'was great pity he was not a French-man.
This conference being past, the French Army marched to San Salvator, and from thence, the Marquess Monpesat three days after, with 500 Horse, and as many Foot, scoured all the Country thereabouts, Pillaging several Towns, and gathering together a great quantity of victuals; the Army staid for those three days at San Salvator, that of Spain being always in the Flank of it, with design either to distress it for want of Victuals, or take it in some place of disadvantage, and fight it; in which time there past continual Skir|mishes between the Scouts of either party. But the French afterwards per|ceiving that by reason of the great vigilancy of the Spanish Captains, they could gain little in that Country, retired towards Monferrat, unto Mon|calvo; and for as much as Grance had strict orders from Court that he should be sure to Winter in the State of Milan, he marched to Gabbiano, and casting a Bridge of Boats over the Po, a little below Crescentino, the French passed toward Sesia to plunder, and live in the Enemies Country, took the Castle of Carpigna, Garrisoned by two Italian Companies, run over all the Country even to the Gates of Novara, and made several other marches without any other Action between them, but only some skirmishes, which from time to time fell out between the parties, because the Spaniards intend|ing to hinder the French from taking up their Winter quarters in the State of Milan, were sometimes in Flank, sometimes in Front, and other whiles upon their backs, with so much inconvenience and trouble to them, that at last finding themselves not so strong, as was necessary to maintain the Posts which they had taken, and the season growing very bitter, they were forced to retire into Piedmont, where lying too heavy upon the Duke of Savoy his Subjects, the French Horse was sent beyond the Mountains to Winter in Daul|phine, Bress, and Dombes, and so ended the Campagne for this year 1653, with some resentment of the Court, who intended that the Troops should (what ever became of it) maintain themselves upon the Enemies charges that Win|ter in the State of Milan.
In this mean time the Courriers who brought the Letters and Capitula|tions of Bourdeaux were come to Court, and Monsieur de Las, (who was dis|patched from the Generals, and Monsieur d' Estrades) having made his rela|tion of all passages, the Amnestie was presently dispatched unto the Bur|delois, containing an entire abolition of all their Crimes, none being accept|ed in it but the Councellor Trancours, and Blaru, and Desert, Merchants, who were sent by the Olmiera into England, and also Duna Festa, and Villars, heads of that Faction, and Clerac, who was deputed by them into Spain; it was far|ther ordered, that the Citizens should renew their oaths of Fealty unto the King, and rebuild the Castles Trombesta, and de Ha, as being necessary to re|press all popular risings, and to protect and defend the good, and able Citi|zens, it being evident, that in all Cities the Common People are ever Ene|mies to those persons who have most to lose.
This declaration of the King's being proposed to Monsieur La Vic Advo|cate General who was then in Bourdeaux, that he might make the process against those two spyes from Marsin, and Lenet, sent back into the City, and verifie it; Every one expected from the Parliament proofs of their submis|sion, which might cancel the memory of their passed disobedience: But La Vic willing to make use of this occasion to render himself necessary, raised such scruples and intrigues, by his propositions, which were interlaced in such

manner with his conclusions, that some of the Counsellors of Parliament took thence occasion to restrain the King's Will, with such Glosses, Comments, and Modifications, that it appeared they would be, not the Interpreters, but Mode|rators and Disposers of the Kings Favours, so as none should be thanked for them, but themselves.
They did particularly excite the people not to suffer the yoke of the Castles, ordering that new Instances should be made to Court for demolishing the Forts in the City, and that in case the King were absolutely resolved to im|pose that Slavery upon them, yet that those Places should not be under the command of the Governour of the Province.
This reflexion was not pleasing to the King's Ministers, and much less the Condition, That the publishing of the Amnestie should be put off, until the re|sidence of the Parliament should be established, as if their return to Bourdeaux (which was so much the more suspected by the Court, by how much 'twas more earnestly desired by them) were necessary for the security of the people, or for rendring the King's Pardon valid.
These Actions of the Parliament, and these their so extravagant underta|kings, were highly resented by the Duke's of Vendosme and Candale, as if it had been a flat disobedience; whereupon they presently gave order to the Counsellors which had retired to Reolle, to return unto their residence in Bourdeaux: The said de Vie, who was believed Author of this bold attempt, for his own particular ends, was forbid to stay in Bourdeaux; and the Origi|nal Declaration being got out of the Parliament Notary his hand, was by Or|der from the Generals, published by the ordinary Magistrates of the City.
The Court being as much surprised with this disorder, as disgusted with the Parliament of Guienne, whose most faithful Members appeared to be re|bellious, by a severe Decree of Councel on the 26th of September, gave them a sore mortification, commanding them not to intermeddle in any thing whatsoever which concerned the State.
The Generals in the mean time seeing the nearness of the Troops to be a trouble to the City, resolved to draw them off, and the Warr in that Province being ended by the taking of Peregueaux, the Count Bougy, Lieutenant Ge|neral was by Order from Court sent away with between 5000 and 6000 Horse and Foot towards the Frontiers of Flanders; 3000 Foot, and 1200 Horse more marched towards Catalonia, and there remained onely part of Vendosme's Army in the Countrey (vulgarly styled, That between the two Seas,) ready to be put on Shipboard in case the Spaniards continued in the Garonne, from whence two Leagues distant from Blaye they landed, and burnt some Works belonging to the Duke San Simon; and on the other side they went up into the Medoc, and burnt the Country thereabouts.
Vendosme during this time, had taken a view of his Shipping lying under the Fort Caesar, and together with those which had been provided in Bour|deaux during the Siege, proposed to fight the Spaniards, which was extream|ly desired by the Duke of Candale, and Monsieur d' Estrades, who for that de|sign had brought Seven hundred Marriners from the Islands of Rochel under his Government: But the Sea-Captains represented, That the Forces were unequal in the number of great Ships; and that although the French Shipping were more, yet they were less, so as the Spaniards had great advantage with their Gal|lions full of fresh men, whereby they would be easily Masters of them, the King's Ships being neither well furnished with Men, nor sufficiently fitted with Cordage and other Trimming; and supposing the Spaniard should stand out to Sea, or keep in the Mouth of the River where they were, the Galleys, armed Shallops, and other lesser Shipping would be of no use, which notwithstanding where the River was nar|rower, and barred with Sand, would be able well to assail them in case the Spaniards should advance higher.
To end these differences and disputes made by the Captains of the Ships, Monsieur d' Estrades undertook to gather a number of Mariners fit to fight, and to serve with them himself upon the Shipping; but whilest he executed the Duke of Vendosme's Order to bring them, the Spaniards were suddainly seen to hoist sail, and advance towards Blaye, up to Paulliac, not as at first, 5. or 6. at a time to fetch Water, but it seemed that the whole Body of the Fleet would go against the French, at a time when for the ease of Bourdeaux, the Duke of Vendosme had sent his men unto Xaintoigne; but they being with all speed recalled, and some Regiments advanced to go on Shipboard, the Spaniards retired unto the Foss of Verdon.
The Duke of Vendosme had himself viewed the Spanish Vessels upon the 26th of September, and he had sent the Chevalier Carteret, and English-man, to inform himself at a nearer distance of their condition. He found there were 28 Great, and strong Galeons, but by some prisoners taken in the Isle of Pa|tiras, 'twas understood that an Infirmity called the Scurvy, which seises on their Joynts, was much amongst them. They landed notwithstanding at St. Surin de Cadurna, in Medoc, where they burnt some houses, before the King's Forces were in a condition to repulse them, or plant some Cannon against them, which the Duke of Vendosme had appointed for that purpose. Who preparing himself to go against them, had sent some Galeots to St. Surin de Mortagne, and to Mortagne it self, to make provision of Corn. Marsin be|ing come to the Spanish Fleet, had a design upon that Town, landed 3000 men, surprised the Ten French Galeots come to fetch Corn for the Army and Fleet, forced the Castle, and sacked some houses; but doubting after that Monsieur de Breval, a Mareschal de Camp, should come upon him with the Re|giment of Normandy, quartered a side hand of it, he abandoned the Posts that he had taken; and if Breval had had the least number of Horse to cut off the Spaniards passage, they being unprovided of Horse, and laden with Booty, he might have given them a total Rout.
Marsin made some Barricadoes in a Meadow which reached unto the Ri|ver, having the Channel of Mortagne which covered him on the one side; and on the other his own men drawn up in Battalia. He sustained the Skirmish with Courage sufficient, Imbarqued the Goods, and Plunder of that mise|rable Town, losing notwithstanding some Foot in his Retreat, taken by that Regiment of Normandy, who as the Spaniards imbarked and thereby grew fewer, fell upon them.
Monsieur L'Estrades gathered in this time out of the Towns under his Go|vernment about Rochel, and Brouages, about 1200 Mariners, who being got together, and put a Shipboard, 'twas resolved that they should presently set sail to fight, or chase away the Spaniard.
The Duke of Vendosme went aboard the Admiral, and having Shipped his Men, they set sail against the Spaniard, who being surprized at this unex|pected resolution, set fire to some Barks, and small Boats, and by the favour of the wind retired. Vendosme followed them to the Rivers Mouth, and there saw that they divided themselves into two Squadrons, one directing their course towards Biscay, and the other towards Dunkirk.
The Duke took land at Royon, and whilest he staid there to know certain newes of the Enemies Fleet, the Vice-Admiral of Spain called San Salvator, which came from St. Sebastians, accompanied by a Foyst laden with Victu|als and other Provisions, entred into the River, not knowing that the Spanish Fleet was gone, and engaged her self so far amongst the French Shipping, that the said two Ships being laid aboard, after some resistance were forced both of them to strike Sail, and yield.
There was aboard the said Vice-Admiral, 40 Pieces of Cannon, and aboard

the Foyst 700 Marriners, and provisions of Victuals for a month for the whole Fleet. After the taking of these Swisses, the French Shipping went into the River Sudre, and the Duke of Vendosme returned to Court.
Monsieur d' Estrades for his great merits was declared Maiore of Bourdeaux, a place much esteemed, and of great importance, being the principal amongst all the inhabitants, Maiore signifying head, and Governour of the City; the Mareschal's of France de Mattignon, d'Ornano, and de Roquelaure, having here|tofore enjoyed that Office. The stirs in Bourdeaux were thus quieted, and the people enjoying the fruits of that Peace granted unto them by the King's favour; the Plague coming into the City, allayed much the gust of their re|pose; the freedom of Commerce being interrupted thereby, and by the Cala|mity of all the Neighbouring Towns, who tasted of the same Calamity, and were almost dispeopled by it.
The Deputies of Bourdeaux coming afterwards unto the Court, which was then at Chalons in Champaigne, were received by their Majesties with such demonstrations of clemency, and affection, as took from their memory, the shame of their past errours, and gave them courage to expect favours from his Majesties Bounty; in the mean time the Parliament of Guienne which was retired to Reole, received the provisions for the Government of Limousin, granted by his Majestie unto the Mareschal Turenne.
He by the vigour of his Sword, and prudence of his Councels, kept the Frontier quiet, from all attempts of the Enemy, and encamped always where he might observe the Prince of Conde's motions; who though he were retired a little to refresh his Souldiers, had not yet laid aside the thoughts, of taking the field afresh, and at least to keep his Winter quarters in France.
But the Cardinal Mazarine finding himself, by the happy success in Guien|ne, freed from that strong diversion, which was given to the King's Forces in those parts, and being now at liberty which all the Forces to repel the Prince of Conde's bold designs, and take from him all the Credit he had in France, having called all the Generals unto a Councel in his Abbey at Laon, proposed unto them that he desired before the Forces drew into their Winter quarters, it being as yet Autumn, which in France is used to be mild open weather, to attempt the taking of St. Menhaud, from the Prince of Conde, as that which having in it a strong Garrison, scoured all the Coun|try thereabouts, and drew great contributions not only from the open Towns, but from those also that were Walled.
The opinion of the greatest part of the Commanders who met in Councel, was not to engage in any Enterprize that year, because the Spaniards though much weakened by the Siege of Rocroy, might draw out again, and return|ing with considerable Forces, might either raise the Siege, which would much prejudice the reputation of the Army; or by way of diversion recom|pence the loss of it, with something which would be of more importance.
The Cardinal opposed this opinion, and let them see, that with the Ar|mies of the two Mareschals Turenne, and Ferte Seneterre, they might make head against the Spanish Army, and at the same time invest St. Menhaud with the King's Guards, and some few Forces added to them; and afterwards the Forces which were expected from Guienne, and new Levies from Germany being joyned to them, they might besiege the Town, and carry it, whereby all Champaigne would be freed from the Plunderings, and damage, which they suffered by that Garrison.
This opinion prevailing, the Court returned from Laon, unto Soissons, and from thence upon the 20th of October went to Chalons; mean while the Marquess Castelnau drew out with about 1500 men from Turenne's Army, and was sent towards St. Menhaud, and St. Mor also did the like with 900 Horse, and some Foot, provided by the Cardinal, and they with these Forces the

next morning blocked up St. Menhaud, making four quarters about it, but without drawing any line about it, because the Armies of Turenne, and Ferte Senneterre, standing to cover, and defend the besiegers, they pretended to take it by storm without a Siege.
And although it appeared ridiculous, that 3500 men should attempt to besiege a City with a strong Castle, Garrisoned by above 1500 men, under the command of brave Chieftains, the Marquess de Fortz, Governour of the City, and Monsieur de Montal Commander in the Castle, but who directed all as being Conde's greatest Confident; they undertook the matter notwith|standing with so much readiness, and courage, that the issue of it made it ap|parent how great the Judgment, and ability of the Cardinal was, who him|self alone (contrary to the opinion of all the other Commanders) made them engage in this design.
There commanded then in the King's Camp as Lieutenants General, the Marquesses of Castelnau, and Uxelles, the Count of Navailles, and Monsieur St. Mor; the provisions for the Camp were brought from Chalons, and for want of Horses, and Carts, all the Country being ruined by the War, they made use of the Court Carriages, a thing extraordinary, and which not being foreseen by the Enemy, made them constantly believe that 'twas a vain En|terprize, being resolved upon without means convenient to perform it; principally because Clermont was on the left hand, the Garrison whereof scoured the Campagna, and incommoded all the Neighbouring Country, ha|ving amongst other exploits, one day taken divers of the Court-horses under Carts of Ammunition, and Victuals, going to the French Camp.
The Mareschal Turenne, in respect the Cardinal had undertaken the said Siege, rose from Aubigny, and with between 6, and 7000 men, put himself to observe the motion of the Spaniards, who seemed as if they would go towards Rocroy. The Mareschal de la Ferte, placed himself with his body between the Mose, and Clermont, to countenance the besiegers. The Count Beaujeu marched farther into Picardy with about 2500 chosen Souldiers, to guard the Frontier places: The Duke d' Elboef, and the Count d' Illebonne his Son, with their men, kept sometimes at Rosan, sometimes at Mon Cornet, and some|times at other Posts, according as the business most required.
The 26th of October the King accompanied by the Cardinal, and a good number of principal Cavaliers of the Court, went to the Camp to see the posture of it, and to give countenance to the Siege, he lodged in the Abbey of Cicussy, belonging to the Cardinal Bichi, and from thence went to the rising of a Hill, under which was the quarter of Marquess Castelnau, from whence some Cavaliers went in bravery within a Musket shot of the Walls, and amongst them the Count de Guiche, eldest Son of the Mareschal Gramont, though a youth not above 15 years of Age, being all fire, and spirit, advanced his Horse before the rest, and without fear discharged his Pistol upon the Enemies Guard, and returned without hurt unto his Majesty, who was much edified to see so extraordinary a Courage, which to the French Nobili|ty uses to be an unseparable companion of their high Birth. And there be|ing a Councel of War held in his Majesties presence, they resolved to send Monsieur de Villequier with a Summons to the besieged, and a particular de|mand unto the Marquess de Fortz, to give up the Town unto his Majesty.
This Marquess, by the mediation of Monsieur de Vaubecourt his Brother-in-law, who was Governour of Chalons, treated to make his peace with the Court, and the business was upon the point agreed; but the Town being blocked up, just as he expected the Prince of Conde's consent unto the agree|ment, he thought he could not with his honour quit it, but as a generous Cavalier stand in defence thereof, he returned therefore that answer, and

that Montal might have no occasion to suspect his Faith; he declared that he would in that Siege serve as a private Souldier, leaving the care and Govern|ment of all to him; which he did, exposing himself always to the greatest dangers.
The King returning upon the 28th of October to Chalons, upon the first of November the French began to break ground, and make their aproaches on two sides, and planted their Batteries against the City, but with little pro|fit, by reason of the brisk defence the besieged made by sallyes, and other oppositions, which made the Enterprize seem difficult.
Upon news brought that the French besieged this Town, the Prince of Conde who (as hath been said) was troubled with a Quartane Ague, gave order unto the Counts Briole, and Duraz, that drawing together what strength could be gotten out of the neighbouring quarters, they should en|deavour to put some relief into the Town, and the whilst he with the Spanish Generals would gather together all their Forces, not so much to defend that place, as to be able to take up Quarters within France.
The said Counts by assistance of the Lorenois, got together 3000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and advanced to accomplish their design; which without doubt had taken, if the Cardinals diligence had not prevented them, who having notice thereof upon the 4th of November at Night from the Count Grand Pre, Governour of Mouson, presently leapt out of Bed, and gave orders about it; he dispatch'd presently Monsieur d'On Lieutenant of his Guard to Vitry, to make the Count Brugy with the Forces of Guienne come in all hast unto the King's Camp; he commanded the Gens d' Armes, and Horse of his Maje|sties Guards, and his own, and all the Gentlemen of his House to march im|mediately. He forthwith sent Courriers all about, that from all places Soul|diers should come, and re-inforce the King's Army, to the command of which he appointed the Mareschal du Plessis Pralin, in whose fidelity, and experien|ced Valour, he had great confidence; so as by break of day all the Souldiery, and as many Gentlemen as were about the Court, were Horsed and Armed, with a readiness equal unto the quickness of their Life, and Spirit.
The Mareschal went from Chalons after Dinner the same day, and being accompanied by a good number of Volunteers, and the said Guards, marched towards the Camp to be there at Night the most privately he could, and that he might be ready to fight them the next morning, at which time they were expected but the Commanders of Conde's Troops moved not at all, being perhaps in fear of being encountred, and inclosed by Mareschal Ferte Snnterre, who by the Cardinal's Order, was drawn off from the Army with 3000 Horse, and 500 choice Dragoons, and marched to get between Clermont and St. Menhaud, being a fit place to charge upon the Enemies Rear, in case they had engaged themselves in any design against the Army that besieged the Town.
The next day all the Troops of Guienne came up, being in number Ele|ven Regiments of Horse, and Ten of Foot, all Old tried Souldiers, so as the Army being now re-inforced by these, and other Recruits which came from Germany, Conde could not undertake to relieve it without a full Army, and that with evident danger of being drawn to a pitch't Battel, then much desired by the French, but abhorred by the Spaniard, who should then have run too great a hazard, and therefore were very wary in seconding the da|ring Councels of the Prince of Conde, about fighting a Battail, or the under|taking of any hazardous design; and especially it being about a Town be|longing to the Prince himself, they were not willing to venture their Soul|diers for anothers benefit: To which was added, That the Lorenois pretend|ing to have done sufficient for that Campagne, were resolved not to draw again out of their Quarters.

Upon the arrival of the Mareschal du Plessis, the Siege was taken up with greater vigour, being notably defended by Montal, with frequent Sallies, and losses on both sides; and better he would have done, had not a Magazine of Ammunition been blowed up the Night before the 6th of November, by means of a Cannon Bullet shot into it, or some other accident, the same being variously reported. The French assaulted vigorously the Half-Moon before the Port du Bois, and at the same time got into the Ditch on the other side; but the Besieged fallying out upon their backs hindered their work, and took prisoner Monsieur d'Ortis, a Lieutenant of the Guards; and hurt several other Souldiers and Officers, amongst whom was Monsieur de Pontet, a Captain of the said Guards. Upon the 16th day they made a Sally upon the Guard of Monsieur de Nancre, who commanded then in the approach, but were with some loss beaten back, which happened also in another Salley, made upon the Trench kept by the Regiments de Guard two days after, where they were repulsed by Monsieur de Charmon, a Captain of that Regiment, with the loss of some Souldiers, and of Monsieur de la Garde, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment de Burgoigne. Which was also seconded by the death of Mon|sieur Demon, Sergeant Major of the Town, who was next day killed in the Ditch, as he went to discover which way they might go with most security, to interrupt the Works of the Besiegers.
The Marquiss Castelnau in the mean time attacked a Work called Ferra Ca|valli, and having carried it, got into the Ditch, and made a Gallery to defend the Miners; which succeeded well, after they had beaten back two Sallies of the Besieged, who were many of them killed upon the place. The Regi|ments d'Uxelles, and Dampierre, on the other side, took the Half-Moon on the right side of the breach called La Exvelape; whereupon the French being on the one side ready to give the Assault, and a Mine ready to blow up the Bastion on the other, the Besieged wanting Powder, demanded a Parley, and offered to give up the Town, if in Eight dayes they were not relieved: which being refused by the Mareschal, who gave order for prosecution of his Works; Upon the 25th day, Montal without any reserve, agreed to march out of the Town, with Arms, and Baggage; which he did upon the 27th of November towards Rocroy, being followed but by few French, because the greatest part of those who served him, accepted the Amnestie, and either went into the King's Service, or their own houses; as did also the Marquiss de Forz, Mon|sieur de Taissy, Geneste, and others, who being invited by the King's Clemency, cst from their minds all kind of bitterness, and found that the true happiness of Subjects, consists in their entire obedience to their Soveraign,
Together with this Enterprise of St. Menhaud, ended the Campagne 1653; which in the beginning of it was likely to have proved very prejudicial, and fatal, to the King's Interests, by reason of the unequality of Forces, and the Diversion in Guienne, which was the most part of it under the Princes, so as the more hard and improbable a matter 'twas to hinder the Enemies Pro|gress, so much the greater Glory resulted by it unto the Prudence of the Car|dinal, and valour of the Commanders, who were able to gain so considerable advantages; and having through so many disasters and cross accidents of For|tune, brought things unto so good an end, we cannot choose but hope for the continuance of good success, since the malignity of the times can never be so great, but that it will be overcome by the constant endeavours of Wit, and Prudence.
By taking of this Town, the Countrey thereabouts was freed from the Contributions they were enforced to pay unto this Garrison, to avoid the mischiefs which otherwise they did unto them.
During this Siege, the Cardinal failed not with incredible diligence to

have an eye to all, and to give such Orders as were convenient for the good Government of the Kingdome. He dispatcht Courriers into Provence, to make them with their Galleys carry necessary Provisions into Rosa, doubting least the Spaniard after the happy relief of Girone, should lay Siege to that im|portant place; he sent the Captain of his own Guard to Brisac, to conclude the Negotiation with Count d' Harcourt, and get that considerable Fort to be left freely unto his Majesties disposing; he applyed to Bourdeaux such reme|dies as were proper for curing the unquietness of that people, to make them tast the Sweet of Peace, that they might thereby better know the bitterness of their passed troubles: Orders being afterwards given out for the Souldiers Winter Quarters with the least trouble that might be unto the Subjects, he returned with the King to Paris, where his Majesty was received as in Tri|umph, with theincredible applause of every one, and with so much admi|ration of the Cardinal's Abilities, that his Name was rendred Venerable, and immortal, by the Hands, and Tongues of those, who had before exclaim|ed against him.
Whilst the Cardinal Mazarine was imployed about the business of the Campagne, and intent upon the Enterprize of St. Menhaud, the Countesses of Mancini, and Martinozze, his Sisters, with a Daughter of the latter Coun|tess, who after Barbarine's alliance with the Pope had left Rome, came into Provence, being honoured in all places where they passed, and particularly in Genoua, with all those marks of honour, and esteem, proper unto the ge|nerosity of that State, and due unto the merit of their Brother, and their own worthy qualities, being Ladies endued amongst their many other Vertues, with an admirable Modesty, and excellent Deportment; they staid in Pro|vence for some days, and coming to Paris when the Court was returned thi|ther, were received with an Affectionate courtesie, not onely by the Grandees of the Court, but also by his Royal Majesty.
The Affairs standing in the posture hath been related, the Prince of Conty was in Cadillac, where Monsieur de Langlada the Cardinal's Secretary lay sick, amongst other discourses which past between them, the Prince discovered to him the design he had to make his Peace at Court, and put in execution the last Advice he had received from the Mouth of his dying Father, which con|sisted in this, That he should alwayes stand for the King's Interests, and never swarve from the Obedience due unto his Prince.
He revolved in his mind upon the example of his Brother, who whilest he had contained himself within his Duty, had been Fortunate, and Glorious. He considered, That the misfortune of his Family, deceived by their Friends, who for their own particular Interests had made a separation between him, and his Brother, reduced him unto the necessity, either to be in an ill condi|tion, wheresoever he should live, without Favour or Trust at Court; or to take unfitting means for returning with glory and advantage to his first obe|dience, and preserve his Family in that condition, wherein his Father had by great endeavours left it, and from whence Conde was about with so much inadvertency, to throw it headlong.
He foresaw that to retire himself into Spain, would be contrary unto his Genius, and 'twould be to expose himself absolutely to the revenge of a Brother, who prepossessed by Count Marsin, blinded by Lenet, and full him|self of sinister impressions against him, would make a scorn of him, and of those Eminent Services he had done him in Emergencies of high Importance, having with an admirable dexterity kept up his Party with a few Men, and little Money, amidst the aversion of the People, who were tired even to extre|mity, with the Miseries of Warr; he thought that by retiring into Italy, or any part of his own Lands in France, he should never be able to avoid the con|tinual

suspitions would be had of him by the Court; so as either t'one way; or t'other, his life in the flower of his Age would prove unhappy, idle, and unworthy of his Lively Spirit, and Courageous Heart, which made him ca|pable of all Noble Actions; revolving therefore with himself, what was Es|sential to his own Interest, and weighing prudently what was fit for him to do, he found the onely means to preserve himself in a condition fit for a Prince, such as he was, would be to follow the example of the Prince his Bro|ther, and to unite himself with the first Minister, by the strict tyes of an Al|liance, which would consequently restore him to the Favour of his Royal Majesty.
He gave a hint of these thoughts unto Langlada, but opened himself after with greater confidence unto the Duke of Candale, with whom he professed to have a particular tye of Friendship; neither was he deceived in his thought, for the Duke concurring in opinion with him, approved his thoughts as well projected, and firmly grounded, praising the Resolution with frank sincerity, notwithstanding the Duke himself were far proceeded in a Treaty with the same party the Prince proposed, and did extreamly desire the conclusion of it.
The Prince for all this thought it not fit to discover his thoughts so sud|dainly unto the Court, but onely sent thither Monsieur Menil the Captain of his Guard, onely to pass Complements, but without Letters of Credence, or other Instructions. Menil was received with great kindness, and he ha|ving informed himself touching the sence, not onely of their Majesties, but also of the Cardinal, and all the other Ministers, assured the Prince, That he had found so great an inclination in the Cardinal towards him, that he might cer|tainly assure himself of an eternal Oblivion of all things past, and of the renewing a sincere Affection towards his Person. Upon these informations he resolved to dispatch thither Monsieur de Saracin his Steward, in whose Fidelity and Prudence he had great confidence, that he might make some Overtures, and speak more freely of those things which he before hinted in Cadillac, unto Langlada.
Saracin found the good inclination of the Court, and in consequence there|of after some Journeys to, and fro, made by him, and Langlada, the Treaty of Marriage between the Prince of Conty, and the Countess Martinozzi Niece to the Cardinal, was so far advanced, that it was no longer doubted. This News being heard by those who were envious of the repose, and glory, of both Prince, and Cardinal, they attempted with great malignity to sow tares, and foment suspicions between them. Some of them representing unto the Ab|bot Ondedei, That all this was but an Artifice; That Conty held secret Intelli|gence with his Brother, and the Dutchess his Sister; and that the effect would ne|ver be correspondent to the appearance. But the advantage being reciprocal, and the inclinations between the parties equal, the spight of those who malig|ned them was at last overcome, and the stipulation of the contract was con|cluded by his Majestie himself, to whose good pleasure the Cardinal refer|red his will, having already wholly sacrificed himself unto his Service; and if the execution thereof was delayed, it proceeded from the Prince of Conty his good Nature, who would not be present at the making of his Brother's Process, who was accused and declared guilty of High Treason, by the Par|liament of Paris.
The Prince got his coming to Court to be put off until the end of Carne|val; and then coming thither was received with all imaginable applauses and content,1654. the first Friday in Lent the Ceremony of their Hand-fasting and Betrothing was performed, with a Dowry of 200000 Crowns given to the Princess by her Uncle, and 50000 more by the King's Bounty; to which was

added a Pension equal to the Church-Livings, which (being a considerable Summe) were resigned by the Prince into the King's hands: After followed the Marriage, which was honoured by the presence of the King, Queen, Duke of Anjou, and all the Princes, and great Lords about the Court; where there were none so stung with Envy, or possessed with Rancour, or ill will, that durst find fault with this Conjunction, because the Merits of the Uncle from the Crown, were altogether unparallel'd, and the Beauty of the Bride was accompanied by all those excellent Conditions, that are able to enforce Praise and Commendations, even from Envious persons and Detractors.
The Queen her self would needs do that Honour unto the Princess, to put her into Bed; and by her Incomparable Kindness, to give testimony of the Content this Marriage brought her.
The King after made a gracious Gift unto the Bridegroom of all the Goods and Charges of the Prince his Brother, which were Confiscate; but he with an exemplar greatness of Mind, refused the Favour, despising all Riches and Dignities which might accrue unto him by such spoyls; to let his Brother know, That in his Heart there reigned no other Interest but that of Reputa|tion and Honour, which ought to be the onely guide unto the Actions of Mo|derate and Prudent persons.
The dayes following were spent in the most lively expressions could be made of general Contentment for the re-union of this Branch unto the Royal Stock, which was accompanied with Balls, Musick, and other Recreations befitting a Royal, and Majestick Court; And in honour of these Nuptials, there followed after many Poems composed by several persons, and amongst others by Monsieur Amaltei in France, and Monsieur Torcigliani in Italy, the two most Famous Virtuosi of this present Age.
At the same time that Paris was all in coy by reason of this Marriage, and the good Success of the Campagna; at Brussels on the contrary, all were in Sadness, and apprehension, occasioned by the fear they had conceived of some sinister Accident, by reason of the Imprisonment of Charles Duke of Lorrain, which happened in manner following.
This Prince lived in Flanders with Maximes directed unto the taking of the Common people, conversing with persons of mean condition, and shunning the converse of Noble-men, which by the Nobility was attributed to an extravagancy of humour; with the Common people it got a vogue. But his courses were much the more observed by the Ministers of Spain, because he approved not the Form of their Government. To which was joyned a par|ticular difference he had with the Prince of Conde, which produced many in|conveniences, and in particular spoiled all Plots that were well laid, one of them hindring alwaies the designs of the other.
The Count Fuensaldagne in all his Negotiations with the said Duke recei|ved ever doubtful answers; he was alwaies willing to feed him onely with hopes, and promises; and making shew of great distrust, would alwaies have his money before-hand, when he was to do any Service with his Force; it was known that Cardinal Mazarine caused him to be Treated with under-, hand, to make him quit the Spaniard, and put himself under the Protection of France.
The Prince of Conde, who had particular Information of all that passed by his Friends in the Court of France, and served the Catholick King with all fidelity and truth, could not endure that any prejudice should be done un|to the Spanish Interests, more than his own concernments; and 'twas the common Opinion in Flanders, That both he, and the Kings Ministers there being advertised of it, gave notice thereof unto the Emperour's Court, and that of Spain, representing to them, That 'twas necessary to come unto a speedy

resolution, to avoid the blow might be expected from the Duke unto his Maje|sty's prejudice.
After several meetings and consultations in the said Courts, it was resolved, That they should secure his Person in Flanders, as soon as it might be done with|out confusion or trouble. This Order was some time before come from Spain; but could not be as then effected.
Finally, In the Campagne 1653, it was discovered that he had made an Agree|ment with France, That in case the Armies came to fight, the Lorenois should stand Neuters, without assisting either Party: And the suspicion thereof, was the occasion that when the Armies faced each other, the Spaniards (as hath been said) durst not ingage the French, nor make use of the opportunity they had to fight Turenne, but the Forces of both sides (after the taking of St. Menhaud by the French) being gone into their Winter-quarters,  the Duke being in Brus|sells, an Arrest upon his person was resolved to be executed in manner following.
First, 'twas agreed with the Count Ligneville, Commander-General of the Loranois (who had a particular Antipathy against the French Nation) that in cause any change of Quarters should be made among the Spanish Souldiery, he would take order that his men should not move, and then they caused some Troops to draw near Brussels for the effecting of the Arrest which had been or|dered.
The Duke was advertised of this, but said to him who gave him that no|tice, that he valued it not in case those were the Troops who changed their Quarters.
The King's Ministers being in doubt notwithstanding that he might escape by Night, either by favour of the Citizens, or some other way, kept a most strict watch at the Gates; the next day the news was spread abroad over the City, and coming to the Duke's ears, he answered, I fear not: Night being come, a while before Sun-set the Duke being with a Father Confessor at the Magdalenes, in their little Church, he saw Count Garcia, Sergeant Major General, come in with many Officers attending on him; the sight of whom made him change colour.
The Count told him, That the Arch-Duke was to confer with him immediately about several Affairs of great importance to the Crown, and expected him at the Pa|lace. The Duke answered, He thought the hour something late, and that in the morning he would perform his Duty. The Count then replyed, That he had order to bring his Highness to Court that Night. Upon which the Duke said, Your Lordship may please to go, and I will follow.
When they came unto the street before the Palace, where the Courtiers use to walk, the Count said to him; Your Highness is to go towards yonder other ap|partment, for I have the King's order to arrest you.
The Duke then stood, and after he had with a frank speech, ripped up the Services he had done the House of Austria to the total ruine of his own, he high|ly blamed the Spaniards usage, and refused to go farther, till he had spoken to the Arch-Duke. But he could not obtain that satisfaction; for Garices had told him, That in case he refused to go willingly, he must be enforced to carry him by violence. Finally, the Duke being perswaded, was brought into the lodgings appointed for him, shewing at first an extraordinary cheerfulness, but the Ca|valiers being afterwards retired, he resolved 'twere better (since by force he could not do it) to endeavour his own release by submission.
He writ very calmly to the Arch-Duke, and recommended to him the Coun|tess Cantacroy, his wife, though their marriage was at Rome declared unlawful. Whilst he was writing, the Secretary Navarre entred the Chamber, and made him subscribe an order unto his Troops, That for the time to come they should be obedient to the Arch-Duke. That night he was served at Table by principal Cavaliers; and when Bed time came, two of his own Valets de Chambre were

appointed to wait upon him, at their first entrance into the Chamber, he cryed out with a great sigh, See the remainder of my Fortune. That night all the Citi|zens had order to be in Arms, to prevent any inconveniences, which was pre|sently executed, there being none that dis-approved what had been done. In the morning they waked him, but he would not rise, saying 'twas yet too early, to which no reply was made, but he was left to his own liberty: At last when he thought good, he arose, and after he was dressed, they brought him several Dishes of Meat, and he was served by the Arch-Dukes Camariers in extraordi|nary. The Count Garcies after came in, and told him, That he came to wait upon his Highness to Antwerp; upon which the Duke rose up presently without reply.
Being come out into the Hall, in presence of a numerous Guard he opened his Doublet, and shewing his Breast, said aloud to them, I am a Souldier, and fear not all these preparations made for me; I only desire that some of you would take my Life, and by my Death all troubles will be ended.
Many would have it, that he believed they were absolutely resolved to kill him by some lingring death; but Garcies with all sweetness told him, He wondred his Highness should entertaine such thoughts, that the King his Master intended no|thing but to secure him for some time. He then went on, and it being now late, all the people ran togehther to see him pass in a Coach, being Guarded through the City by 300 Horse. The Duke made no shew of sadness to the people, but with courtesie and in a pleasant manner saluted the Citizens by name, and passing by a lodging wherein some French belonging to the Prince of Conde lay, he said to them, Ah! What will the World say that the Duke of Lorrain should be made a Prisoner by the Spaniard for whom he hath lost all his own Country. Being come out of the City, the said Count Garcie, who was something sickly, had License to return, and the Guard of him was assigned to another Colonel; when he took leave, the Duke told him with Tears in his Eyes, That he had brought him through the City at Noon day to make him a laughing stock unto the People: Garcie answered, His Highness had been cause of that by remaining so long in his Bed. The Duke replyed, That he was a faithful Servant to the King, and his actions would speak him so; and that he had never done any dis-service to the House of Austria, and prayed him to inform, and assure the Arch-Duke thereof, when he should relate uno him what had passed, and that he would also give an assurance unto Fuensaldagne of his affection. He was conducted unto the Castle of Antwerp where he was kept for some time before he was sent into Spain; his House was after searched, his Papers seised, and all the Goods sequestred, which were found in his, or the Countess Contueroy her house, which were amongst other things, Jewels of the value of 500000 Crowns, which belonged to the House of Lorrain, and amongst the rest, a very fair Diamond, given heretofore by the Emperour Charles the fifth unto a Duke of Lorrain one of his Ancestors, which was called Charles the fifth his Diamond. What sum of money there was found was not declared; and although the general report was that the Duke was considerably rich therein, yet 'twas thought the Spaniards did not find him to be so.
But in regard the Ministers of Spain, suspected that the Lorrain Souldiers, and particularly the Nobility who (purely for affection towards their natural Prince) had followed him, preferring his service before their own particular interests, (even to the leaving of their Country, and loss of their estates) would not endure the injury done to their Soveraigne Prince, but rise up against the Spaniard, and put things into confusion. The Count of Ligneville therefore (who was Lieutenant General) and the other principal Commanders, were gained by money, and other promises, to the affecting whereof the Antipathy between them, and the French, to whom they bear a natural hatred, contri|buted in a great measure. So as by means thereof, and the declarations which the Arch-Duke made, that he put the command, and whatsoever else belonged

unto the Duke, into the hands of the Duke Francis his Brother, the Souldiery was quieted, and all those stirs they feared were avoided.
The Arch-Duke after published a Manifesto, setting forth the reasons which moved his Catholick Majesty unto this Resolution, the substance whereof was; That when the Duke retired into the Dominions of Spain, to preserve himself from the violence exercised by France against his Person, and Estates, he was received by his Catholick Majesty, and his Lieutenants General, with a sincere friendship, and taken into his particular Protection, with so much love, and care of his Concernments, that he had always included him in all Treaties touching the General Peace, which suffi|ciently shewed forth the candidnss of his proceeding, and the honourable esteem had of his Person, admitting him besides into all Councils of War, and other debates of his Majesties Officers, and Ministers of State, that notwithstanding these so great benefits recerved by him, he had contrary unto his duty, and the tyes of gratitude wherein he stood ingaged, done many things prejudiciall unto the Interests of the Crown, from which he had received so great advantages. For that besides the Plundrings, Rapines, Sacriledges, and inhumanities exercised upon the Subjects by his Forces, which were to be imputed unto the Duke himself, and were rendred sufficiently notorious, and pub|lick, by the general Out-cries, Teares, and Lamentations of the people, there was an ample discovery made of his secret intelligences, and the carrying on of designes by him, no way conducing to the advantage of the publick service, which he was bound to pro|mote sincerely by the assistance of his Forces; that every man was capable of discover|ing his inconstancy, and affected irresolution, in the matters to be resolved on touching the War, and the delays used by him in executing the designs of most importance, which was the cause that (by his sole default) many considerable Enterprizes, which according to all probability and humane providence, were likely to have been of great benefit and advantage, had miscarried. That all these things were so well known, not only to the Lieutenants General, Colonels, and other Officers of the Army, but even to the very Souldiers, and common People, who were Eye-witnesses thereof, that they exclaimed, and admired so abominable abuses, were let to run on, without a remedy. That true it was, the King of Spain by reason of his own innate goodness, and the af|fection he bears unto the House of Lorrain, had been indulgent even to the extremi|ty; hoping still the Duke touched with remorse of his own conscience, and considera|tion of his Majesties unparallel'd bounty, would at length return unto his duty. But things proceeding still from bad to worse, and his irregular deportments, being arrived even to the utmost bounds of sufferance, were come to such extremity, that all his Ma|jesties Subjects, and all the Neighbouring Princes, and States, had them in such abomi|nation, that the effects of their revenge, were even upon the point of falling upon Flanders, on that account.
His Majesty therefore, that he might no farther provoke the Divine wrath against himself, nor the indignation of the abused Princes and People, against his subjects, could not longer defer the taking such courses, as were necessary to stop the Current of this mischief, by the securing of his Person, wherein he swarved not in the least man|ner from the Law of Nature, and of Nations, which permits all Soveraign Princes to prevent without respect of any Person whatsoever, all oppressions, and violences exercised against their Dominions, and Subjects, and do justice unto themselves, their People, and the Neighbouring Princes, and States, in Amity with them; having first in vain, made trial of ways of sweetness, for the effecting of it.
That he did this not out of any aversion to the House of Lorrain, but on the con|trary protested that he would alway protect it, and espouse their interests; in testimony whereof, he had proposed the Prince Francis of Lorrain his Brother to command his Forces; and until his arrival, the Arch-Duke declared and commanded, all should observe and obey the orders of the Count Ligneville, Lieutenant Gene|ral of the said Forces, giving farther an assurance unto all the Officers, and Souldiers, of a general pardon of all excesses, they had before committed under the said Dukes command; and this Manifesto was made the very day on which

the Duke was arrested, which was the 25th day of February 1654.
It was afterwards insinuated among the Souldiers, that the Duke should not be sent away for Spain, but that some points being adjusted with him, and se|curity given for his Fidelity, he should be set at liberty; wherewith the minds of the Officers, and Souldiers, affectionate unto the Service of their Prince, were something quieted and that bitterness removed which this unexpected accident had raised amongst them.
The news of this Action coming to the Court of Spain, was received with that content which an Affair deserved, whereon depended consequences of so great importance; but these superficial reflections, corresponded not to those were made by them who looked deeper into the matter, because although the Action were judged to be necessary, and that a longer dissimulation would have been improper, to give a remedy to those disorders, yet the ill consequences such an example might produce, rendred the execution of it to be no way suit|able, unto the rules of Policy.
It was considered, that the Services the Duke had done the House of Austria were publick, but his failings published in the Manifesto, and declarations of the Arch-Duke, were yet unknown, little credit being usually given to what is published by interested Persons; that it was very hard to wipe out the opini|on already settled, that the Duke had provoked France against him, only to comply with the Spaniard, and upon that account only, had lost his Country, so as if he were after the loss thereof refuged in Flanders, it seemed rather to be the effect of an Obligation, than their courtesie.
That by how much the deeper he was charged with Crimes by the Spanish Ministers, by so much more the proceedings of France against him, seemed to be justified, with this consideration, that if he had given just cause unto the Spani|ard whom he had so much obliged, to punish him, the French, against whom he had raised Arms, had certainly a just occasion for what they did; besides it was some trouble to the Spaniard to consider, that upon this example, any Prince, or Person of Quality, who had well deserved from them, might hereupon have a just cause to think, that the Services done to them meet with ingratitude, but the injuries they receive are never pardoned; and thereupon desperately re|solve, to employ themselves no more in performing Services which are not like to be acknowledged, but choose a party that may be able to secure them against their power of being able to inflict punishment.
The Court of France upon this news made a great stir, and endeavoured to improve this good opportunity of decrying the Actions of their Enemies, which because it may be gathered, from the Manifesto published in the King of France his name, the 2d. of Iuly 1654. in Sedan, where the Court then was: It will not be niss here to insert it.



WHereas the most Christian King hath been given to understand, that divers Commanders, and a great part of the Souldiery, and other Persons belonging to the Army, being Natives of the Countries of Lorrain, and the Barrois, with the great prejudice of their Honour, and duty (notwithstanding the excessive injury done by the Spaniards unto Charles Duke of Lorrain their natural Prince, in imprison|ing his Person) have taken party with, and engaged in their service; neglecting the advantageous offers made unto them of assistance, for the procuring of his liberty. His Majesty considering that to continue towards them, the same favour, and goodness, he hath been pleased to exercise since Lorrain hath been under his obedience, having never proceeded against any who abandoned their Country; to put themselves into the said Dukes service, because they followed the fortunes, and were obedient to the Commanders of their own Prince) were to render his clemency blame-worthy, and of too great prejudice to his Affairs; be resolves therefore (as justice requires) to im|ploy all such lawful means as he is able, for their punishment, to punish them, ma|king

them feel the effects of his indignation, considering they now Act directly con|trary, not only unto the Interests of his Crown, but also against those of their own Duke, and his Family; unto whom his said Majesty hath upon all occasions sufficiently declared his Affection, and esteem, having several times (as is notoriously known to the whole World) offered the said Duke to restore unto him the possession of his Countreys, if he would forsake the Spanish interests, and take part with him, but those offers (which would have prevented the disgrace that hath befallen him) were still refused, upon the expectation probably he had, that by refusing those advantageous, and consi|derable offers, made him from France, and his firm adherence unto Spain, for so long a time with such extraordinary constancy, and perseverance, would certainly have merited from them, some other recompence than a Prison, and the loss of all his Goods. His most Christian Majesty doth therefore hereby Order and Expressly command, all Com|manders, Officers, Souldiers, and others, being Natives of Lorrain, or the Barrois, that serve in the said Duke's Army, or that are any ways engaged in the Spanish Ser|vice, to abandon the same, and retire within 15 days after the Publication of these pre|sents, upon the confines of France; either to take pay under his Majesty (in which case they shall be Received and Treated as others are who now serve under his com|mand) or otherwise to retire themselves in their own Countries, or where ever else their Estates lye; being in such case to make a declaration before his Majesties Iudges where they shall chance to come, or those who are next adjoyning thereunto, that they will no more bear Arms, nor Act any thing directly, or indirectly, against his Maje|sties Service; upon penalty that such as shall refuse, after the expiration of this Term, shall be prosecuted as Traytors, and declared guilty of High Treason; and suf|fer the punishment due fore the same, by confiscation of their Goods, demolishing of their Houses, destroying their Woods; and other pains and forfitures, in such cases due, and to be inflicted. His Majestie doth farther order and command the Mares|chals of France, Turenne, and Ferte Seneterre, Generalls of his Forces in Flan|ders, Picardy, and Champaigne; to cause this his declaration to be published in all places necessary, that none may pretend Ignorance thereof, and to put the same in Exe|cution, unto the utmost of their power, declaring that the same credit shall be given unto authentick Copies of this declaration, as to the Original itself.



To this Manifesto was annexed, a declaration concerning the Terms upon which the Colonels, Captains, Officers, and Souldiers, which would put them|selves into the French Service, should be received; the Tenour whereof is is fol|loweth.
HIS Majesty highly resenting the imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain by the Spaniards, and the injurious, and unworthy of age, received by him from those who have no Authority over his Person, or his Forces; hath caused several means to be proposed unto the Count Ligneville (Commander in chief of the said Duke's Army) for procuring his liberty, before he was sent away into Spain, which the said Count was advertised would certainly be done, but he neglected to give ear unto them, unto the prejudice of his Faith, and Honour, having suffered himself to be wrought upon by the Spaniard, to whom he hath shewed much more affection, than to his Lord and Master; and considering that the Colonels, Captains, and other Officers, and Souldiers; may probably be  disposed to advance his Majesties design for the said Dukes enlarg|ment; hath by these presents been pleased to give a firm assurance, once all Officers, and Souldiers, as well Foot, as Horse, of the Lorrain Army; who for revenging the wrong, and endeavouring the releasment of their Prince, shall put themselves into his Majestie's Service, and take pay under him.
That they shall be put, and kept together in one body, under the command of Mares|chal de la Ferte Seneterre, Governour of Lorrain, and the Barrois.
That as soon s there shall be got together anybody, or Company of the said Forces,

they shall receive a pay, as well Officers, as Souldiers, and that everyone shall be con|tinued in his former charge, and imployment.
That every Regiment shall be tried by their own Colonels, in the same manner, as was formerly accustomed.
That his Majesty will assigne them Winter Quarters after the end of the Campagne, and that they shall upon all occasions be treated as the other strangers, who serve in pay under his Majesty; who doth upon the word of a King, promise to observe, and make good whatsoever he hath hereby published and declared.
The King of France upon the first news of this imprisonment, had dispatcht Monsieur de Corberez, unto the Count Ligneville, with fit instructions to make him sensible of the obligations he had to endeavour the releasment of his Master, by force of Arms, if by other means he could not obtain it; but all the applica|tions, and perswasions, made to the Count and Prince Francis of Lorrain, who in a few days after came out of Germany, into Flanders, were without effect; the Count's Antipathy against France, and the Spaniards Arts, working more pow|erfully with him, then all the declarations, and offers of the French: The Count alledging for his excuse, the orders he had received from the Duke to obey the Prince his Brother; and the Prince those promises made by the Ministers of Spain, that the Duke should be suddenly released, as soon as things could be in such manner adjusted, and dispatched, that they might be secured against those pre|judices, which the intelligences he entertained with the money, had brought upon them.
The discourses which were after made in either Court, touching this Action so important, and unusual, were very various, and many conceits were pub|lished thereupon, dictated by hatred, or by passion; for there were some who blamed the Spaniards, as having taken this resolution, onely because they knew themselves unable to satisfie the immoderate covetousness of the Duke, with such Sums of Money as they should be forced to give him, if they intended to make use of him and his Armies Service, and that therefore the Arch-Duke, foreseeing that when Money fell short, he might be drawn to quit them, and make his Peace; they had by this Act sought to prevent him, not upon any just ground they had against him, but only upon a bare suspition of it.
Others published, That all this was a plot of the Prince of Conde, who being na|turally zealous of the House of Lorrain, and impatient to have a Companion in the Army, who perhaps did in some sort take away part of that profit he ex|pected from the Catholick King's generosity; and by reason of his wariness in preserving of his Army (which was his All) would not second his fiery reso|lutions, but gave a stop unto them, by sober, and mature Councells, had by his Artifices contrived, and brought to pass, all this mischief which fell upon him.
But as all these conceptions had no other foundation but guesses, and con|jectures, grounded only upon likelihoods, so they found not that credit was expected; but as shadows upon the appearance of light vanish, so all those suppo|sitions were wiped away by another conceit, which of all others came nearest to the Truth, and this was, That the Dutchess of Chevreux, who is witty, and full of Spirit, above any Lady of this Age, being for the reasons above mentioned, a parti|cular Enemy unto the Prince of Conde, being of the House of Lorrain, and conse|quently of kin to the Duke Charles; found means to insinuate unto him dexterously, an agreement with the Court of France, proposing to him, That prudent men ought to make use of all imaginable Conjunctures, since there was nothing of greater conse|quence then to lay hold of opportunity, which renders that at sometimes easie, which when the nick of time's once past, becomes impossible.
The Duke listned unto these Propositions, and much more unto that of 300 thousand. doubloons, to which (as the report went) besides the payment of

his Army (which in that case was to come over from the Spanish Service, into that of France) and entered into a Treaty; the rather, by reason of the Envy he bore unto the Valour, and Prerogatives of Conde, which seemed to lessen the esteem was had of him, and might also dimminish much of his usual gains; and this being discovered either by Conde, or the Count of Fuensaldagne, was the cause that moved the Spanish Ministers to prevent a blow of that importance, which would have proved destructive, and fatal to them, because their Army being lessened by the departure of the Lorrain Forces, and the French recei|ving a double encrease by the addition of those Forces; all Flanders would have been totally over-run, and wasted by the Enemy.
The Cardinal in the mean time, ceased not to continue the management of Affairs with a wise dexterity; his design was to keep the Kingdom United, to carry the War out of France, and to enforce the Spaniard unto that Peace, which they professed publickly to desire, but were privately resolved never to make.
He renewed therefore the Treaty of Peace with the Protector Cromwell at London, to secure France against those Jealousies, that Kingdom, which was in Arms, and had no diversion, might give unto it, and sent the Mareschal Gram|mont, on whose Valour and Fidelity he much relyed, unto his Government of Baione, and Bearne, to observe the motions of the Spaniard in Biscay, and pre|vent all stirs upon that Frontier, either by them, or by the English.
He sent abroad new orders for recruiting the old Troops, and raising new ones, that he might the next Campagne, not only Quarter without fear in Flanders, Catalonia, and Piedmont, but also take in hand any other design upon occasion, and for that reason, gave order for setting out, and Victualling of a Fleet, that when time served might set Sail for Catalonia, or towards the Sea of Naples, where the Duke of Guise pressed for a sudden resolution; relying much upon the good intelligence he had with the discontented Persons in that King|dom, by whom he was often Solicited, and Persons sent expressly to him from them. Together with the care of things belonging to the War, he mingled also the thought of those, which tended to the settling of Peace at home; and caused his Majestys mercy and clemency to be extended unto all those who were yet contumacious, that so an end might be put unto all Jealousies within the Kingdom; and by experience it might appear, that he desired nothing but to render his Actings, and Ministry, equally profitable, and grateful to the whole French Nation. Towards which (notwithstanding the ill usage he hath received from many of them) instead of seeking his revenge, forgetting all in|juries done him, he bears so great a kindness, that his whole Study is, to bring them all by favours, unto a repentance for their Errours; that they may avoid all punishment due to the crimes they have committed. And for as much as Money is the sinews of War, and the Soul of all great Enterprizes, he applyed himself with his whole Study, to distribute it in due manner, and raise it with the least trouble of the people, he received in all places good intelligence with friends, and endeavouring to create good correspondencies with Neuters, he dispelled from France all those Cloudy storms of troubles, wherewith 'twas threatned, and restored unto it that calm it now enjoys; which probably will produce the Peace so much desired, and hoped for, in Christendom, and furnish a large matter for Learned Pens, to celebrate the glories of his most Christian Majesty, and applaud the Vertue of him who hath done him such worthy Service.

FINIS.



