




AN ELEGIE VPON THE Death of THOMAS Earle of Strafford, Lord Lievtenant of IRELAND.
VVho was beheaded upon Tower-Hill, the 12 of May, 1641.
By THOMAS HERBERT.
Take an example from Lord Wentworth all,
Lest by high climbing you do chance to fall.


Printed Anno Dom. 1641.





AN Elegie upon the death of THOMAS Earle of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND.

_Awake my drowsie Muse, no longer dreame,
But in Apollo's Sisters divine streame;
Goe wash thy selfe, swiftly returne againe,
Begging Melpomene, her Tragick straine,
Noe Epithaliums, I intend to write,
Nor will I Comicke, Love Letters indite,
To want on Females, I must touch the urne,
Thaw frosen hearts, and make them with zeale burne;
I do intend, all Mortalls to tell plaine,
From Earth they came, to Earth they must againe:
But yet before that sad tale I do begin,
Ile tell man what his Nature is, and how by sinne,
Death is his wages, assist me then great GOD,
Whilst I show man, how he may scape thy Rod:
Draw an Example from Lord Wentworth all,
Whose Vertues lay obscured by his fall:
Mans definition is a Lump of Clay,
At first Divine, untill sinne drove away,
That happinesse, joy, and felicitie,
Were then transformed into miserie;
Then man sublime, by Nature did he grow,
His Soule with sinne, like high water did flow:
But Oh, Alas! by it what did he get,
A world of sorrow, and to live by swet:
Adam did lead the way, and we like fooles,
Continue Trewants out of Vertues Schoole.
Poore men are not content, but murmur still,
Because the World they have not at their will;
Rich men (like Poets Icarus) aloft do soare,
Never regarding they owe death a score;
Like Phaeton they vow for to ascend,
Although Ioves thunder, forces them to bend:
But whither ramble I? my Theame is to treate,
Of one whose Vertues once were counted great:
His vices I condole, wondering to see,
The Devils malice, link't with pollicie:
When he perceives a man like for to thrive,
In Gods affayres, then doth he plot and strive,
Casting his golden baytes, Riches, and pride,
To hale him from such vertues cleane aside:
Angells rejoyce when as man doth do well,
Divells Triumph, when as he is in Hell:
Was not this man, whose deedes we did despise,
Once pious, vertuous, learned and wise;
Which caus'd our King his fortunes for to rayse
In an iron age, for to see golden dayes,
Which hee had enjoyd, had not the Divell,
By sugry baytes acquainted him with evill.
O what is wisdome if it be abus'd,
Or what the best of things, if but ill us'd;
The costliest jem, ill usage doth deface,
The best of men sometimes come to disgrace
Nor do I excuse him which doth amisse,
Nor will I Serpent like, at's sorrowes hiss
Had I his Honours upon me conferr'd,
Why might not I, as well as he been bar'd
From doing well, without JEHOVAHS ayd?
My fame with his, in darknesse might be layd;
O therefore let none in derision say,
There once the head of a false Traytor lay;
We all are Traytors unto Heaven, we all,
Are guilty of our Gransire Adams fall:
If GOD let slip, who is it which can stand?
The best may fall, and feele his powerfull hand.
Satan himselfe was once an Angell bright,
Who now is Prince of the infernall night.
Those which do think themselves clearest from sinne,
Know not the danger which their selves are in;
As before sayd, we all base Traytors are,
For which judgements do wait on us, though noe care,
Is taken to repent, if GOD strikes, we
Suffer not Earths, but Hellish miserie.
Were GOD not mercifull this very day,
Death might Arrest, Oh who could his debt pay;
That were not for to loose a life or name,
Wife, or Children, or a glorious fame,
But Soule and body, which do far excell,
Such Earthly trifles and be cast in Hell.
But to my Theame againe, he wisdome had,
Honour and Riches, why was he so mad,
Then not to be content, but covet more,
And by ill courses to encrease his store;
Some such a question may propose I know,
I answere thus, and thus their error show;
Why marvel'st thou that when man hath honour,
He is apt to follow Satans displayd Banner;
It is mans Nature still aloft to sore,
Though daily rising, yet would he rise more
Honour tis true, an Earthly blessing is,
But yet sometimes it makes man do amisse;
Aiming at honour what Tragedies have been,
Acted by puft up Spirits, blood was seen,
To die our Channels with a crimson gore,
Once here in England Traytors were sad store;
Man having Honours, and conjoyn'd with pride,
To all affections made a nuptiall Bride:
Whence came the Roman Civill War which taxt
The totall circle Orbe, and each man vext;
But by two Spirits honoured of all,
By which Caesar did rise, but Pompey fall:
Had not proud Haman honour as a King,
Who 'gainst poore Mordecaies complaints did ring;
Sitting i'th Gate and to him did not bend,
Wherefore his Life on Gallowes he must end.
But he escap'd, and Haman he must dy,
His honour brought him unto miserie;
By which we may perceive, honour oft times,
Ruines that man which highest seemes to climbe?
But yet mistake me not, I do not say,
Honour makes all men perish and decay:
Be that far from me. Peeres are in our Land
Decked with Honour, and yet firmely stand;
But GOD protects them, he doth give them grace,
To rule their actions, and maintaine their place;
Which that he may do still, let good men pray,
And condole him, which lately went astray;
Let all lament, that Satan hath the force,
Man from his Heavenly maker to divorce;
To see that one, which late was of renowne,
By Satans malice should be overthrowne:
Gush out in teares yee barrenest of eyes,
Breake Adamantine hearts, that one so wise
Vnfortunate should be, so low to fall,
Let all good men lament his Funerall;
Not that he dyed, but that his death was bad,
Let that the object be to make us sad;
O yee Honours, why did yee not preserve
Your Masters life, why did you let him swarve,
From doing well, why did hee eschew good,
Stayning by Treason his most noble blood.
Why stand yee silent, and me no answere give,
Tell me where is your Master, doth he live?
Are Honours dumb, tell me yee riches then,
Where is your Lord, once famous amongst men
Methinks they answere me, and thus do say,
Going to death from him we sled away:
O why do men then with so greedy speed,
Run after Riches, when in our greatest need,
They cannot helpe us, why do mortalls so
Hugg Baggs of gold, authors of Terrene woe?
Honour and Riches each man doth desire,
Which causes are to set their hearts on fire:
With worldly vanities and damned sinne,
Which are the causes we do griefe live in;
O then contemne them, do them not regard,
But about thy Bul-wark still keepe watch and ward
Thy Soule I meane, which if but entered once,
Tis ten to one thou loosest not thy sconce;
O did we knowe the Devills malice all,
We would for Riches not so often call,
Which are but miseries, the Devills baytes,
Stuffed with venome, and cramb'd with decayts;
What will our Vsurers refuse to do,
To obtaine wealth, their Soules they will foregoe;
Rather than tenths ith hundred, as for death,
They do not feare it, push, they yet have breath.
O foolish worldling, sooth not up thy selfe,
That thou must live, because of worldly Pelfe:
This very night thy soule may taken be,
And then for gold thou'st nought but miserie:
Death feareth none, no not the greatest Kings,
Monarchs he wounds, and to the grave downe brings;
His dart can pierce the thickest Coate of Male,
Vndaunted still he rangeth with lookes pale,
And hideous, none sees him but doth fly,
All are afrayd Deaths dart for to come nigh,
But fly whither they came, Death wil them meet,
And for their Honour, give a winding Sheete;
Couragious Souldiers, and the Courtier neate
In person though tall, low, little or greate,
If Death say unto them, yee mortalls stand,
They dare not answere, Sir, at whose command?
If man but knewe his owne brittle estate,
And how he suject is unto each Fate:
His looks so lofty he would sure cast down,
Vpon his grave, dig'd in some hole ith' ground,
Who knows how soon his glasse it may be run,
Which being out, alas his life is done.
Then doth he wish he sooner had repent,
And in the world so vainly not been bent:
Their Riches, Honour, or their earthly fame,
Cannot redeem them from eternall shame.
As man must dye, so is there severall wayes
To cut him short, and end his wretched dayes.
None knowing when first borne what death to dye,
Whether by Rope Knife, Axe, Artillery.
My Lord of Strafford, once sure little thought
Crimes at so high a rate to have had bought.
Each man can tell what present is, but who
What in the future he shall undergoe?
Wherfore you which have honour and renown'd,
Be sure that guilty you be never found
In offering to your King and Countrey wrong
By haynous deeds, or by offensive tongue
If that your King doe shew unto you love,
Oh Love againe, and trechery remove
Farre from your hearts; if this you doe deny,
Though Noble, yet disgracefull death you die
Art thou admir'd for Wisdome, praise thy God,
O be not selfe-conceited, least his rod
Doe bruise thee into Atomies; thy fame
Being metamorphosed to eternall shame.
Hast Honours, Riches?  imploy them well,
He which is Righteous beares away the bell.
Without the which, what thing so ere be thine,
Is but vanitie, puft with blustring wind
They which desire to see JEHOVAHS face,
Earth must contemn, and seek for heavenly grace.
O let Lord Wentworths fall, which once was wise,
Cause us repent, that by it we may rise:
The quintessence of valour he accounted was,
But yet the Devill was too strong, alas!
Who can deride him? and not rather weep,
That he by Satan should be layd asleep
In vain securitie. Ireland forget his sinne,
Only forsake those steps which he trod in.
To Englands Peeres, let him example be
Let them take warning by his miserie.
A Traytors name,  let them count it base,
For of all scandalls, that's the worst disgrace
O here in peace, let them still sit and sing
Praises to God and Prayers for our King.

FINIS




