




The late King Iames His Letter to his Privy Council
of Scotland, with their Answer, in reference to His
Indulgence, containing His Absolute Power, without Reserve.
His Majesties Letter to His Honourable Privy Council of Scotland;
together with their Answer.
Edinburgh, February 24. 1687.
ON Thursday, the 17th Instant, His Majesties Gracious Letter to the
Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council of this
Kingdom, was Read at the Board; After which their Lordships U|nanimously
Ordered, That His Majesties Royal Proclamation there|in
Enclosed, should be Published here the next day, which was accordingly
performed with great Solemnity and Demonstrations of Joy. The Copies of
which Gracious Letter, together with the Councils dutiful Answer to His Ma|jesty
thereupon, do here follow.

His Majesties Letter to His Privy Council of Scotland.
IAMES R.
RIght Trusty and Right Well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor, Right Trusty
and Right Well-beloved Counsellor, Right Trusty and Entirely-be|loved
Cousins and Counsellors, Right Trusty and Right Well-beloved Cousins
and Counsellors, Right Trusty and Well-beloved Cousins and Counsellors, Right
Trusty and Well-beloved Counsellors, and Trusty and Well-beloved Counsel|lors,
We Greet you well. Whereas by Our Letter of the 21st of August last past,
We were graciously pleased to inform you of Our Designs in order to the Ease
of Our Roman Catholick Subjects, unto which we had your Dutiful Answer in
some days thereafter; We have now thought fit to Publish these Our Roy|al
Intentions, and to give an Additional Ease to those of Tender Conscien|ces,
so to convince the World of Our Inclinations to Moderation, and to e|vidence
that those of the Clergy who have been Regular, are Our most particular
Care; though We have given some Ease to those Principles, We can with
any Safety Trust: We have at the same time expressed Our highest In|dignation
against those Enemies of Christianity, as well as Government, and
Humane Society, The Field Conventiclers, whom We recommend to you to
Root out with all the Severities of Our Laws, and with the most vigorous
Prosecution of Our Forces, it being equally Our, and Our Peopl's concern,
to be rid of them. As for the other Particulars of Our Royal Proclamation
here inclosed, We doubt not but they will appear to you most Just and
Reasonable, as they do to Us, and that you will, in your respective Capacities
Assert, and Defend Our Royal Rights and Prerogatives, which We are re|solved
to maintain in that Splendor and Greatness, which can only make them
Safe for Us, Supports for Our Friends, and Terrors to Our Enemies. It is
evident, We do not mean to encroach on the Consciences of any, and what
We will not do, We are resolved not to suffer in others: And therefore it is
Our Will and Pleasure, That these Our Commands be forth-with obeyed,
and that in Order thereunto, this Our Proclamation be forth-with Printed and
Published in the usual manner in such Cases accustomed; And if any shal be so
bold as to shew any dislike of this Our Procedour, We desire to be inform|ed
thereof by you, To the end We may convince the World, that We are in
Earnest, assuring all, That as We expect Obedience therein, and a Readiness
from you, and all Our Judicatures to assert Our Rights, so it shall be Our
Care on all Occasions, to shew Our Royal Favour to all of you in General,
and to every one in Particular. For doing all these things, as well contained
in this Our Letter, as in Our Proclamation aforesaid, These Presents shall be to
you, and all others respectively, who may be therein any way concerned, a
sufficient Warrant. and so We bid you Heartily Farewell.
Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twelfth day of February, 1686/7. And
of Our Reign the Third Year. By His Majesties Command.
MELFORT.







The Answer of the Lords of the Council to His
Majesties Letter.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
YOur Majesties Commands are exactly Obeyed. Your Royal Procla|mation
is Printed and Published, by which Your Majesty hath gi|ven
a further Evidence of your Favour and Goodness to all Your Sub|jects.
And we are hopeful, that by Your Majesties extraordinary Acts of
Mercy to some, who have been too ready on many Occasions to abuse the
Clemency of Your Royal Predecessors, they will be at last convinced what
they owe to so Gracious a King; And if any shal be still so obstinate as to
make any wrong use of Your Majesties Goodness, We do unanimously assure
Your Majesty, That we will maintain and assert Your Royal Prerogatives and
Authority with the hazard of our Lives and Fortunes; And all of us shall
in our several Capacities do our Utmost, that Your Government may be easie
to all, whom Your Majesty thinks worthy of Your Protection.
We are very willing that Your Majesties Subjects who are Peaceable and
Loyal, may be at Ease and Security, notwithstanding of their Profession and
Private Worship, and do conceive that such of them as are or shall be employ|ed
by Your Majesty in Offices of Trust Civil or Military, are sufficiently se|cured
by Your Majesties Authority and Commission for their exercing the
same.
We return Your Majesty our most humble Thanks for giving Us Your Roy|al
Word for maintaining the Church and our Religion, as it is now established
by Law, and rest satisfied, believing Your Majesties Promise to be the best
and greatest Security we can have. We are,
Edinburgh, 24. Feb. 1686/7.
May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesties most Humble, most Faithful,
And most Obedient Subjects and Servants,
Signed by The Earl of Perth Lord High Chancellor, the Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews,
the Lord Archbishop of Glasgow Elect, the Lord Marquess of Athole Lord
Keeper of the Privy Seal, the Duke of Gordon, the Lord Marquess of Doug|lass,
the Earl of Linlithgow, the Earl of Dumfermling, the Earl of Strath|more,
the Earl of Lauderdale, the Earl of Southesque, the Earl of Traquair,
the Earl of Airlie, the Earl of Belcarras, the Lord Viscount of Tarbat, the
Lord Viscount of Strathallan, the Lord Livingstoun, the Lord Kinnaird, Sir
George Lockhart of Carnwath Lord President of the Session, Sir Iohn Dal|rymple
younger of Stair Lord Advocat, Sir Iames Foulis of Collingtoun
Lord Justice Clerk, Sir Iohn Lockhart of Castlehill one of the Senators of
the Colledge of Justice, Lieutenant General Iames Douglas, Sir Andrew
Ramsay of Abbotshall, Major General Iohn Grahame of Claverhouse, and
Andrew Wanchop of Nidry..

And His Majesties said Privy Council having Ordered, That the said Letter
should afterwards be Signed by such of the Counsellors as were not then pre|sent;
It was accordingly Signed at Westminster by the Earl of Morray, and
the Earl of Melfort, Principal Secretaries of State for the said Kingdom, the
Earl of Arran, the Earl of Drumlanrig, the Earl of Winton, the Earl of Sea|fort,
the Earl of Ancrum, and the Earl of Dumbarton.






Re-printed at Edinburgh, Anno DOM. 1689.





