



CHOICE PRESIDENTS Upon all Acts of Parliament, Relating to the OFFICE and DUTY OF A JUSTICE of PEACE. WITH Necessary Notes and Instructions there|upon taken out of the said Acts of Parliament, and other particular Cases in Law adjudg'd therein. As also A more usefull method of making up Court-Rolls than hath been hitherto known or published in print. By Rich. Kilburne, Esq late one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the County of Kent, and Principal of Staple-Inn.
The second Edition, with many usefull Additions. Made publick by G. F. of Grayes-Inn, Esq
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins, Esquires, for Richard Tonson within Grayes-Inn-Gate next Grayes-Inn-Lane. 1681.







THE Publisher's Preface TO THE READER.
THE good Reception this Trea|tise hath met with in the World, hath put me upon the Revi|sing of several of the Author's Papers that came to my hands since his Death, which, for the publick good, I have with all Faithfulness and Candour (strictly observing his own Method) reduced into order. But withall, I cannot but let the Reader know, that tho' the Title Courts be added to this Collection, which at first sight may seem something Foreign to the rest of the Matter, yet it being col|lected by the same Author (who was an Attorney as well as a Justice of the Peace,) and his Design alwaies

being to improve the Method of ma|king up Court-Rolls in a more suc|cinct and beneficial manner than o|thers understood, I thought it my Duty to oblige all Persons concerned in that Practice, by incerting that Title in the second Impression of this Book. The other Additions the Reader will find extreamly suitable to the first Intention of the Author, being Precedents which have recei|ved their Forms from late Acts of Parliament, and otherwise since the Author's Death to the time of this second Publication. Only I must further add that no small pains hath been taken in this second Edition, to fit the several Authorities quoted in the Margin to the last Impressions of the Statutes at large, and Dalton's Iustice, which I hope will find a fa|vourable Acceptance and Esteem from the Purchaser, which is the utmost desire of
G. F.
Grayes-Inn, May 12. 1681.





OF ALEHOUSES, c.

A Licence to keep an Alehouse.
Kent ss. MEmorandum, That we5  6 Ed. 6. cap. 25. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. whose Names are hereun|to subscribed, Justices of the Peace within the said County, have Admitted, Licensed, and Allowed A. B. Victualler, to keep a common-Ale-house in the house where he now dwelleth in C. in the County aforesaid; and not elsewhere, for the space of one whole year next ensuing the date hereof and no longer. Which said A. B. hath entred into Recognizance with two Sure|ties before us in certain summs of money, to the use of our Sovereign Lord the King, under Condition that he shall not, during the time aforesaid, permit, or suffer, or have any play|ing at Dice, Cards, Tables, Shovel-board, Bowls, Quoits, or any other unlawfull Game or Games, in his House, Yard, Garden, or Back|side; nor shall suffer to be or remain in his house any person or persons (not being of his ordina|ry

Family) to drink any Beer, Ale, or Tobacco, on the Lord's day, Humiliation or Thanksgi|ving-day, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon; nor shall suffer any person to lodge or stay in his house above one day and one night, but such whose true Name and Sirname he shall deliver to some one of the Constables, or (in his absence) to some one of the Officers of the same Parish, the next day following, or such as he will answer for; nor shall refuse to lodge any person that shall be brought to him by the Constable or Officer; nor suffer any person to remain in his house tippling or drinking, con|trary to the Law; nor shall willingly admit or receive into his House, Barns, Stables, or other|where, any Players of Interludes, Rogues, Va|gabonds, sturdy Beggars, Masterless men, or any person notoriously defamed for Theft, Inconti|nency, Drunkenness, or any other notorious Crime; nor shall buy or take to pawn any stoln Goods, or other, of any Wayfaring man, or other that shall bring the same to sell, but of such as he shall be able always to produce, and have forth-coming: And also shall sell his Beer and Ale by sealed Measure, according to the Assise, and not otherwise: And lastly, shall in all things behave himself according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom in that case pro|vided. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals, the 6. day of S. in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, of England, c. Annoque Domini 1679.


Or thus:
We whose Names are hereunto written; His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said Coun|ty,

do (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) License, Admit and Allow A. B. Victualler, to keep a common Alehouse or Tipplinghouse in the house wherein he now dwelleth in C. aforesaid. Provided al|ways, that the said A. B. do not suffer any un|lawfull Games to be used in his said House, but do use and maintain good Order and Rule with|in the same. Provided also, that this our Li|cence shall not continue in force above the space of one year now next ensuing at the most. G|ven under our hands and seals at, c.


A License to Brew, and keep an Alehouse.
K. ss. WHereas A. B. of C. in the said County of K. c. hath come before us I. Doe and Ric. Roe, two of His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace within the said County, and bound himself in a Recognizance with sufficient Sureties to Brew, to Sell, and to keep a common Alehouse, according to the Statue of Brewers made in the fifth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth: Now know ye us, the said Iohn Doe and Rich. Roe, to have Licensed the said A. B. to Brew, Sell, and keep a common Alehouse, according to the said Statute. Given under our hands the 10. of September, in the, c.


A Recognizance thereupon.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo die5  6. E. 6. cap. 25. Two Justi|ces, one of the Quo|rum. Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Sco|tiae, Franciae  Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, c. vicesimo ono apud C. in Com' praedict' A. B. de, c. D. E. de, c.

F. G. de, c. personaliter venerunt co|ramObserve to bind the Principal in 20 li. and each of the Sureties in 10 li. nobis H. J. K. L. Iustic' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' praedicto conservand' assignat',  recognoverunt se debere dicto Domino Regi modo  forma sequen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras legalis monetae Angliae,  uterque praedictorum D. E. F. G. decem libras consimilis monetae, sepa|ralit' levand' de separalibus bonis  catallis, terris  tenementis suis, ad opus  usum dicti Domini Regis, haered'  successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Con|ditionis sequen'.
H. J. K. L.


The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas the within bounden A. B. is by the Justices within named licensed, admit|ted and allowed to keep a common Alehouse in the house wherein he now dwelleth in C. within written: If therefore the said A. B. shall not (during the continuance in force of the said Licence) suffer any unlawfull Games to be used in his said house, but does use and maintain good Order and Rule within the same, That then this Recognizance to be void, or else it shall stand in full force.



Another Recognizance for an Ale|house-keeper.
Quarto die Sept. Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae  Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, c. tricesimo secundo Annoque Domini, 1680.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod die  Anno supradictis J. R. de G. in Com'

praedict' victualler recog' se debere dicto Do|mino Regic. T. N. de eadem in Com' praedict' victualler  G. B. de eadem in Com' praedict' Yeoman,  uterque eorum re|cog' se debere Domino Regni 5. li. si praedict' Johannes Desalt' fecerit in performatione Conditionis indorsat; Capt'  Recog' coram nobis E. F.
R. H.


The Condition.
The Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas I. R. of G. in the within named County, is by the Justice within named Li|censed and allowed to keep a Common Ale|house or Victualling-house in . aforesaid for the space of one whole year next ensuing the Date hereof, If therefore the said I. R. shall and do observe and perform all the Restitutions and Clauses mentioned in his said Licence, That then this Recognizance to be void, or else to stand in full force and vertue.



Against an Inn-keeper, Alehouse|keeper, c. suffering to TippleInn-kee|per, Victu|aller, or Alehouse|keeper. 1 Iac. c. 9. 21 Iac. c. 7. View. Con|fession. 1 Witness that can or will justifie.
To the Constable of the Hundred of H. and to the Church-wardens of the Parish of C. in the said County.
Kent. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly proved before me this present day, That A. B. of C. aforesaid, Victualler, did upon the first day of A. suffer D. E. of, c. to remain and continue drinking and tippling in the house of the said A. B. in C. aforesaid, con|trary to the form of the Statute in that case

made and provided: These are therefor (in1 Car. c. 4. Vintners within the Statute. And I con|ceive by 1 Car. c. 4. it must be 2 Witnesses for suffering a stranger to tipple. The Ale|housekeeper is disabled for 3 years. 7 Iac. c. 10. 21 Iac. c. 7. His Majestie's name) to command you, that you the said Constable and Church-wardens do levy for the offence aforesaid ten shillings, (to the use of the Poor of the said Parish) by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the said D. E. to be taken and detained for the same. And for default of satisfaction within six days, that then you do presently appraise and sell the same, and deliver the Surplusage or Remainder over and above the said ten shillings unto the said D. E. And for want of sufficient Distress, that you certifie the same unto me within twen|ty days next ensuing, (to the end that I may farther proceed therein as to Justice doth ap|pertain.) Here of fail not at your perils. Gi|ven under my hand and seal at, c.


A Warrant to levy Money for Tippling.
To the Constable of the Hundred of H. and the Church-wardens of the Parish of C. in the said County.
K. ss. FOrsmuch as it hath been this pre|sent1 Iac. c. 9. 4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7. 1 Iustice. View. Confession. 1 Witness. Within six months. In Inn, Victual|ling-house, or Alehouse. day duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. aforesaid, did upon the first day of A. last past remain and continue drinking and tippling in the house of C. D. in C. aforesaid, (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These ar therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you the said Constable or Church-wardens do require the said A. B. to pay for the said Offence (to the hands of you

the Church-wardens, to be by you accompted for to the use of the Poor of the same Parish) the summe of three shillings four pence of cur|rant money of England, within one week now next ensuing. And if the said A. B. shall refuse or neglect to pay the same as aforesaid, that then you the said Constable or Church-wardens do levy (to the use aforesaid) the said three shillings four pence of the goods of the said A. B. (by Distress and Sale of the same, ren|dring unto him the overplus of the money re|maining of the said Sale.) And if the said A. B. be not able to pay the said three shillings four pence, that then you the said Constable do set him in the Stocks by the space of four hours. Heof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.

Convicted upon my View.4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7.
Convicted by his Confession before me.



A Mittimus (for an Alehouse-keeper suffering to Tipple) for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the first day of1 Iac. c. 9. 1 Iustice. 2 Witnesses forfeit 10 s. to the use of the poor. A. last past it was duly pro|ved before me, That W. L. of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, Alehouse-keeper, did upon the tenth day of, c. suffer I. G. to re|main drinking and tippling in the house of the said W. L. in C. aforesaid, (contrary to the form

of the Statute in that case made and provided;) And whereas, by Warrant under my hand and seal, I did upon the said first day of August command, that you the said Constable or the Churchwardens of the said Parish should levy (for the offence aforesaid) ten shillings to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the afore|said W. L. to be taken and detained for the same, and for want of sufficient Distress, you the said Constable or the Church-wardens aforesaid should certifie the same unto me within twenty days then next ensuing, (to the end that I might farther doe therein as to Justice doth ap|pertain;) And forasmuch as the said Constable and Church-wardens have this present day cer|tified unto me, that the said W. L. hath no suf|ficient Distress to be taken for the said ten shillings, and that the same is not yet satisfied: Thee are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bor|sholders, that you, some or one of you, do take the said W. L. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive the said W. L. into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill the said ten shillings be truly paid to the use afore|said. Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



A Mittimus for an Unlicensed Ale|house-keeper.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. c. hath5  6 Ed. 6. cap. 25. 2 Iustices one of the Quorum. been this present day convicted be|fore us of (obstinately and of his own authority) keeping a common Alehouse at C. in the Coun|ty aforesaid, contrary to our commandment: These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to command you, the said Constable and Bor|sholders, that you, some or one of you, do take him the said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive the said A. B. into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, without Bail or Mainprise, by the space of three days, and untill he shall enter into Recognizance withPay 20 s. 2 Witnesses. This Con|viction is to be certified to the next Sessions. two Sureties, (according to the form of the Statute in that case provided) that he shall not keep any common Alehouse or Tippling|house, or use commonly selling of Ale or Beer, besides the penalty of 20 s. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.



The like upon the Statute 3 Car. the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them, and to the Church|wardens of the Parish of C. in the said County.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. aforesaid3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. View. Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or Tippling|house. To use com|monly sel|ling of Ale, Beer, Cy|der, or Per|ry. hath this present day been (accord|ing to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him, upon his own authority, (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in the Parish aforesaid; by reason whereof he hath forfeited and lost the summe of twenty shillings of currant money of Eng|land, to the use of the Poor of the said Parish: These are thefore (in his Majestie's name) to command you, that you the said Constable or Church-wardens do levy (by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the said A. B. to be by you taken and detained) the said twenty shillings, (to the use aforesaid.) And for de|fault of satisfaction of the said twenty shillings within three days after such Distress taken, you do appraise and sell the said Distress, and deliver the overplus thereof to the said A. B. And if he shall not have sufficient goods and chattels whereby the said twenty shillings may be le|vied by way of Distress, as aforesaid, and shall not pay the said summe of twenty shillings within six days next ensuing, that then you the said Constable and Borsholders, or some or one of you, do openly whip him for the offence aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



The like, for the second Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Keeper of the House of Correc|tion for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. View. Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or Tippling|house. To use com|monly sel|ling of Ale, Beer, Cy|der, or Per|ry. C. c. hath this present day been (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him of his own authority (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in the Parish aforesaid; d forasmuch also as the said A. B. hath been once before in like manner convicted of the like of|fence: These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, toge|ther with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and him there safely to keep for the space of one month, and to deal with him as an Idle, Lewd and Disorderly person. Here|of, c.



The like, for the third Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Keeper of the House of Correc|tion for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. View. Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or Tippling|house. To use com|monly sel|ling of Ale, Beer, Cy|der, or Per|ry. C. c. hath this present day been (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him, of his own authority, (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in the Parish aforesaid; And forasmuch as the said A. B. hath been twice before in like manner convicted of the like offence; ese are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you the said Con|stable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Command|ing also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and him there safely to keep, untill by good order of the Justices in their general Sessions for the County he shall be delivered from thence. And that you do in the mean time deal with him as an Idle, Lewd and Disorderly person. Hereof fail not, c.



A Warrant for Witnesses against an Unlicensed Alehouse-keeper.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. made unto me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. c. doth take upon him of his own authority (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in theKeep a common Alehouse or Tippling|house. To use com|monly sel|ling of Beer, Ale, Perry, or Cyder. Parish aforesaid; And forasmuch as I am cre|dibly informed, that the several persons here undernamed can (if they will) testifie that the said A. B. doth so doe: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do give notice unto the said several persons, that they and every of them are by me required to come be|fore me at C. upon Monday the first day of, c. at eight of the clock in the Forenoon of the same day, then and there to testifie their several knowledges touching the premisses. Whereof they nor any of them are to fail at their perils. And what you shall doe herein, you shall make known unto me at the time and place aforesaid. And have you there then this Precept. Given under my hand and seal at, c.
A. B. C. D. E. F.



For Suppression of an Alehouse for Disorder.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as we are credibly in|formed,Dalt. 34. 2 Iustices, 1 Quorum. That A. B. of C. c. doth suffer evil Rule and Disorder to be kept in his house in C. aforesaid, (contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm) for whichImprison|ment, Fine, and Bond for the good Behaviour. we have thought fit to Suppress him from any longer keeping any Alehouse or Tippling-house, or using commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cyder: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith repair to the said A. B. and charge him to surcease from keeping any longer any Alehouse or Tippling|house, and from common selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cyder, at his peril. And that what you shall doe in the premisses, you, some or one of you, (so giving notice) do make known unto us, some or one of us, with all convenient speed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at . in the said County, the, c.


For renewing Licenses of Alehouse|keepers.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.Dalt. 34. 2 Iustices, 1 Quorum.
Kent ss. THese are (in his Majestie's name) to command you, to warn all

the licensed Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers, and such others within the said Hundred, as do use commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cyder, personally to appear before us at the house of I. G. c. upon Friday the ninth day of O. at ten of the clock in the renoon of the same day; and to bring with them then and thither, as well their former Licences, as also a Certifi|cate of the civil Demeanours and Fitness of themselves for that purpose to be new licensed; and of the conveniency of Situation and Ac|commodation of their said respective houses for that purpose. The same Certificate to be signed with the hands at least of two substantial, ho|nest, discreet, and civil Inhabitants of the re|spective Parishes where they do so now dwell. And have you there the names of such persons as you shall have so warned, together with the names of the several Parishes and places of the said Parishes where their said houses are situate, and by what Signs the same are known; to the end that such of them may be continued, and such of them suppressed, as shall be thought fit. And have you there also this precept. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


Against an Alehouse-keeper for sel|ling less than Measure.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Church-wardens of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly1 Iac. c. c. 9. 1 Iustice. 1 Witness. View, or Confession by 21 Iac. c. 7. Inn-keeper, Alehouse|keeper, or Victualler. Disabled for 3 years. 21 Iac. c. 7. proved before me, That A. B. of the aforesaid Parish of C. did lately utter and fell in his house in C. aforesaid less than one full Ale-quart of the best Beer for a penny, (against

the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) by reason whereof the said A. B. hath forfeited for his said offence twenty shil|lings to the use of the Poor of the said Parish of C. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do levy to the use aforesaid the said twenty shillings by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the said A. B. to be by you, some or one of you, taken and detained for the same; And for default of satisfaction within six days next ensuing, that then you presently appraise and sell the said Distress, and deliver the sur|plusage or remainder over and above to the said A. B. And for want of sufficient Distress, that then you, some or one of you, do within twenty days next ensuing certifie unto me the default of such Distress, to the end that I may farther doe therein as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


A Mittimus for selling less than Mea|sure for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the common Gaol at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas it hath been duly1 Iustice. 1 Iac. c. 9. proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. in the said County did lately utter and sell in his house in C. aforesaid less than one full Ale-quart of the best Beer for a penny (against the form of the Statute in that case made and provided;) And whereas I did thereupon, by Warrant under my hand

and seal, command you the said Constable and Borsholders and the Church-wardens of the Pa|rish of C. aforesaid, that you, they, or some or one of you or them, should levy (to the use of the Poor of the said Parish) twenty shillings, for the offence aforesaid, by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the said A. B. to be taken and detained for the same; and that for want of sufficient Distress, you, they, or some or one of you or them, should within twenty days then next ensuing certifie unto me the default of such Distress, to the end that I might farther doe therein as to Justice doth appertain; And forasmuch as it hath been certified unto me, that no sufficient Distress can be found whereby the said twenty shillings may be levied, and that the same is not yet satisfied: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com|mand you the said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol afore|said, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, to be by him there kept untill the said twenty shillings shall be truly paid. Com|manding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill the said twenty shillings shall be paid accordingly. Hereof fail not at your pe|rils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



For Suppressing an Alehouse after Sup|pression at the Quarter-Sessions.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of Marden and West Barnfield, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas at the general Quar|ter-Sessions of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King holden at M. in the said County, upon Tuesday in the first week next after the Close of Easter last past; it was (for the reasons therein mentioned) ordered by the said Court, That A. B. of G. in the said County should forthwith surcease, and be sup|pressed from selling Ale- or Beer in his then dwelling-house, (or elsewhere) and that the Constables of the said Parish of G. or one of them should require him to forbear to sell any more Ale or Beer; which if he should refuse to doe, that then he should be immediately after|wards dealt withall as an unlicensed Victualler, (any Licence to the contrary in any wise not|withstanding;) of which said Order the said A. B. had notice; And whereas notwith|standing the said Order at the last monthly meeting of the Justices of the Peace of the said County for this lower Division of the Lath of Scray, upon Thursday the fourth day of Septem|ber last past, being the day for new Licensing of the Alehouse-keepers in that Division, a|mongst the multiplicity of business there that day, a new Licence for the said A. B. to keep a common Alehouse in the house wherein he dwelt (at the time of his aforesaid Suppression) was, amongst several other such Licences, laid

down before us, and by us signed and sealed, in the so doing whereof we were surprized: Upon consideration of all which, and forasmuch also as the same reasons and causes for which the said A. B. was as aforesaid suppressed do (as we are informed and believe) still remain; We have therefore thought fit to suppress him from any longer keeping any Alehouse or Tip|pling-house, or using commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Cyder, or Perry. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith repair to the said A. B. and charge him to sur|cease from keeping any longer any Alehouse or Tipplinghouse, and from commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cyder; and that what you shall doe in the premisses, you, some or one of you, (so giving notice) do make known unto us, or one of us, with all convenient speed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at C. in the said County, the second day of October 1679. 31 Car. II. Regis.


A Licence to keep an Alehouse with Articles.
Articles to be observed and kept by A. B. admit|ted to keep a common Alehouse or Victualling|house in his now dwelling house in C. in the said County of Kent as followeth, viz.
Kent ss. IMprimis, If he here of any Robery or other hainous offence commit|ted against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, he shall certifie to the Constable or Borsholders of the Hundred where for the time

he then dwelleth, or some of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for this County, of such persons as lodged at his house within two days before or after such Robery or hainous offence committed, and what apparrel they had and used, and the Christian name, or Sirname, or names of them or as many of them, as he shall know.
2. Also he shall not use or keep, nor suffer to be used or kept any Carding, Dicing, Bow|ling, or any other unlawfull Game or Games at any time in his house or yard.
3. Also he shall not permit or suffer any per|son or persons to continue drinking, or remain tippling in his house otherwise then is per|mitted and allowed by the several Statutes in that case made and provided.
4. Also he shall not suffer any person or per|sons to lodge at his house above one day and one night together, but such as he will answer for, and have forth coming if occasion shall require.
5. Also he shall keep one or more beds in his house, as also Mens meat and Horse meat during the time of Licence, conveniently fur|nished to lodge any way-faring Man or Tra|vellor.
Lastly, He shall not utter or sell less than one full Ale-quart of the best Beer or Ale for one penny, and of the small two Quarts for one penny, and shall have in his house Beer and Ale of both sorts, and also Bread for the Poor and sueh others as will buy the same.
We whose Names are hereunder written, Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King within this County of K. do hereby license and allow the said A. B.

to keep a common Alehouse or Victual|linghouse in his now dwellinghouse, known by the name of the Sign of the George in C. aforesaid, for the space of one whole year next ensuing.
The said A. B. observing and keeping all and singular the Articles above written, for ob|serving whereof he is bound by a Recognizance in 10 li. and two sufficient Sureties with him, viz. C. D. and E. F. in 5 li. a piece to the use of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors. Dated at C. the 8 day of Sep|temb. 1671.
The Recognizance as in Pag. 3.

The Condition.
The Condition of the Recognizance with|in written is such, That whereas the within named A. B. is by the Justices within named, licensed, admitted, and allowed to keep a com|mon Alehouse or Victuallinghouse in C. for the space of one whole year next ensuing; If there|fore the said A. B. doe well and truly observe and keep all and singular the Articles contained in his said Licence, That then, c.





Apprentices.

A Warrant to put out poor Children Apprentices.
To the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name)Dalt. 162. 1 Iac. c. 25. 21 Iac. 28. 3 Car. c. 4. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. to command you, that you do present unto us, or some of us, in writing under your hands, at the house of A. B. in, c. upon the third day of Iune next, at nine of the clock in the morning of the same day, the names of all such poor Children of your said Parish as are Orphans, or whose Parents shall not by you, or the greater number of you, be thought able to keep and maintain them; toge|ther with the names of the Parents of the said Children, (if they have any living) and the se|veral Ages of the Children aforesaid: And that you do cause such of the said Children as be able to come thither, (and more especially such of them as by you shall be thought fit to be put forth Apprentices) to appear before us, (at the time and place aforesaid,) to be by us there viewed: And likewise that you do then and there also present unto us (in writing as afore|said) the names of such substantial Inhabitants of your said Parish, to whom you shall think fit to put the said Children, or any of them, Apprentices; and more especially of such of the said Inhabitants as have not formerly taken such poor Children of the said Parish Appren|tices: And lastly, that you do give notice7 Iac. 3.

to the said Inhabitants, that they are by us re|quired then and there to appear before us, to shew cause why you (by our assent) shall not bind such of the said Children Apprentices unto them, (as to you shall seem convenient) unless they shall in the mean time consent to take and receive the same accordingly; and that you your selves be then and there also present, and have there this Precept. Of all which you are not to fail at your Perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.


An Indenture for an Apprentice so put out.
THis Indenture made the, c. day of, c.43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. Man-child till he shall come to the age of 24 years; Wo|man-child till she shall come to the age of 21, or the time of her mar|riage. in the year of the Reign, c. Between A. B. and C. D. Church-wardens of the Pa|rish of E. in the County of c. and F. G. H. I. Overseers of the Poor of the same Parish, c. of the one part, and K. L. of, c. of the other part, Witnesseth, That the said Church|wardens and Overseers, by the Assent of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, whose names are hereunto written, (according to the form of the Statute made in the 23. year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, intituled, An Act for the Relief of the Poor) have put out and bound M. L. a poor Child of the said Parish of E. Apprentice to the said K. L. till the said M. L. shall come to the age of 24 years. During which time the said Apprentice his said Master well and faithfully shall serve, his Secrets keep, his Command|ments lawfull and honest every-where willingly shall doe. He shall do no hurt nor damage to his said Master, nor consent to be done of

others, but to his power shall lett the same, or forthwith give notice to his said Master there|of. He shall not waste the Goods of his said Master, nor lend them to any person without his consent. He shall not frequent Taverns, Inns or Alehouses, (except it be about his said Master's business there to be done.) He shall not (during the said term) play at Cards, Dice, or other unlawfull Games. He shall not, either by day or night, absent himself from his said Master's service: But in all things (as a good and faithfull Servant) shall demean himself to|wards his said Master and all his. And the said K. L. his said Apprentice shall (during the term aforesaid) educate and bring up, or cause to be educated and brought up, in his Trade, with due and reasonable Chastisement; and find and allow unto him (during the said term) suffi|cient wholesome and competent meat, drink, lodging, washing, apparel, and all other ne|cessaries meet for such an Apprentice: And in the end of the said term shall find, provide for, and deliver unto his said Apprentice double Apparel, that is to say, Apparel meet for him to have and wear as well on the Lord's days as on the working-days, both of Linnen, Wool|len, Hose, Shoes, and all other necessaries meet for such an Apprentice to have and wear. In Witness whereof the parties above said to these present Indentures their hands and seals inter|changeably have set, the day and year first above written.



A Warrant against them which refuse to take Apprentices.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of K. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas the Church-wardensOn refusal to be bound to good Be|haviour, or Indicted for a Contempt, and there|upon to be Fined and Imprisoned. Dalt. 163. and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid did by our assent by Indenture, bearing date the, c. put and bind out unto B. C. of the Parish afore|said D. E. a poor Child of the said Parish Ap|prentice, (according to the form of the Sta|tute in that case made and provided in the 43 year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliza|beth, intituled, An Act for the Relief of the Poor,) And forasmuch as the said B. C. doth refuse to take, receive and keep the said Apprentice ac|cordingly, and doth likewise refuse to seal the Counterpart of the said Indenture: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said B. C. to come before us, or one of us, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County, to enter into Recognizance unto His said Majesty conditioned for personal appearance at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden at E. in the County afore|said, then and there to answer the premisses, and farther to doe and receive as the said Court shall then consider of him in this behalf. Hereof fail not at your perils, Given under our hands and seals at, c.



A Warrant against a Master for abu|sing his Apprentice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of H. c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath5 Eliz. 4. been made unto me by A. B. an Apprentice, against C. D. his Master, both of the Parish aforesaid, That he the said C. D. doth not allow unto his said Servant competent meat, drink, and apparel, and doth immode|rately correct him without any cause at all, (or turneth him out of his house and will not suffer him to return) as the Case requireth. These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to command you, that some or one of you, do cause both the said Parties to come before me at H. on Monday the tenth day of this instant Iune, at four of the clock in the afternoon, to the end that I may examine the same mat|ter. Hereof fail not, c. Given under my hand and seal this, c.


A Warrant against a disorderly Ap|prentice.
To the Constable, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath5 Eliz. 4. been made unto me by A. B. Joyner, against C. D. his Apprentice, both of your Parish of H. in this County, That the said C. D. is a stubborn and disobedient Ser|vant, and doth very much misbehave himself towards his said Master, (or that the said C. D.

hath departed from his said Master, c.) These are therefore, c. as in the foregoing Warrant.


A Discharge of an Apprentice.
K. ss. WE R. K. H. D. E. F. G. H. four5 Eliz. 4. of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace, c. for the County of K. aforesaid, Whereas Complaint having been made unto us by A. B. an Apprentice, against C. D. his Master, both of your Parish of H. within this County, That the said C. D. his Master hath not allowed to his said Servant competent diet, and apparel befitting such Apprentice, and hath sometimes corrected him without any just cause at all, and when he had cause, corrected him above measure, and we having ordered the said Parties to appear before us, and ha|ving examined the Complainant find it to be true, and therefore we do think fit to discharge the said Apprentice of his Apprenticeship, And therefore do by these presents, under our hands and seals pronounce and declare, That we have for the causes aforesaid, discharged the said A. B. the Apprentice of his Appren|ticehood the eighth day of Iuly, Annoque Dom. 1679. Givn under our hands, c.


A Warrant against one that depar|teth out of Service before his time expired.
To the Constable and Borsholders, c.
Kanc. ss. WHereas Complaint hath been made unto me this

present day by A. B. of, c. That one C. D. having been bound and put Apprentice to him the said A. B. is now lately, contrary to Law, departed from his said Master without his Li|cence, or other Lawfull discharge. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, that you, some or one of you, do attach the said C. D. when and where he shall be found within your several Limits and Precincts. And thereupon do fur|ther bring him before me, or some other of his Majestie's Justices of and within the said County to answer to the premisses. And fur|ther to be dealt withall according to Law. Hereof. c.



Bail.

Recognizances for Bail.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo dieIf it be ta|ken before 1 Justice, say, uno Iu|sticiarior' Domini Re|gis, c. Maii, Anno Regni, c. A. B. de, c. personalit' venit coram me C. D. uno Iusticiar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com' suo praedicto conservand' assign',  recognovit se debere eidem Domino Regi decem libras legalis monetae Angliae, de bo|nis  catallis, terris  tenementis suis fieri  levari, ad opus  usum dicti Do|miniAnno Do|mini not necessary. Regis, haered'  successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis indorsat'.


Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quinto dieIf it be ta|ken before 1 Justice, say, uno Iu|sticiarior' Domini Regis, c. Octobris, Anno Regni, c. A. B. de, c. G. H. de, c.  J. K. de, c. personalit' venerunt coram nobis

C. D. E. F. Iusticiar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com' suo praedicta conservand' assignat',  recognoverunt se de bere eidem Domino Regi modo  forma sequen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras legalis monetae Angliae,  uterque praedic|torum G. J. decem libras consimilis monetae, de separalibus bonis  catallis, terris  tenementis suis, separalit' fieri Anno Do|mini not necessary. levari, ad opus  usum dicti Domini Regis, haered'  successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis indorsat'.



A Condition to prefer a Bill and give Evidence.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do perso|nally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of Kent, and do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of indictment against W. T. for the matters wherewith the said W. T. is charged before, The Iustices within na|med (or the within named Iu|stices.) and do also then and there give such evidence as he knoweth concerning the same, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial of the said W. T. for the same; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

If at the Sessions, then say:
Do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in the within named County of Kent, at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said

County at M. in the County aforesaid, and do then and there prefer, c. as in the foregoing Condition.



A Condition to give Evidence.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if th within bound A, B. do per|sonally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of Kent, and do then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth against I. K. concerning the matters wherewith he is charged, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial of the said I. K. for the same; That then this Recogni|zance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:
Do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in the with|in named County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, and do then and there give such Evidence, c. as before.


A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Felony.
The Condition of this Recognizance is2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. If charged but with suspicion, then say, such, That if the within bound A. B. do per|sonally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of

Kent, then and there to answer our Sovereign Lord the King for and concerning the the sus|picion of his, c. Fe|lonious taking and stealing of (as the Case is) whereof he stands charged. where|withall he standeth charged before, c. and to doe and receive, c. and do not depart the said Court without licence for the same; That then this Recognizance to be void, or else it shall stand in full force.


If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:
Do personally appear before His Majastie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in the with|in named County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holded for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, then and there to answer, c. as before.


If the Fellon be in Prison.
These are to charge and require you that immediately you bring before me the body of A. B. now in your Custody to be Bailed, as Law requireth. Whereof fail you not, c. Given, c.





Bastards.

For the apprehending and conveying the Woman to the House of Correction.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundreds of B. and C. in the said County, and to every other His Majestie's Officers in the County a|foresaid, whom the Execution thereof may con|cern.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do apprehend I. L. of B. in the said County, Single woman, and her safely convey to the House of Correction for the said County at T. in the County afore|said; and there deliver her to the Keeper of the same, together with the Mittimus here|withall delivered unto you. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at H. in the said County the second day of Iune 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Se|cundi 31.



A Mittimus of the Mother of a Ba|stard-Child to the House of Cor|rection.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. hath lately7 Iac. c. 4. May be chargeable to the Pa|rish. 2 Iustices, Quaere, if not fit one to be of the Quorum, according to 18 El. c. 3. If she put in security to discharge the Parish, she cannot be punished by the Statute 7 Iac. but by that of 18 Eliz. Coke Magna Charta, fol. 733. had a Bastard-Child; These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to com|mand you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and her safely con|vey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver her to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Command|ing also you, the said Keeper, to receive her into the said House, and there punish and set her on work during the term of one whole year, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals, c.



A Warrant against the Mother (for the second Offence) to commit to the House of Correction, and find Sureties of good Behaviour.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. hath lately7. Iac. cap. 4. c. May be chargeable to the Pa|rish. 2 Iustices; if not fit one be of the Quorum, according to 8 El. c. 4. If she put in surety to discharge the Parish, she cannot be punished by the Sta|tute 7 Iac. but by that of 18 Eliz. Coke Mag. Ch. fol. 733. had a Bastard-Child; And for asmuch as she hath before offended in the like kind: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders and every of you, That you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and her safely convey to the aforesaid House of Correc|tion, and there deliver her to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to re|ceive her into the said House, and there punish and set her on work, untill she do put in good security for her good Behaviour not to offend so again, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


To convene the Mother and repu|ted Father.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as we are informed, That A. D. of the Parish of B.

in the County aforesaid (within the said Parish)18 Eliz. cap. 3. hath lately been delivered of a Bastard-Child (begotten and born out of lawfull Matrimony) yet living, and chargeable to the Parish afore|said; And forasmuch as the said A. D. upon her Examination taken hath charged E. F. of, c. to have begotten her with Child of the Bastard-Child aforesaid: These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to command you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do bring the said Woman before us at the house of R. in T. in the County aforesaid, upon the tenth day of Iune at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to be by us farther examined touching the premisses; and that you give notice thereof unto the said E. F. (if conveniently you can) to the end that he may likewise be at the time and place aforesaid to make his lawfull Defence therein, (if he shall so think fit.) And farther, that you, some or one of you, do give notice to the se|veral persons whose names are here under writ|ten, that they and every of them are by us required to appear at the time and place afore|said, to certifie their several knowledges touch|ing the premisses; to the end that upon the examination of the Cause and Circumstance, we may take such order therein as to Justice doth appertain. And lastly, that what you shall doe in execution of this our Precept, you do make known unto us at the time and place aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.
A. B. of, c. C. D. of, c. E. F. of, c.



A Warrant against the reputed Fa|ther of a Bastard-Child.
To the Constable, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as upon ExaminationDalt. 39. of A. B. of, c. Single woman, this day taken before me, (upon Oath) it ap|peareth that she is at present with Child of a Bastard-Child, which is likely to be chargeable to the Parish when it shall happen to be so born; And forasmuch as (upon her Examina|tion) she hath confessed that C. D. of, c. did beget her with Child of the Child aforesaid, and hath before me charged him with the same: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said C. D. to come before me, or some one of His Majestie's Justices of the PeaceLamb. 122. Cromp. 196. of the said County at, c. aforesaid, then and there to receive as by the said Court shall be injoyned; and also that he shall in the mean time be of good Behaviour, as well towards His said Majesty, as towards all His liege people. Which if he shall refuse to doe, that then (without expecting any farther or other War|rant) you, some or one of you, do safely con|vey him to the Gaol of, c. and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the aforesaid Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill he shall find such sufficient Security as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



An Order for Releif of the Parish touching a Bastard-Child, and for punishing the Mother and reputed Father.
Kent ss. THE Order of us W. B. and R. K.18 Eliz. cap. 3. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. Esquires, two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, (whereof one of us is of the Quorum) and both residing in the limits where the Parish-Church of H. in the County aforesaid is the 19. day of April in the year of our Lord 1672. (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) touching the male Bastard-Child late born in the Parish of H. aforesaid, of the body of A. G. of the same Parish, Single woman, (the keeping of which said Bastard-Child hath ever since the birth thereof been, and still is chargeable to the Pa|rish aforesaid, and so likely to continue charge|able.)
First, (upon our Examination of the Cause and Circumstance, and due Consideration thereof by us had) we do adjudge W. S. late of H. aforesaid, Tayler, the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child.
And for Punishment of the said Mother and reputed Father, and the better Relief of the said Parish, we do hereby order as followeth: that is to say,
We do order, That the said Mother shall by the Constable and Borsholders of the Hun|dred of Great B. in the said County, or by some or one of them, (upon some day, be|tween the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common High-way at or

near, c. in the Parish aforesaid) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dung|court, and being so stripped and tied, shall be there openly whipped untill her body be bloudy.
We do also order, That the said reputed Father shall by the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred aforesaid, or some or one of them, (upon some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the com|mon High-way in the Parish aforesaid, over against the dwelling-house of I. S. there) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and shall then and there be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and being so stripped and tied, shall be from thence drawn to the Watch-house aforesaid, and on the way well whipped, in such manner as is in such cases accustomed.
We do farther order, That the said Mother shall within three days next after notice of this our Order render her body to the said Con|stable and Borsholders, or to some or one of them, ready to undergo her Punishment before ordered:
And that the said reputed Father shall with|in six days next after notice of this our Order render his body to the said Constable and Bors|holders, or to some or one of them, ready to undergo his punishment before ordered.
We do likewise farther order, That the said reputed Father shall within six days next after notice given unto him of this our Order pay, or cause to be paid, to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid, or to some or one of them, twenty shillings of lawfull money of England, towards the moneys by them dis|bursed (before the said notice given) for or

towards the charges of the keeping of the said Bastard-Child, from the time of the birth thereof untill the time of the giving of the said notice.
And that upon every Friday which shall be next after the end of the said six days, untill the said Bastard-Child shall attain unto his age of ten years, the said reputed Father shall like|wise pay unto the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish (for the time being, (or unto some or one of them, sixteen pence of lawfull mony of England, towards the charges by them dis|bursed towards the keeping of the Bastard-Child aforesaid,) meaning between the end of the said six days, and the time that he shall attain unto his said age of ten years.)
We do farther order, That the said Bastard-Child shall be kept and nourished by his said Mother untill he shall attain unto the age afore|said; and that she (so far as she shall be able) shall during the said time so keep and nourish the same.
We do lastly order, That both the said Mo|ther and reputed Father shall (for ever from and after such time as the said Bastard-Child shall attain unto his said age of ten years) joynt|ly and severally discharge the said Parish of and from all charges whatsoever, for, touching or concerning the keeping or relieving of the same.
In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names the day and year first above written.
W. B. R. K.



A Warrant to be written under the Order aforesaid, for giving notice thereof to the Mother and reputed Father.
To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A.The same Justices. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
THese are (in His Majestie's name) to com|mand you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do (with all convenient speed) give or cause to be given notice of our Order, (a Copy whereof is herewith delivered unto you) both unto the Mother and reputed Father therein mentioned; to the end that they and every of them may the better observe and perform the same: And what you shall doe in execution of this our Precept, you, some or one of you, do certifie unto us, or one of us, (with all convenient speed next after the Execution of the same) to the end that farther proceedings may be thereupon had as the Case shall require, and to Justice doth appertain. Given under our hands and seals at, c. aforesaid the, c.


A Warrant for the Punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of a Bastard-Child.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss. WHereas A. G. of Hawkh. in18 Eliz. cap. 3. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. the said County, Single wo|man, was lately delivered within the said

Parish of a male Bastard-Child (begotten and born out of lawfull Matrimony) yet living, and chargeable to the Parish aforesaid, and so likely to continue chargeable, to the great burthen of the same Parish, and the defraud|ing of the Relief of the impotent and aged true Poor of the Parish aforesaid, and to the evil example and encouragement of lewd life; And whereas, upon our Examination of the Cause and Circumstance, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and pro|vided) we have (in and by an Order by us this present day made, and subscribed under our hands, touching the Bastard-Child afore|said) adjudged W. B. the elder, late of Hawkh. aforesaid, Broad-weaver, the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child; And for Punish|ment of the said Mother and reputed Father (according to the form of the Statute afore|said) we have thereby ordered, That the said Mother shall by you, some or one of you, (upon some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common High-way, at or near the Watch-house at Highgate in the Parish aforesaid) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dung-court, and being so stripped and tied, shall be there openly whipped untill her body be bloudy; and that the said reputed Father shall by you, some or one of you, (upon some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common High-way in the Parish aforesaid, over against the house of I. B. there,) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and being so stripped and tied, shall be from thence

drawn to the Watch-house aforesaid, and on the way well whipped in such manner as is in such cases accustomed; And that the said Mo|ther shall, within three days next after notice of that our Order, render her body to you, some or one of you, ready to nndergo her Pu|nishment before ordered: And that the said reputed Father shall, within six days next after notice of our said Order, render his body to you, some or one of you, ready to undergo his Punishment before ordered: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com|mand you and every of you, that in case the said Mother and reputed Father, or either of them, shall so render her, his, or their body or bodies to you, or any of you, as aforesaid, that then you, they or he (to whom the same shall be so rendred) do (with all convenient speed afterwards) proceed with effect to exe|cute your, their or his office according to the faid purport of the Order aforesaid, and do execute the same accordingly; And that what is done in the premisses, you, or one of you, do (with all convenient speed, after the afore|said, c. day of, c.) make known unto us, or one of us, to the end that in case of failer by him or her of rendring his or her body to you or one of you, (according to the said Or|der) such farther proceedings may be there|upon had as to Justice doth appertain. Here|of fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at Hawkh. aforesaid the first day of May, 1672.



A Warrant and Mittimus against the reputed Father for not obeying the Justices Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to the Keeper of the common Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas by an Order by us18 Eliz. cap. 3. It is not expresly said what Iustices shall com|mit: But I conceive it fit to be the 2 Iustices that made the Order. But like|wise con|ceive that other Iusti|ces may so doe, (muta|tis mutan|dis.) But I also con|ceive it fit that then it should be done by 2 Iustices, whereof one of the Quo|rum. made, and subscribed under our hands the first day of May last past, touch|ing a male Bastard-Child lately born in the Parish of Hawkh. in the said County of the body of Anne Gardiner of Hawkh. aforesaid, Single woman, (chargeable to the Parish afore|said) we have adjudged Will. Bowman the el|der late of Hawkh. aforesaid, Broad-weaver, the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child; And for Punishment of the said reputed Fa|ther, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided, among other things in the said Order contained) have or|dered, That he shonld by you the said Con|stable and Borsholders, or by some or one of you, (upon some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the com|mon High-way in the Parish of Hawkh. afore|said, over against the house of I. B. there) be stripped from the middle upwards, and then and there should be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and (being so stripped and tied) should be from thence drawn to the Watch-house at Highgate in the Parish afore|said, and on the way well whipped, in such manner as is in such cases accustomed; and

that he should within six days next after no|tice of our said Order render his body to you the said Constable and Borsholders, or some or one of you, ready to undergo his punishment before ordered; And whereas it hath been duly proved before us, that after the making of the said Order, and by the space of six days and upwards before the day of the date hereof, the said Will. Bowman (so as aforesaid the re|puted Father of the said Bastard-Child) had notice of the said Order, and yet notwithstand|ing hath not hitherto rendred his body to you the said Constable and Borsholders, or any of you, according to the purport of the same, and so hath not for his part observed and per|formed the Order aforesaid. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com|mand you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do attach the body of the said Will. Bow|man, and him deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to be by him kept in the same without Bail or Mainprise, (except he shall put in sufficient Surety to perform the said Order, or also personally to appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the said County;) And also to add such Order as the Justices of the Peace of the County afore|said, or the more part of them, then and there shall take in that behalf, (if they then and there shall take any;) And that if at the said Sessions the said Justices shall take no other Order, then to abide and perform the Order before made as is abovesaid. Commanding also you, the said Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to receive then the said Will. Bowman into the same, and him there safely to keep, according to the purport and tenour of this Precept.

Given under our hands and seals at Hawkh. aforesaid, the second day of Iune, Anno Dom. 1673. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 25.


An Order for Relief of the Parish in case of a Bastard out of the Estate of the reputed Father.
To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of, c. in the County of, c. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOasmuch as (upon your Com|plaint14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. to us) it appeareth, That A. B. the reputed Father, or Mother, of a Bastard-Child born in the Parish aforesaid, hath lately ran away out of the said Parish, and left the said Bastard-Child upon the charge of the Parish aforesaid, although A. B. hath Estate sufficient to discharge the said Parish: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require and authorize you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do seize and take so much of the Goods and Chattels, and receive so much of the annual Rents and Profits of the Lands of the said A. B. as will amount unto the summe of, c. which we doThis Order must be con|firmed at the Sessions. 18 Eliz. cap. 3. 3 Car. c. 4. (according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made) order you to take and re|ceive for or towards the discharge of the said Parish, for the bringing up and providing for the aforesaid Bastard-Child. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Warrant for Punishment of the re|puted Father of a Bastard-Child, for not keeping the Child, and obeying the Order.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundreds of C. and B. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the common Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas upon our Examina|tion of the Cause and Cir|cumstance, and due Consideration thereof by us had, touching a male Bastard-Child late born in the Parish of C. in the said County, of the body of I. A. of C. aforesaid, Single woman, (the keeping of which said Bastard-Child was at the time of making of the said Order charge|able to the said Parish, and hath ever since continued chargeable) we did by an Order by us made, and subscribed under our hands the 19th. day of April last past, (according to the form of the Statute in such case made and pro|vided) adjudge W. S. of H. in the said Coun|ty, Tayler the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child; and for the Punishment of the said reputed Father, and the better Relief of the said Parish, we did thereby order, That the said reputed Father should by the said Con|stable, or by the Borsholder of the Town-Bur|rough, (within the Hundred aforesaid) upon some day of the Market to be holden in the Town of C. in the said County, (within the Hundred aforesaid) between notice given of that our Order given unto him, and the 12. day of this instant A. (and now lately past) at the

Market-Cross in the Town aforesaid, (between the hours of three and five in the afternoon of the same day) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and tied to one of the Posts of the Market-Cross aforesaid, (most visible to the said Market) and then and there openly whipped untill his body be bloudy; and that he should in such convenient time after notice of that our Order to him given render his body to the said Constable and Borsholder, or one of them, (ready to undergo his Punishment so ordered) as that the said Punishment might be executed accordingly; And that the said reputed Father should pay to the Overseers of the Poor, or one of them 20 s. by them dis|bursed hefore the said notice given, for or towards the charge of keeping the said Child from the time of its Birth; And that upon every Friday which (after notice to him given of that our Order) should be during such time as the said Bastard-Child should be chargeable to the said Parish of C. pay unto the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid for the time being, or to some or one of them, sixteen pence of lawfull money of England, towards the charges by them disbursed for relief of the Bastard-Child aforesaid; and that the reputed Father should for ever after such time as the said Bastard-Child shall first cease to be charge|able to the said Parish, discharge the Parish aforesaid of and from all future charges what|soever, for, touching or concerning the keep|ing or reliving of the same; And whereas (after the making of the said Order, and by the space of six days and upwards before the day of the date hereof) the said W. S. had notice of the said Order, and yet hath not ob|served or performed any part thereof on his

part to be observed and performed: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bors|holders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do attach the body of the said W. S. and him to deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to be by him kept in the same without Bail or Mainprise, (except he shall put in sufficient Surety to perform the said Order, or else personally to appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the said County) and also to abide such Order as the Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, or the more part of them then and there shall take in that behalf, (if they then and there shall take any;) and that if at the said Sessions the said Justices shall take no other Order, then to abide and perform the Order before made as is abovesaid. Commanding also you the said Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to receive then the said W. S. in the same, and him there safely to keep, according to the purport and tenour of this Precept. Given under our hands, c.


A Warrant for sending a Bastard-Child (found wandring) to the place of its Birth.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
K. ss. WHereas upon our examination we find, That A. B. being the Bastard-Child of C. D. and about the age of five years, hath been found wandring and going up and down the Parish of H. and other places thereabouts, and was, as we are credibly in|formed,

born in the Parish of I. as appeareth by the Book of the said Parish: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, That (according to the General usage, custome, and common acceptance of the Law in case of a lost Child) you do con|vey the same Child to the said Parish of I. and that you the Church-wardens and Over|seers of the Poor of that Parish, do take due care, that the said Child may be there provi|ded for. Hereof fail not at your perils. G|ven under our hands and seals the, c.


A Warrant for apprehending a Wo|man on suspicion of having mur|thered her Bastard-Child.
To the Constable, c.
K. ss. WHereas I am informed that A. B. hath had a Child lately born alive of her Body, and is suspected to have murthered or made away the said Child, since the birth thereof: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and com|mand you, that immediately upon sight hereof you do apprehend and bring the body of the said A. B. before me or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County to answer to all such matters and things as on the behalf of His Majesty shall be objected against her touch|ing the premisses. Likewise you are to make diligent search, by all lawfull means, to find out the truth of the premisses, and to bring before me or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County, all such persons as can give any information on the behalf of His Majesty

touching the premisses.. And hereof fail not, as you will answer the contrary at your perils. Given under my hand, c.


A Condition of a Recognizance for the Appearance of the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. within mentioned did on the day of the date within written com|plain to the Justice within named, that M. H. of the Parish aforesaid, Single woman, was then with Child of a Child, which when born is likely to be a Bastard, and chargeable to the said Parish; And whereas the said M. H. upon her Examination (the day aforesaid) before the said Justice did confess the same to be true, and charged the within bound I. N. to have be|gotten her with Child of the Child aforesaid: If therefore the said I. N. do answer unto such matters as shall be objected against him by the said M. H. touching the said Bastard-Child, then this Recognizance to be void, or else, c.


The Condition of a Recognizance, of one charged to be the Father of a Ba|stard-Child, before its Birth, to ap|pear at Sessions.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas upon Examination of A. B. in the said County of K. Single woman, lately taken before the within named Justice of the Peace, it appeareth that she was then

with Child, which (when it shall be born) is likely to be chargeable to the Parish where it shall happen to be so born; And whereas the said A. B. upon her said Examination did charge the within bound C. D. with the beget|ting her with Child of the Child aforesaid: If therefore the said C. D. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the County aforesaid, at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at, c. in the County afore|said, to doe and receive as by the said Court shall be enjoyned, (and shall in the mean time be of good Behaviour, as well towards His said Majesty, as also towards all His liege people;) That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.


A Condition to discharge Church-war|dens and Parishioners of a Child born in the Parish.
K. ss. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas M. H. hath of late been delivered of a Man-child within the Parish of, c. within written, to the which Child the within bound E. G. by his own vo|luntary Confession doth acknowledge himself to be the Father: If therefore the said E. G. his Heirs, Executours or Assigns, or every or any of them, do from time to time, and at all times hereafter, fully and clearly acquit, discharge and save harmless as well the within named I. B. and H. T Church-wardens of the Parish-Church of, c. aforesaid, and their Suc|cessours for the time being, and every of them, as also all the Inhabitants and Parishoners of

the said Parish, which now are or hereafter shall be for the time being, and every of them, of and from all and all manner of Costs, Char|ges and Expenses whatsoever, which shall or may in any manner of wise at any time here|after arise, happen, come, grow, impose or be imposed upon them or any of them, for or by reason or means of the birth, education, nouri|shing and bringing up of the said Child, and of and from all other Actions, Suits, Charges, Troubles Impeachments and Demands what|soever touching and concerning the same; That then, c



Good Behaviour.

A Warrant and Mittimus for Good behaviour.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at C. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. c. These2 or 3 Iu|stices Lam. 119. First Assig|navimus in the Com|mission of the Peace. are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bolsholders, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. to come before me, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to find sufficient Se|curity,

as well for his Appearance at the next2 or 3 Wit|nesses. 34 E. 3. c. 1. general Session of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the said Court shall be injoyned; as also that he shall in the mean time be of Good behaviour, as well towards His said Majesty, as towards all His liege peo|ple: Which if he shall refuse to doe, that then (without expecting any farther or other War|rant)Dalt. 290. to 297. you, some or one of you, do safely con|vey him to the Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver to the said Keeper of the same, (to|gether with this Precept.) Commanding al|so you, the aforesaid Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep untill he shall find such sufficient Securi|ty as aforesad. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


Causes for the Good behaviour.
Threaten to hurt any in the body, of ill name andFirst Assig|navimus in the Com|mission of the Peace. 34 E. 3. c. 1. Dalt. 290. to p. 297. Either of these are sufficient. fame, and of very lewd life and conversations, or common Barterer, or common Rioter, or common breaker of the Peace, or common Alehouse-haunter, or common Drunkard, or common Swearer, or common Woodstealer, or do keep a common Stew or Bawdy|house, or common Hedge-breaker, or common Tale|bearer, or common Slanderer, or common Libeller, or common Whoremonger, or common Whores, or com|mon sowers of Discord, a maker of strife amongst his Neighbours, or common Night-walker, common Cheater, or common Companions of Thieves, or common Messenger for Thieves, or common Pilfe|rers, or commonly suspected to be Thieves, or do commonly practice Poysoning, or common Eve-drop|pers, or are commonly suspected of Incontinency,

or common harberers and entertainers of Whores, Rogues, or Thieves, or common Robbers of Or|chards, or have sold Ale or Beer without Licence, and contrary to the Command of the Iustice of the Peace, or are Idle persons, wandring up and down, fare well and spend much in Alehouses, and have no known and visible Estate to maintain it, or that A. B. hath begotten a Bastard Child on the Body of C. and is like to be chargeable to the Parish, or hath a hand in sending away the re|puted Father of a Bastard Child then left to the Charge of the Parish, c.


Another Warrant for Good behaviour.
To the Constable and Borsholder of A. c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as we have been credi|bly informed that A. B. of your Town of C. c. is a man of Evil behaviour, and one that dayly moveth discord between his Neighbours, and a common disturber of His Majestie's Peace. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you, that immediately upon the sight hereof you bring before me (or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) the Body of the said A. B. to answer such matters as on His Majestie's be|half shall be objected against him by C. D. and also that you require him to bring sureties for his Good behaviour untill the next Sessions. And hereof fail not. Given under, c.



A Mittimus to the Gaol for one that refuses to find Sureties for his Good behaviour.
To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, or to his lawfull Deputy thereof.
Kent ss. I Send herewithall the Body of A. B.Lamb. 120. 1 Iustice. of, c. for that he refuseth to find sufficient Sureties to be of Good behavi|our towards His Majesty and all His liege peo|ple, and to appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County at M. aforesaid, straightly charging and comman|ding you in the name of our said sovereign Lord the King to receive him the said A. B. into safe custody, and him safely to keep in the said Gaol untill he shall find sufficient Sureties as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under, c.



A Supersedeas for the Good behaviour.
R. R. one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace within the said County of Kent, To the She|riffs, Bayliffs, Constables, Tythen-men and all other His said Majestie's Officers and Ministers within the said County, and to every of them Greeting.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. in theCrompt. 237. County of K. aforesaid, Yeoman, hath personally come before me, and hath found sufficient Sureties, That is to say, C. D. of F. in the said County, Yeoman, and E. F. of G. in the County aforesaid, Gent. either of the which hath undertaken for the aforesaid A. B. under the pain of 10 l. and the said A. B. hath undertaken for himself under the pain of 20 l. that he shall well, uprightly and honest|ly behave himself as well towards His said Ma|jesty as towards all his liege people, and espe|cially towards C. D. of K. in the said County, Yeoman, And that he will personally appear at the next Quarter Sessions to be holden in the said County of K. These are therefore to command you (in His Majestie's name) that you utterly surcease to molest, arrest, trouble, or imprison the said A. B. for the said occasi|on, And that if you have for the said occasion, (and for no other) taken and imprisoned him, That then you do cause him to be delivered and set at liberty without farther delay. Here|of fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal, c.



A Recognizance thereupon.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo die5 E. 6. c. 25. Two Justi|ces, one of the Quo|rum. Observe to bind the Principal in 20. li. and each of the Sureties in 10 li. Octobris, Anno Regni Domi|ni Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae  Hiberniae Regis, Fi|dei Defensoris, c. vicesimo nono, apud C. in Com' praedict' A. B. de, c. D. E. de, c.  F. G. de, c. personaliter venerunt co|ram nobis H. J. K. L. Iustic dicti Do|mini Regis ad pacem in Com' praedicto con|servand' assignat',  recognoverunt se de|bere dicto Domino Regi modo  forma se|quen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras le|galis monetae Angliae,  uterque praedicto|rum D. E.  F. G. decem libras consimi|lis monetae, separalit' levand' de separalibus bonis  catallis, terris  tenementis suis, ad opus  usum dicti Domini Regis, haered'  successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis sequen'.


A Condition of a Recognizance for the same.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in the within named County of K. at the If at the Assizes, then say, at the next Assizes and general Gaol-deli|very to be holden for the said County, to doe and re|ceive, c. next general Assizes of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, to doe and re|ceive what by the Court there shall be then and there enjoyned; and shall in the mean time be of Good behaviour towards our Sovereign

Lord the King and all His liege people; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full sorce.


Another Condition.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do personally appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace of K. and M. in the County aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the said Court shall be enjoyned; and do in the mean time keep His Majestie's Peace towards His Majesty and all His liege people, and especially to T. A. of C. within written; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else to stand in full force.


Another Condition.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do per|sonally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in the within na|med County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, to doe and re|ceive what by the Court there shall be then and there enjoyned; and shall in the mean time be of Good behaviour towards our So|vereign Lord the King and all His liege peo|ple; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.




Bridges.

A Warrant to a Hundred for As|sessing a proportionable Rate of a Tax (appointed by the Body of the County) towards repair of the Coun|ty Bridges.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to C. D. E. F. c. Inhabitants of the said Hundred in the County aforesaid and to every of them.
Kent. ss. WHereas several common Bridges of the said Coun|ty were much out of repair, The charges of Reparations whereof was estimated to amount to 750 li. which were ordered to be repaired by the Body of the County aforesaid, The pro|portionable part whereof to be born by the Hundred aforesaid do amount unto 20 li. These are therefore (by virtue of His Majestie's Com|mission of Oyer and Terminer) to us and others (on that behalf) directed (under the great Seal of England) To command you (the said Constable and Borsholders) sorthwith equally to assess and tax the said Hundred by a pound rate upon all Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels (both real and personal) within the Limits, Circuits and Bounds of the Hundred aforesaid (as hath usually been done within the said Hundred (for publick Taxes,) And that you do collect and gather the same so that you may have the same ready in the hands of you

the aforesaid Constables within one and twen|ty days next after your receit of this Precept (to be paid and disposed of) for and towards the purpose aforesaid as we some or one of us shall (for that purpose) direct; And in case of refusal or neglect of any person or persons to pay his, her or their proportion or proportions of the said money (so by you assessed and taxed) within one week next after demand thereof, that then you some or one of you do cause the said per|son or persons (so refusing or neglecting) to come before us some or one of us to be bound over (according to an Order by the said Commissioners in that behalf made) to appear at the next general Assizes or Quarter-Sessions for this Western Division of the said County which shall next happen after such refusal or neglect to answer the same: and you are hereby further required to make known unto us some or one of us (with all convenient speed next after the end of the aforesaid one and twenty days) what you have done in execution of this Precept. Given under our hands and seals the second day of May, 1681.



A Warrant to make a Tax for County Bridges repaired.
To the Constable of the Hundred of A. and to B. C. c. Inhabitants of the said Hundred, and to every of them.
Kent. ss. WHereas the usual BridgesIn allusion to the Sta|tute of 22 Hen. 8. cap. 5. I conceive it fit to have 4. Iu|stices, whereof 1 of the Quor. of, c. within the said County were lately in great decay and unre|paired, and by an Order made at C. c. the said Decays and Irreparations were ordered to be mended at the Charges of the said County, and have lately been amended accordingly, the proportionable part of which said Charge thought fit to be imposed upon this Division doth amount unto, c. of lawfull money of England, and the proportionable part of the same thought fit to be imposed upon the said Hundred doth amount unto, c. of like mo|ney: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Inhabitants, that you, or any three of you at the least, (whereof you the said Constable to be one) do forthwith (after publick no|tice before given, as is usual in other Taxa|tions) make a Taxation of all and every the Inhabitants of the said Hundred as in such cases.



A Warrant to collect a Tax for re|pairing County Bridges.
To A. B. and C. D. Inhabitants of the Hun|dred of E. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie'sIn allusion to the Sta|tute of 22 H. 8. cap. 5. I conceive it fit to have 4 Iu|stices whereof one of the Quo|rum. name) to command you, That you do forthwith collect and gather the several summs of money (specified in the Taxation herewithall delivered unto you) of the several persons therein mentioned to be taxed upon them for the purpose in the said Taxation spe|cified, and that you do pay the same unto R. T. (whom we have appointed general Receiver of the moneys raised for the purpose aforesaid within this Division of the several Hundreds) on or before the second day of May, (deduc|ting out of the same onely 5 s.) as by us al|lowed unto you for and towards your pains in collecting and paying in of the same, and in case of refusal or neglect of payment of any of the said parties so taxed of the moneys tax|ed upon them as aforesaid (after demand made thereof by you or either of you) that then you do certify unto us, or some or one of us, the names of the said persons so refusing or neglec|ting,When mo|neys recei|ved as much as you can get. with all convenient speed, to the end that such farther proceeding may be had thereupon as to Justice doth appertain. Given under our hands and seals at, c.



A Warrant for not paying the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been made unto us by R. T. c. (by us appointed collectors and gatherers of the moneys imposed upon the said Hundred for and towards the reparations of the several Bridges of D. in the said County) that the se|veral persons (whose names are here under written) have refused to pay unto them the several summs of money adjoyned to their se|veral names (being taxed upon them for the purpose aforesaid) although the same have been duly demanded of them: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said several persons to come before us, or one of us, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County to answer the premisses, and far|ther to doe and receive as to Justice doth ap|pertain, unless they shall forthwith pay the said moneys unto you, some or one of you, which if they shall so doe, that then you (so recei|ving the same) do forthwith pay the said mo|neys so received unto the said R. T. c. or one of them, to the end that the same may be byAs afore|said. them paid over to the general Receiver of the moneys raised for the purpose aforesaid by us formerly appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.
A. B. C. D. E. F. c.




Carriages for the King.

A Warrant to provide Carriages.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas we have (by War|rant13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices. from the Green-cloath) received notice to provide Carts and Carriages from the places adjacent for the present service of His Majesty, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause four suffi|cient Carriages within the said Hundred (each Carriage to consist of four able Horses, or six Oxen, or four Oxen and two Horses) to be and attend for the service aforesaid at B. in the said County upon the first of April next ensuing at eight of the clock in the forenoon of the same day. Hereof fail not at your pe|rils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



Another Warrant for providing of Carriages for the King's use.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss WHereas we have received13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices. notice in writing by War|rant under the hands and seals ofLord High Ad|miral of England, or 2 more of the princi|pal Officers or Commis|sioners of His Maje|stie's Navy, or Master of His Majestie's Ordnance, or Lieutenants of His Majestie's Ordnance for providing of Carriages for the service of His MajestyService of the Navy or Ordnance. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause to be sent to A. ten Carriages on the second day of May next furnished with Horses or Oxen sufficient for the said service. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Warrant to levy the Penalty for not appearing with Carriages for the King upon notice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss. FOr as much as it hath been duly13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices, by oath of the Officer or two cre|dible Wit|nesses. proved before us, That B. C. of C. c. having had reasonable notice to bring one Carriage to T. upon the first day of May last for the service of his Majestie's Ordnance, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made) hath Refuse or wilfully neglect. wilfully neglec|ted so to doe, by which he hath forfeited for|ty shillings (to the King's Majestie's use:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do demand of the said B. C. (to His Majestie's use) the aforesaid forty shillings; and in default of payment up|on demand, that then you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the aforesaid forty shil|lings (to the use aforesaid) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said B. C. rendring to him the overplus upon such Sale, (if there shall be any, the charge of Di|straining being first deducted.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Mittimus for one that doth im|press or take away any Cart or other thing from the Owner, under pre|tence of power from the Green|cloath for Carriage of His Maje|stie's Provisions, without lawfull Authority.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at C. in the County aforesaid.12 Car. 2. cap. 24. Settled the 13. of the same King cap. 8. Provision for His Majesty, or the Queen, or any of the Chil|dren of the King or Queen. Or impress or take any Cart, Car|riage, or other thing, without the consent of the Owner. 2 Iustices.
K. ss. FOr as much as it hath been made appear unto me, upon (the com|plaint of A. B. of, c. in the County afore|said) That C. D. of E. hath impressed a Cart for Carriage of His Majestie's Provisions with|out consent of the Owner, on pretence or co|lour of a Warrant from the Green-cloath, (con|trary to the intent of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) at the request of the said A. B. to will and require you the said Consta|ble and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him deliver to the said Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, (together with this Precept.) Re|quiring and commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive the said C. D. into the Gaol aforesaid, and him there safely to keep untill the next Sessions. And thereof neither you nor any of you are to fail at your perils. Gi|ven under my hand and seal the second day of May in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sove|reign Lord Charles the Second, c.




Certificates.

A Certificate from the Minister and chief Inhabitants of the Parish of a man's Honesty.
K. ss. WE I. . Minister of the Word of God in the Parish of S. in the said County of Kent, I. B. of S. aforesaid Constable of the Hundred of S. wherein the said Parish standeth, I. B. and G. C. Church|wardens of the said Parish, W. V. T. L. T. W. A. W. T. I. and E. H. c. of the said Parish, and most of us Freeholders within the same, Do hereby certify to all to whom it shall concern, That A. B. one of the Inhabitants of the said Parish of S. is, and by the space of five years last past, hath been a House|holder within the said Parish, and by all that time hath behaved himself and lived in good sort, and reputed a man of honest Conversa|tion, and hath paid according to his degree all manner of Scots and Assesments as other the Inhabitants of the said Parish have done. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands the ninth day of May, 1681.



A Certificate for continuing of an Alehouse-keeper.
To the right Worshipfull His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace within the Lower Division of L. in the County of Kent.
WE whose names are hereunto subscri|bed, Inhabitants of the Parish of H. within the Division and County aforesaid, do humbly certify, That the now Dwelling-house of A. B. Victualler is conveniently situated there for a Victualling-house, and that he is of good name and fame, and the said House is well accommodated for entertainment of Travellers, and that he keepeth good Rule therein; And therefore we humbly desire your Worships that his Licence for keeping the said Victualling|house there may be continued.


A Certificate for the time of the Birth of a Child.
THese are to certify your Worships, That A. B. Son of E. B. Widow, was born in the month of August, in the year of our Lord God 1679. in the Parish of R. in the County of B. about the latter end of the month. In witness whereof we, the Neighbours and God|mother of the said Child, who were present at the birth of the said Child, are ready to testify the same when your Worships shall please to require it, and have hereunto set our hands this 30th day of November, Anno Dom. 1679.
A. B. C. D. c.



A Certificate for one that hath not been touched of the Evil.
WE the Rector and Ancient Inhabitants of the Parish of A. in the County of B. whose names are hereunto subscribed, do up|on good Information certify, that C. D. the Son or Daughter. of E. F. of the Parish aforesaid hath not as yet been touched for the Distemper com|monly called the Evil. Given under our hands, and seals this 10th day of March, Anno Dom. 1680.



Chimney-money.

A Mittimus for disturbing a Collectour.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's common Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.16 Car. 2. cap. 3 1 Iustice dwelling near the place. Proof upon Oath.
K. ss. FOr as much as it hath been duly pro|ved before me, That A. B. an Of|ficer duly appointed to receive, collect and answer the Duty arising by Fire-hearths and Stoves in this County, (according to an Act of Parliament, intituled An Act for collecting the Duty arising by Hearth-money by Officers to be ap|pointed

by his Majesty) hath been vio|lently oppo|sed or inju|red. (in the due Execution of the said Act) by C. D. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Bor|sholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Com|manding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep by the space of for any time (not ex|ceeding a month.) next after such deli|very of him unto you. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



Church.

For not coming to Church.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent. ss. FOr as much as I have received1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 2. 14 Car. 2. cap. 4. 1 Iustice of that Divi|sion. 1 Witness within a month after default made. Information, That B. C. of D. in the County aforesaid, c. did not upon any of the, c. Sundays last past resort or repair to any Church, or Chapel, or other usual place ap|pointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Service, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made:) These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to will and re|quire you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said B. C. to come before me, to an|swer the premisses. Hereof fail not at your pe|rils. Gven under my hand and seal the, c.



To levy the Forfeiture for not com|ing to Church.
To the Church-wardens of the Parsh of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent. ss. FOr as much as B. C. of D. afore|said,1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 4. 14 Car. 2. cap. 4. 1 Iustice of that Di|vision, c. c. did not upon Sunday the second day of May, nor upon Sunday then next following, nor upon Sunday then next following, resort or repair to any Church, Chapel, or other usual place appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Ser|vice, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made) and being called before me, did not make sufficient excuse of his said de|faults to my satisfaction: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, that you, or one of you, do levy by Dis|tress and Sale of the Goods of the said B. C. three shillings for his defaults aforesaid, to be1 s. per Sunday. imployed to and for the use of the Poor of the said Parish, (rendring to him the overplus of the money raised of the Goods aforesaid so to be sold;) and in default of such Distress, that you do certify me thereof with all convenient speed, to the end I may further proceed there|in as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof, fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



A Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church (for want of Distress.)
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas (by Warrant under1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 4. 14 Car. 2. cap. 4. 1 Iustice of that Divi|sion. my hand and seal) the Church-wardens of the Parish of A. in the said County were lately by me commanded to levy three shillings by Distress and Sale of the Goods of B. C. of the Parish of A. in the said Coun|ty, (to be imployed to and for the use of the Poor of that Parish) for that he did not upon Sunday the second day of May, nor upon Sun|day then next following, nor upon Sunday then next following, resort or repair to any Church, Chapel, or other usual place appoin|ted for Common Prayer, and there hear Di|vine Service, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made;) and the Church|wardens aforesaid have returned to me, that the said B. C. hath no Goods or Chattels suffi|cient for the levying of the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, that you, some or one of you, do take the aforesaid B. C. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Comman|ding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep, untill payment shall be made of the moneys

aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Gi|ven under my hand and seal the, c.


To Distrain for a Church-Tax.
To the Church-wardens of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to either of them.
Kent ss. FOr as much as complaint hath been by you made unto us, That the several persons hereunder named have re|fused or neglected to pay unto you the summs of money adjoyning to their several names, be|ing assessed upon them for and towards the re|paration and maintenance of the Parish-Church of H. aforesaid and other Church-duties, and for doing and performing such things as by an Ordinance of Parliament (made the 9th day of Febr. in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred forty seven) are appointed to be done at the charge of the said Parish: These are therefore (in His Majesties name) to com|mand you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the said several and respective summs of money by Distress and Sale of the several and respective Goods of the said several and respec|tive Offenders, and likewise the summ of 2 s. more of every of them, for and towards the charge and expence in levying of the same, ren|dring to the said several and respective parties the overplus (if any be;) And in default of such Distress, that then you, or one of you, do certify the same unto us, to the end that there may be such farther and other proceedings touching the premisses as to Justice doth apper|tain. Given under our hands and seals at H. aforesaid the 17th day of May, Anno Domini 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 31.



Against a Minister for not reading Prayers, c. once in a month.
To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the said County.
Kent ss. FOr as much as it hath been duly13  14 Car. 2. c. 4. 2 Iustices. Confession, or 2 Wit|nesses. proved before us, That A. B, the proper Incumbent of thePar|sonage, Vi|carage, or Benefice with Cure. The Ordi|nary may allow an Impedi|ment. in the County aforesaid, doth reside on his Living and keep a Curate, and hath not himself in person with|in one month now last past openly and pub|lickly read the Common Prayers in and by the Book prescribed (by the Statute made in the thirteenth year of His now Majestie's Reign, intituled An Act for the Uniformity of Publick Prayers and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies, and for establishing the Form of making, ordaining and consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the Church of England) in the Parish-Church of C. to the said Parishioners in such order, manner and form as in and by the said Book is appointed, whereby he hath (by virtue of the Statute aforesaid) forfeited five pounds to the use of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, or some of you, do demand of the said A. B. the aforesaid five pounds to the use of the Poor aforesaid; and in default of payment thereof within ten days after such demand, that you, or some of you, do levy the same by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. rendring to him the surplusage. Hereof ail not

at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
The like Warrant (mutatis mutandis) if he do not (if there be occasion) administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, once in every month.


A Mittimus for Preaching whilst Disabled.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOr as much as we have received a13  14 Car. 2. c. 4. 2 Iustices. Certificate from the Ordinary with|in whose Jurisdiction the Parish of T. in the said County is situate, That A. B. being (by virtue of the Statute in that behalf made) dis|abledSermon or Lecture. to preach any Sermon, did, during the time that he did continue and remain so dis|abled, preach a Sermon in the Parish-Church of T. aforesaid, (against the form of the Sta|tute: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you the said Con|stable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper thereof, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the Gaol aforesaid, and him there safely to keep by the space of three months, (without Bail or Mainprise.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands, c.




Coals.

Upon Complaint touching Coals.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's16  17 Car. 2. c. 2. 2 Iustices. name) to require you to cause A. B. of, c. to come before us at the house of, c. to answer such Complaint against him for Offences against an Act of Parliament lately made (intituled, An Act for the regulating the measures and prices of Coals) as hath lately been made unto us, and farther to doe and re|ceive as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.


For delivering a Moiety of such Coals as are sold contrary to the Statute to the Informer.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss. FOr as much as A. B. of, c. is16  17 Car. 2. c. 2. 2 Iustices. Sea-coals brought into the Thames must be sold by the Chauldro containing 36 bushels heaped up, according to the Bushel sealed at Guild-hall, London: And Scotch|coals and other Coals (sold by weight) after the proportion of 112 li. to the hun|dred (of Avoirdupois weight) without fallacy or deceit. duly convicted before us, (ac|cording to the form of the Statute in that be|half made, intituled, An Act for regulating the measures and prices of Coals) That hesold or exposed to Sale. Half to the person prosecuting or complaining. Parish where the Offence committed, or any other adjoyning Parish or Parishes. did lately expose to sale forty Chauldron of Coals of the value of, c. (contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you

to seize the Coals aforesaid, and the double value thereof; and that you do deliver the one half of the Coals and value aforesaid unto C. D. (being the person prosecuting in this behalf) to his use, and likewise that you do imploy and dispose the other half of the same to and for the use of the Poor, or Repairing of the High-ways of the Parish of M. where the said Offence was committed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.


Touching Prices of Coals.
To the Constable, c.
Kent ss. FOr as much as (according to an16  17 Car. 2. c. 2. 3 Iustices of the Quo|rum. Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for regulating the measures and prices of Coals) we did appoint and judge reasonable, that Coals coming into the River of Thames within this County, and sold by re|tail, should be sold at the rate and price of, c. by the Chauldron; And forasmuch as A. B. anIngros|ser or Re|tailer. of such Coals doth refuse to sell as aore|said: We do therefore (according to the said Act) appoint and impower C. D. and E. F. joyntly or severally, to enter into the saidWharf or place where the Coals are stored up. where the said Coals are stored up, (and in case of refusal to take a Constable to force entrance; which Constable is hereby required

to act accordingly.) And you the said C. D. and E. F. joyntly and severally, are hereby farther appointed and impowered the said Coals to sell, or cause to be sold, at the rate aforesaid, (rendring to the said A. B. the mo|ney for which the said Coals shall be sold, ne|cessary charges being deducted.) For all which this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



Constables Charges.

A Warrant for making of Constables.
THese are (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you to make your2 Iustices. repair unto us, or to some other Justice of Peace of this County, to take the Oath of a Constable to serve His Majesty within the Town of A. (If not cho|sen at the Leet this Clause is to be omitted. according to the Choice made of you by the Jury at the last Leet holden in your Town) And hereof fail not. Dated, c.


Or thus,
To A. B. C. D. and E. F. c. Inhabitants of C. c.
WHeres A. B. of your Town of C. the now Constable thereof, is by rea|son of his Age and Impotency very unable and insufficient to execute the said Place: These are (in His Majestie's name) to charge and

command you, whose names are hereabove written, to come and appear before me at my house at H. to morrow being Thursday by eight a Clock in the morning, that I may make Choice of one of you to be sworn to undertake the said Office. And hereof fail not, c.


A Warrant for a Tax for the Consta|ble's Charges in the Execution of his Office.
Kent ss. FOr as much as we are informedI conceive that it is fit to have 2 Iustices, and one of them of the Quorum. Dalt. 165. by A. B. Constable of the Hun|dred of D. in the County aforesaid, That he hath necessarily disbursed (for and on the be|half of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred, in the Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of His Majesty) several summs of money, and (for his Reimbursement of the same) hath craved from us such assistance as hath been in such cases accustomed: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require and authorize you the Inhabitants of the Hundred aforesaid, whose names are here|under written, or the greater number of you, to take and examine the Accompt of the said Constable touching the premisses; and for his Reimbursement of such money (as you or the greater number of you shall find upon the said Accompt to have been by him so necessarily disbursed as aforesaid,) that you or the greater number of you do forthwith make a Tax or Assessment of and upon all and every the In|habitants of the said Hundred, in such manner as hath formerly in such cases been accustomed within the same; and to authorize you, the

said Constable, to demand, collect, and gather the said money so taxed and assessed; and in case of refusal of payment thereof unto you, that then you do return unto us, (or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) the names of the persons so refu|sing, to the end that they may be farther pro|ceeded against for the same as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not, c. Given un|der our hands and seals at, c. the, c.
To A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. and N. O.


To appear and shew cause for their not paying the said Charges.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. These are (in His Majestie's name)I think 2 Iustices best, Quo|rum 1. to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the several per|sons whose names are hereunder written to come before some or one of us at the house of T. N. Inn-holder at the George Inn, c. in the aid County the fifth day of Iune next ensuing, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to shew cause why they did not pay unto A. B. late Constable of the said Hundred, the several summs of money hereunder mentioned, added to their several names, and severally as|sessed upon them, for and towards his Reim|bursement of moneys by him necessarily laid out, (for and upon the behalf of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred in the Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of His Majesty)

and farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your pe|rils. Given under our hands and seals at H. the first day of Iune 1679, c.
A. B. xij. d. C. D. vi. d.


For refusing to appear to shew Cause for not paying the said Charges.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as the several personsBest 2 Iu|stices, Quo|rum unus. here-under named were (by vir|tue of a Warrant to you directed under the hands and seals of us A. B. c. His Majestie's Ju|stices of the Peace of the County aforesaid) war|ned to come before us, or some of us, this pre|sent day, c. in the said County, to shew cause why they did not pay unto A. B. late Constable of the said Hundred, the several summs of money hereunder mentioned, (added to their several names, and severally assessed upon them, towards his Reimbursment for his necessary Disbursements for and on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred, in the Exe|cution of his said Office in and about the Ser|vice of His Majesty) yet the aforesaid persons have refused so to come, or to pay the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do bring the aforesaid persons before us, or one of us, and other His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said Coun|ty, at the house of, c. in, c. upon Monday the fifth day of May, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same, to shew cause why

they do not pay they said moneys, and farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain, (unless they shall pay the moneys aforesaid.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


To levy the Charges upon their re|fusing to pay the same.
To the Constable of the Hundred of A. in the said County.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com|plaint)14 Car. 2. 2 Iustices. it appeareth unto us, That the several persons hereunder named have refused to pay unto you the several summs hereunder specified, and severally added to their several names, assessed on them (accord|ing to the form of the Statute lately made) towards your Reimbursement of such moneys as you have disbursed in and about the Execu|tion of your said Office, (according to the Sta|tute aforesaid:) These are therefore to re|quire and authorize you, to levey the said se|veral and respective summs so assessed upon the said respective persons so refusing to pay the same, (rendring the overplus to the owners, if any shall be.) Given under our hands and seals the, c.

A. B. 11 s.
C. D. 13 s. c.




A Condition of a Recognizance to appear and answer the not paying the same at next Sessions.
THe Condition of this Recognizance isSee Title Recogni|zances. such, That whereas the within bound C. D. hath refused to pay to A. B. late Consta|ble of the Hundred of D. in the within named County of K. assessed upon him the said C. D. (for and towards the Reimbursement of the said late Constable of moneys by him necessarily laid out for and on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred, in Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of His Majesty:) If therefore the said C. D. do personally ap|pear before his Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the said County at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, to doe and receive what by the said Court shall be enjoyned touching the premisses; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.


A Warrant for levying 3 s. 4 d. upon a Constable for neglect of his Du|ty, in giving an account of Rogues, Vagabonds, c.
To the chief Constables of A. and to the under Constables of H. and to their Deputies greeting.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as at our Assembly at7 Iac. c. 4. A. the second day of Iune last,

for the adjusting the accounts of the under Constable, according to a Statute made in the reign of King Iames touching Rogues and Wanderers, A. B. of H. aforesaid, was fined at 3 s. 4 d. for being negligent in his Office, and refusing to make such account as by the said Statute is appointed: These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to will and re|quire you, that some or one of you, do forthwith upon the receipt hereof demand of the said T. C. the said Fine, and if he shall re|fuse or neglect to pay the same unto you with|in three days, that then you do immediately levy the said 3 s. 4. d. by Distress and Sale of his Goods and Chattels, rendring unto him the overplus thereof, if any such shall remain. And lastly, that one of you the chief Constables do pay the same unto the now Treasurer of the Marshalsey, at or before the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden at B. for these parts, and this shall be your sufficient Warrant in that behalf. Given under our hands, c.


A Warrant to sell the Goods of an Offender that refuseth to bear his own Charges to the Gaol.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath3 Iac. 10. 1 Iustice. He that committed him. For any of|fence or misdemea|nour. Must bear the charges of himself and of those appointed to guard him thither; or that shall so guard him thither. If the Of|fender be unable to bear his Charges the Parish|oners must do it. been made unto me by the Pa|rishioners of C. in the said County, That whereas A. B. being apprehended in the said Parish upon suspicion of Felony, and by my Warrant for that cause sent from thence to His

Majestie's Gaol for the said County at Maid|stone in the County aforesaid, the charges of the said Parishioners in conveying and guard|ing him to the said Gaol did amount to ten shillings, and the said A. B. hath refused to bear the same; And forasmuch as I am credi|bly informed that the said A. B. hath Goods and Chattels within the Parish of D. in the County aforesaid sufficient to defray the said Charges: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you, and every of you, to seize so much of the said Goods and Chattels as shall be sufficient to defray the Charges aforesaid, and to cause Apprisement to be made thereof by four of the honest Inhabi|tants of the said Parish of D. where the Goods are; And that you do after the said Apprise|ment sell the said Goods, and that out of the moneys arising of the said Sale you do pay over unto the Parishioners of A. aforesaid the aforesaid ten shillings, delivering unto the said A. B. the overplus arising of the said Sale. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



A Warrant to make a Tax for con|veying a Felon to the Gaol.
To the Church-wardens and other substantial In|habitants of the Parish of A. within the Hun|dred of B. in the said County Greeting.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Constable of the Hundred aforesaid hath made Complaint unto us that you refuse to make a Tax or Scot in the said Parish, for conveying of C. D. of, c. lately attached for Felony in the said Parish to the Gaol, not having of his own to bear his Charges thither: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and command you forthwith to make a Tax or Scot for the discharge of such moneys as the said Complainant hath been at in the pre|misses, or to come before us or some of us, at the house of, c. (sale die.) And then and there to shew cause why you do not so do. Hereof fail not c.



Conventicles.

A Condition of a Recognizance in caseSee Title Recogni|zances. of an Appeal made touching Conventicles.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas R. G. of R. in the within named County of Kent, Gentleman,

was lately convicted by the within named Ju|stices of taking upon him to teach in an As|sembly lately held in the Parish-Church of Sandherst within written, (under pretence of exercise of Religion in other manner then ac|cording to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, against the form of the Statute lately made to prevent and suppress Se|ditious Conventicles) and had therefore (ac|cording to the Statute aforesaid) forfeited the summe of twenty pounds; And for that (in the judgments of the said Justices) they did think the said R. G. unable to pay the said summe of twenty pounds, they did therefore (by their discretions) adjudge five pounds thereof to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the within bound W. W. who was also (according to the said Statute) convicted of being present at the said Assembly, (contrary to the Statute aforesaid:) And whereas the said W. W. was also by the said Justices convicted, for that he at the time of the said Assembly was one of the Church|wardens of the said Parish, and knowing the said Assembly to be holden within the same, did not give information thereof to any Ju|stice of the Peace, nor endeavour the Convic|tion of the parties which were at the said As|sembly, nor of any of them, (according to the duty of his said Office) but wittingly and wil|lingly did omit the performance of his Office aforesaid in the execution of the said Statute, (against the form of the same) by which he forfeited the summe of five pounds: And the said two several summs of five pounds have (by Warrant of the said Justices) been le|vied of the Goods and Chattels of the said W. W. and he hath the day and year within writ|ten

appealed from the Justices aforesaid to the judgment of the Justices of the Peace of the said County in their next Quarter-Sessions: If therefore the said W. W. do prosecute the said Appeal (with effect,) that then this Recogni|zance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.
And forasmuch also as the aforesaid Wife ofWhere Of|fender is a Feme-Co|vert, levy upon her Husband. the said S. B. is a Feme-Covert cohabiting with the said S. B. (her Husband;) These are therefore, c. (prout, c.) forthwith to levy the aforesaid five shillings (so imposed upon her as aforesaid) by Distress, c. (prout, c.)
And forasmuch as a man unknown did thenWhere Tea|cher is a man un|known. and there take upon him to preach or teach, (prout the Record) you may levy twenty pound upon any the Offenders as in your judgment shall seem fit.


A Record of a Conventicle.
 This Record must be written in Parchment, and would be better in Latin, according to the Precedent ensuing.
K. st. MEmorandum, That upon the tenth22 Car. 2. Regis, c. 1. 2 Iustices. By Conses|sion of the party, or Oath of witness, or notorious e|vidence of the fact. Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting. day of Iune in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, (by the grace of God) of England; Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, c. it was (according to the form of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) duly proved to

us, That A. B. being of the age of sixteen years and upwards, and a Subject of this Realm, was (upon the first day of Iune now last past, in the Parish of, c.) present at T. in the said County, under under colour or pretence of exercise, c. of exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the other then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England. Where five persons are present more than those of the same houshold. of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid.) Of all which we have the day and year first above written made this Record under our hands and seals.


A Record concerning Conventicles where several persons are con|victed.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod J. S. de Sundrich in Com' praedict' Yeoman, Ed. W. de W. in Com' praed' Gene|rosus, Maria uxor G. J. de parochia de E. in Com' praed' Husbandman, Eliz. Williard de Edenbridge praed' in Com' praed' vidua, J. B. de, c. (cum multis aliis, in toto se attingen' ad numerum duodecim personarum,)  quilibet eorum, die Solis vicesimo sexto die Junii, Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc vicesimo secundo, ultra tatem sexdecim annor'  subditi dicti Dom' Re|gis nun existen', praed' 26. die Junii, Anno vi|cesimo secundo supradicto, insimul assemblaver'  praesentes fuer',  quilibet eor' praesens fuit, in domo mansionali ipsius Annae Pelham, viduae, in praed' parochia de Edenbridge in Com' praed' ad Conventiculum, sub colore exercitationis (An|glice

exercise) Religionis in alio modo quam se|cund' Liturgiam  practicationem (Anglice practice) Ecclesiae Angliae (ad tunc  ibidem tent') contra formam Statuti praevenire  sup|primere seditiosa Conventicula nuper edit'  provis.
Memorandum etiam, Quod (tempore  loco supradictis) praed' Johannes Stiles assumpsit su|per se docere in Conventiculo praed',  in eodem (adtun  ibidem) docuit, contra formam Sta|tuti praed'; Qudque praed' Anna Pelham vidua tempore supradicto scienter (Anglic wittingly)  voluntarie permisit Conventiculum praedictum fore tenend' in domo mansionali sua praed', (etiam contra formam ejusdem Statuti.)
Record' quarum quidem separalium offensarumQuaere, if there must not be two Justices. Ego Willielmus Leche miles, (unus Iustic' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com' suo prd' conservand' assign') cui (secundum formam  effectum Statuti praed') separales offens. praed' sic (ut praefertur) fore commiss. sufficient' apparuit, per praesentes sub manu  sigillo meo undecimo die Julii, Anno vicesimo secundo supradicto, apud Westerham praed' in Com' praed' feci. Praedictique Johannes Stiles, Edwardus Whitaker, praedict' Maria, uxor praed' Georgii Johnson, Eliz. Williard, Josephus Browne junior, Josephus Browne senior, Johannes Fletcher, Robertus Pelham, Anna Pelham vidua A. B.  Dorothea Pelham Spinster, de separalibus offensis suis (in Record' praedict' superius mentionat') per Recor|dum illud (virtute Statut' praed') plene  per|fecte convicti sunt,  quilibet eorum inde separa|lit' plene  perfecte convict' est. Et ego praefat' Iusticiar' superinde (virtute Statut' praed') die, Anno  loco ultim' mentionat' Finem quinque solidor' super quemlibet offensor' (Anglic Offen|ders) praed' sic (ut prefertur) ad Conventicu|lum

praed' praesent' existen' (pro separali offensa sua praed') imposui. Praedictaque Anna Pelham vidua pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipsa (ut prae|fertur) permisit Conventiculum praed' fore tenend' in domo mansionali sua praedicta, forisfecit sum|mam viginti librar' (virtute Statuti praed'.) Praedictsque Johannes Stiles pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) assumpsit su|per se docere in Conventiculo praedicto,  in eo|dem (ut praedictum est) docuit, forisfecit sum|mam viginti librarum (virtute Statuti praed'.)


A Record of the Conviction of cer|tain persons taken at a Conven|ticle.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod S. B. de par. de C. c. prout, c.  quidam alius homo ignotus, (in toto se attingen. ad numerum octo personarum)  quilibet eorum, 3. die, c. Anno, c. ultra aetatem, c.  subdit', c. quorumque ad numerum quinque per|sonarum non adtunc fuerunt de familia Roberti Kite de praedicta par' c. in Com' praed' Mer|cer, (in praed' par' de Stapl.) eodem 3. die, c. Anno, c. insimul assemblaverunt  presentes fuerunt,  quilibet eorum praesens fuit, in domo mansionali ipsius Roberti Kite in praed' par' de Stapl. in Com' praed' (ad Assembl. sub colore, c. prout, c.  adtunc  adhuc in pleno robore existen'.)
Memorandum etiam, Quod praed. homo igno|tus ad tunc  ibidem assumpsit super se docere in Ass. praed.  (ad tunc  ibidem) docuit, (etiam contra formam ejusdem Statut.)
Memorandum etiam, Quod praed. Robert. Kite tempore supradicto scienter (Angl. wittingly)

 voluntarie permisit Ass. praed. fore tenend. in domo mansionali sua praed. (etiam contra for|mam Statuti praed.)
Record. quarum quidem separalium offensa|rum Nos J. H. Miles, W. C. S. B.  R. K. Arm. (Iustic. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com. sua praed. cons. ass.) quibus (se|cundum formam  effectum Stauti praed.) se|parales offens. praed. sic (ut praefertur) fore commiss. sufficient. apparuit, per praesent. sub ma|nibus  sigillis nostris 17. die Apr. Anno 27. supradicto apud C. praed. in Com. praed. fecimus. Praedictique Sam. Bates  praed. uxor ejus, Henr. Start, c. Robert. Kite,  praed. homo ignot', de separalibus offens. suis in Recordo praed. superius spec. per Record. illud (virtute Stat. praed.) plene  perfecte convict. sunt,  quilibet eorum inde separalit. plene  per|fecte convict. est. Et nos praefat. Iustificiarii superinde (virtute Stat praed.) die, anno  loco ultim. mentionat. super quemlibet offensorum (Anglice Offenders) praed. (sic ut praefertur ad Assembl. praed. praesent. existen.) pro separali offensa sua praed. Finem quinque solidorum im|posuimus. Praedictsque homo ignot. pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) assumpsit super se docere in Assembl. praed.  (adtunc  ibidem) docuit, forisfecit summam viginti libra|rum, (virtute Stat. praed'.) Praed. Robert. Kite pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) permisit. Ass. praed. fore tenend. in domo mansionali sua praed', forisfecit summam viginti librarum, (virtute Stat. illius.) Et quia (in judiciis nostris) putamus praed. H. Start fore pauperem  inhabilem solvere praed. finem quinque solid. super ipsum pro offensa sua praed. (eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) praesens fuit ad Ass. praed'. ut praefertur) impositum; Et eo

quod praed. finis quinque sol. super praed. homi|nem ignot. (eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) prae|sens fuit ad Ass. praed', ut praefertur) impo|sit' de bonis  catallis suis levari non potest: Ideo (ex discretionibus nostris) praed. duos se|parales fines 5 sol. ult. mentionat. de bonis  catallis praed. C. B. qui (ut praefertur) ad Ass. praed. praesens fuit, nos praefat. Iusticiarii (apud Cr. praed. in Com. praed. eodem 17. die Apr. Anno 27. supradicto) levari adjudicavi|mus. Et quia praedictus homo qui (ut prae|fertur) assumpsit super se docere in Ass. praed',  adtunc  ibidem docuit, est extraneus, (Angl. a stranger)  nomen  habitatio sua incognit. exist'; Ideo (ex discr. nostris) praed. summam 20 li. per ipsum pro offens. sua prae|dicta (ut praefertur) forisfact', nos (praesat. Iusticiarii, die, anno  loco ult. mentionat.) de bonis  catallis separalium personarum hic postea mentionat. levari adjudicavimus modo  forma sequen'; videlicet de bonis  catallis praed. J. B. qui, c. (prout, c.) 9 li.  10 s. inde,  de bonis  catallis praed. C. B. qui etiam, c. (prout, c.) 40 s. inde,  de bonis, c. praed. R. C. qui etiam, c. (prout, c.) 100 s. (inde resid',) c. ut in Recordo.
In quarum omnium rerum test. nos praefat. Iustic. (die, anno  loco ult. mentionat.) man.  sigill nostr. praesentibus opposuimus.



Memorial of a Record of a Con|venticle.
Kent ss. A Memorial of the Account of the Moneys mentioned in the Record certified at the Quarter-Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, (on Tuesday next after the Close of Easter, 1679.) by Sir I. H. Knight, W. C. S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (four of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) forfeited (as in the said Record is mentioned) in an Assembly holden (in the dwelling-house of R. K. in the Parish of Sta|pleherst in the County aforesaid) under colour of exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy of the Church of En|gland, upon the thirtieth day of March, 1675.
His Majestie's third part of the said Forfeitures by the said Justices tendred into the Court of the general Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County at M. aforesaid on Tuesday next after the Close of Easter, 1679. and by appointment of the same by the said Justices paid to Sir I. C. Knight and Baronett, (She|riff of the said County) to His Majestie's use. Viz.
For R. C. 20 d. 20 d. and 39 s. 4 d. All which was levi|ed and paid to the said Ju|stices since the last general Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County at M. aforesaid, viz. 02 02 08
Summa patet.
And as concerning the moneys in the said Record mentioned to be payable by the several persons ere under named, His Majestie's third part whereof cometh to as followeth, viz.


S. B. 20 d. 20 d. and 3 l. 3 s. 4 d. In all
03
06
08


C. B. 20 d. 20 d. 20 d. and 13 s. 4. d. In all
00
18
04


I. B. 20 d. and 23 s. 4 d. In all
01
05
00


R. K.
06
13
09


In all
12
03
09


The said Justices do say, that they did up|on the seventeenth day of April 1678. (be|ing the day of the Conviction of the persons aforesaid for their Offences in the said Record mentioned) make out their Warrants for le|vying thereof, but they have not as yet re|ceived the same, or any part thereof; nor is the same, or any part thereof, (as yet) levi|ed (that they know of,) though they have di|ligently enquired after the same.



A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Offence.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. Forasmuch as C. D. was this present22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convicted by Record (by us made) of being present in the Parish of C. in the said County at an As|sembly, Con|venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of exercise of Religion in other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice. of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did upon the said Conviction fine the said C. D. not ex|ceeding 5 i. for his said Offence, and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (to|gether with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) by the space of nox exceeding 3 months. next after such delivery of him unto

you. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our, c.
The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Free|hold or Copy-hold, or 50 li. in Goods.


A Mittimus upon the second Offence.
To the Constable, c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. was this pre|sent22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Con|venticles) convicted (by Record by us made) of being present in the Parish of T. in the said County at an As|sembly, Con|venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or practice. of the Church of England, (con|trary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did upon the said Conviction fine the said C. D. not exceeding 10 li. for his said Offence, and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us; And for|asmuch as the said C. D. hath been once before that time convicted of the like Offence, (con|trary to the Act asoresaid:) These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Bors|holders,

and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Com|manding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) by the space of not ex|ceeding six months. next after such delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail not, c.
The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do; if they be satisfied that the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Freehold or Copyhold, or 50 li. in Goods.


A Mittimus upon the third Con|viction.
To the Constable and Borsholders, c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. was this22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. present day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, in|tituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convicted (by Record by us made) of being present in the Parish of T. in the said County at an As|sembly, Con|venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of exer|cise of Religion in other manner than is al|lowed by the Liturgy or practice. of the Church of England,

(contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And foras|much as the said C. D. hath been twice be|fore that time convicted of the like Offence, (contrary to the said Act:) These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Bors|holders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Command|ing also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) untill the next general Quarter-Sessions for the West-Division of this County, the next Assizes, Gaol-delivery, Great Sessions, or Sitting of Oyer and Ter|miner, in the County aforesaid, (which shall first happen;) And that you then and there have him, to be farther proceeded against as by the said Act is directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if they be satisfied that the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Free-hold or Copy-hold, or be worth 50 li. in Goods.



A Record against one that suffereth a Conventicle, c. to be kept in his house.
 I conceive it fit that this Record be written in Parchment. And Quaere if not fit to be in Latin.
Kent ss. MEmorandum, That upon the22 Car. 2. Regis, c. 1. 2 Iustices. By Confes|sion of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence of the fact. second day of Iune in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, (by the grace of God) of Eng|land, Scotland, France and Ireland King, De|fender of the Faith, c. it was (according to the form of an Act of Parliament in that be|half lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) duly proved to us, That R. T. of, c. did wittingly and willingly suffer Assemb. Conventicle or Meeting. under under colour or pretence of exercise of, c. other than, c. of exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the by the Liturgy or practice of, c. of the Church of England, to be held in his in House, Out-house, Barn or Room, Yard or Back-side, Woods or Grounds. in the Parish of T. in the said County on, c. day now last past, (contrary to the Act aforesaid.) Of all which we have the day and year first above written made this Record under our hands and seals.



A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Conviction.22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. By Confes|sion of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence of the fact.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at C. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as D. E. was this pre|sent day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conven|ticles) convicted (by Record by us made) of wittingly and willingly suffering Assem|bly, Conven|ticle, or Meeting. under under colour or pretence of exercise of Religion o|ther than, . by the of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or practice f, c. of the Church of Eng|land, to be held in his in House, Out|house, Barn or Room, Yard or Back-side, Woods or Grounds in the Parish of T. in the said County upon the second day of Iune now last past, (contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did upon the said Conviction fine the said D. E. not ex|ceeding 5 li. for his said Offence, and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Con|stable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said D. E. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Pre|cept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise)

by the space of not ex|ceeding 3 months. next after such delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail not at your pe|rils, c.
The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Freehold or Copy-hold, or 50 li. in Goods.


A Mittimus thereupon, upon the se|cond Conviction.
To the Constable, c. (as in the precedent War|rant.)
K. ss. FOrasmuch as, c. (as in the pre|cedent22 Car. 2. cap. 1. as in the precedent Warrant. Not exceed|ing 10 li. not exceed|ing 6 mon. Warrant, till you come to these words) And he did not pay down the said Fine unto us; (go on thus) And forasmuch as the said D. E. hath been once before that time convicted of the like Offence, (contrary to the Act aforesaid: These are therefore, c. (as aforesaid.)
The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) c. as aforesaid.



A Mittimus thereupon, upon the third Conviction.
To, c. (as in fol. 102.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as, c. (as in fol. 102.22 Car. 2. cap. 1. till you come to these words) And forasmuch as the said D. E. hath been twice before that time convicted of the like Offence, (contrary to the said Act:) These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Borshol|ders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said D. E. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Com|manding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) untill the next general Quarter-Sessions, (for the West Division of this County) the next Assizes, Gaol-delivery, Great Sessions, or Sitting of any Commission of Oyer and Terminer, (in the County aforesaid) which shall first hap|pen; And that you then and there have him to be farther proceeded against, as by the said Act is directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis, c.) as aforesaid.



A Warrant to levy the Penalty of the Statute upon the Teacher in a Conventicle.
To the Constable, Borsholders, Headboroughs and Tithingmen of the Hundred of M. C. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them and to all and every other Officers within the said County, whom the exe|cution hereof may concern.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I did (this presentThis is by way of Cer|tificate, where the Offender lives in another County, (made to a Iustice of Peace.) day) receive a Certificate (to me directed) under the hand and seal of W. E. of S. in the County of Sussex, Esquire, (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in the said County of Sussex) That G. H. of C. aforesaid, Tailour, was (upon the first day of this instant August) by him con|victed (by proof to him made according to an Act of Parliament, intituled, An Act to pre|vent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, lately made and provided) of being present in the Barn of R. W. of W. in the said County of Sussex, Husbandman, and there did take up|on him to preach or teach at a Conventicle, (the five and twentieth day of Iuly last past) under pretence of exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, and contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid;

and that therefore, being thereof convicted as aforesaid, the said G. H. did forfeit for the said first Offence twenty pounds and that he (the said Justice) had (by virtue of the said Act) imposed on him (so convict as aforesaid) for his said Offence the said summ of twenty pounds, (as being thought by him able to pay the same, as by the said Certificate appear|eth:) These are therefore (by virtue of the Act aforesaid) in His Majestie's name, to com|mand you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said twenty pounds, (by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said G. H;) And that when you or any of you have so levied the said twenty pounds, (or any part thereof) that then you, they or he that hath so levied the same, do forthwith deliver the moneys so levied to the aforesaid W. E. (to be by him distributed according to the Act aforesaid.) Hereof neither you nor any of you are to fail at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at A. in the said County of Kent 10. Aug. 1679. Annoque Reg|ni Regis Caroli Secundi 31.


A Warrant pro testes to prove the Conventicle.
To the Constable, (as in the precedent War|rant.)
Kent ss. WHereas we have (this day) received information, That several persons (upon the 19. day of Iune last

past) were present in the Parish of S. in the said County at a Conventicle then and there held, under colour of exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, (con|trary to the form of an Act of Parliament late|ly made and provided to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles;) And whereas we are also informed, That the several persons here under named can testify the particulars and truth of the premisses: These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to command you and every of you, that you do give notice to the several persons, that they and every of them are by us commanded to appear before us at the house of R. K. Esq in H. in the County aforesaid on Wednesday the first day of this instant August at 8 of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, then and there to testify their several knowledges touching the premisses. Whereof neither they nor any of them are to fail at their perils. And you are farther hereby commanded to appear (at the time and place aforesaid,) to make appear un|to us what you have done in the execution hereof. Hereof also you are not to fail at1 Iustice enough. your perils. Given under our hands and seals at H. in the said County the, c. day of, c. 1670. 22 Car. c.
A. B. of, c. c. as many as be
C. D. of, c. c. as many as be



A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.
To the Constable, (as in page 105.)
K. ss. FOrasmuch as R. L. of the said Pa|rishNote, You must make your War|rant into the several Hundreds and Liber|ties where the Offen|ders inha|bit and use their addi|tion, prout the Record. of S. Mercer, was (this pre|sent day, according to an Act of Parliament to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles lately made and provided) by us convicted of his wittingly and willingly suffering an Assem|bly to be holden in his dwelling-house in the said Parish of S. upon the 30. day of March now last past, (under colour of exercise of Re|ligion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid) by which he hath (according to the said Act) for|feited the summe of twenty pounds for his said Offence: These are therefore (in His Maje|stie's name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy (by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said Robert Kite) the aforesaid summe of twenty pounds; And you and every of you are (in his Majestie's name) hereby farther commanded, that when you or any of you have (as aforesaid) levied the summe aforesaid, that then they or he ha|ving so levied the same do forthwith deliver the same to us or one of us, to be distributed accor|ding to the said Act. Hereof neither you nor any of you are to fail at your perils. Given un|der our hands and seals at C. c. prout supra.



A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.
To the Constable, c. (prout precedent War|rant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as W. W. of the afore|said Parish of S. Gent. (one of the Church-wardens of the said Parish) I. H. of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, (the other Church-warden of the said Parish) T. N. of the Parish aforesaid, Chandler, (one of the Over|seers of the Poor of the said Parish) I. W. the elder of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, G. P. c. (many others) W. H. of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, (Headborough of the North Borough in the said Parish) c. (prout) were every of them this present day by us convicted, (ac|cording to an Act of Parliament to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles lately made and provided) of being present (in the Parish-Church of Sandherst aforesaid in the County aforesaid) upon Sunday the nineteenth day of Iune last past (between the hours of nine and twelve before noon the same day) at an As|sembly then and there held, (under pretence of exercise of Religion in other manner than ac|cording to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid;) and we have (by virtue of the said Act) imposed upon every of the said Offenders (so convicted as aforesaid) a Fine of five shillings for that his respective offence: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name)

to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy upon every of the said Offenders (re|spectively) by Distress and Sale of his respective Goods and Chattels the aforesaid Fine of five shillings. And forasmuch as R. Giles of Rol. in the said County, Gent. did then and there take upon him to teach (in the Assembly afore|said,) and did then and there teach, (against the form of the Act aforesaid) and was this present day by us (according to the said Act) convicted of his said Offence, and he hath (for the same) forfeited the summe of twenty pounds; and for that (in our judgments) we do think the said R. G. unable to pay the said summe so forfeited as aforesaid: We have there|fore (by our discretions) adjudged the same to be levied of the Goods and Chattels of the aforesaid W. W. I. H. Da. Pet. and I. C. who (as aforesaid) were all of them present at the Assembly, and are thereof (as aforesaid) con|victed; and the same summe of twenty pounds to be levied in manner following. That is to say, one hundred shillings thereof of the Goods and Chattels of the said W. W. other one hun|dred shillings thereof of the Goods and Chat|tels of the said I. H. other one hundred shil|lings thereof of the Goods and Chattels of the said D. P. and the other one hundred shillings thereof (residue) of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. C. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy one hundred shillings (parcel of the said summe of twenty pounds) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chat|tels of the said W. W. and to levy other one hundred shillings (other parcel of the said summe of twenty pounds) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. H.

and to levy other one hundred shillings (other parcel of the said summe of twenty pounds) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said D. P. and to levy the other one hun|dred shillings (residue of the said summe of twenty pounds) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. C. And for|asmuch as Thomas Hur of the aforesaid Parish of Sand. Labourer, was (this present day by us convicted (according to the Act aforesaid) of being present at the Assembly aforesaid, (contrary to the said Act) and we have also (by virtue of the Act aforesaid) imposed upon him a Fine of five shillings (for that his Of|fence;) and for that we do (in our judg|ments) think the said Thomas Hur poor, and unable to pay the said summe of five shillings (upon him for his said Offence imposed, as aforesaid:) We have therefore (by our discre|tions) adjudged the same to be levied of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. W. who (as aforesaid) is convicted of the like Offence at the same Assembly. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy the said Fine of five shillings by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. W. And forasmuch as T. H. of B. in the County aforesaid, Malster, was (this present day) by us convicted (according to the Act aforesaid) of being present at the Assembly aforesaid, (contrary to the said Act) and for that the said T. H. heretofore committed the like Offence, and (according to the form of the Act aforesaid) was thereof convicted, therefore he (for his said Offence of being present at the Assembly herein before mentioned) hath in|curred the penalty of ten shillings: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command

you and every of you, forthwith to levy the said ten shillings by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said T. H. And for|asmuch as Mary (the Wife of the said Iohn Wats) and Elizabeth (the Wife of the said Iohn Cogger) were both of them (this present day) by us convicted (according to the Act aforesaid) of being present at the Assembly aforesaid, (contrary to the said Act) and we have (by virtue of the Act aforesaid) imposed upon the said Mary a Fine of five shillings for that her said respective Offence; and we have also (by virtue of the said Act) imposed upon the said Elizabeth a Fine of five shillings for her said respective Offence; and for that the said Mary is a Feme-Covert, (cohabiting with the said Iohn Wats her Husband) and the said Eli|zabeth is also a Feme-Covert, (cohabiting with the said Iohn Cogger her Husband;) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy the aforesaid Fine of five shillings so impo|sed upon the said Mary (as aforesaid) by Di|stress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said Iohn Wats; and to levy the aforesaid Fine of five shillings so imposed upon the said Elizabeth (as aforesaid) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said Iohn Cog|ger. And forasmuch as the aforesaid W. W. (at the time of the said Assembly) was, and still is one of the Church-wardens of the Parish of Sand. aforesaid, and the aforesaid Iohn H. then also was, and still is the other Church|warden of the aforesaid Parish, and the afore|said Tho. Nurley then was, and still is one of the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, and the said Will. Hammon then was, and still is Headborough of the North Borough in the Pa|rish

aforesaid; and every of them was (this present day) by us (according to the said Act) convicted, for that he knowing the Assembly aforesaid (in form aforesaid) to be holden within his aforesaid Parish, did not give infor|mation thereof to any Justice of the Peace, nor endeavour the Conviction of the parties afore|said, or any of them, but wittingly and wil|lingly did omit the performance of his duty, in execution of the Act aforesaid, (against the form of the said Act) for which Offence every of them respectively hath forfeited the summe of five pounds: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you and every of you to levy the summe of five pounds (by the said William Ward so forfeited as is last be|fore mentioned) by Distress and Sale of his Goods and Chattels; and to levy the summe of five pounds (by the said W. H. so forfeited as is last before mentioned) by Distress and Sale of his Goods and Chattels; and to levy upon the other Church-warden, (prout.) And you and every of you are hereby (in His Ma|jestie's name) farther commanded, that when you, or any of you, have (as aforesaid) le|vied the several Fines and Forfeitures aforesaid, (or any of them) that then they or he so ha|ving levied the same do forthwith deliver the same to us, (or one of us) to be distributed (according to the said Act.) Hereof neither you nor any of you, c. (prout common form.)



To levy money upon a Gaoler, c. for suffering one committed (up|on this Act) to go at large.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro|ved22 Car. 2. cap. 4. compared with 41. 2 Iustices. Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious E|vidence of the fact. before me, That A. B. Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at C. in the County afore|said did upon the 10th day of Iune last past per|mit D. E. to go at large, contrary to the War|rant of his Commitment made by virtue of an Act of Parliament lately made, (intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventi|cles) and contrary to the Act aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. ten pounds by him forfeited for his said Offence; and that you do pay the moneys so levied to the Church|wardens of the Parish of T. in the said County, (for the relief of the Poor of the said Parish.) Given under our hands and seals the, c.
The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) if the Keeper of the House of Correction suffer the Of|fender to go at large.



The like for suffering one at large to joyn with the Offender in custody in the exercise of Religion, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro|ved22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious E|vidence of the fact. before us, That A. B. Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at C. in the County afore|said did upon the 10th day of Iune last past per|mit E. F. being then a person at large, to joyn with D. E. (a person committed to his custody by virtue of an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Sedi|tious Conventicles) in the exercise of Religion differing from the Rights of the Church of En|gland, (contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. ten pounds by him forfeited for his said Offence; and that you do pay the moneys so levied to the Church|wardens of the Parish of T. the Parish where the Offender did last inhabit, in the said County, (for the relief of the Poor of the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
The like (mutatis mutandis) against the Keeper of the House of Correction, if he offend in the like case.



Against a Peer of the Realm for be|ing at a Conventicle, the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices of the place or division where the Peer dwels, one of the Quorum. of this Realm) was this present day (according to the form of an Act of Par|liament lately made, intituled, An Act to pre|vent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convic|ted (by Record by us made) of being present in the parsh of V. in the said County at an As|sembly, Con|venticle, or Meeting under colour or pretence of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or prac|tice of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said T. Lord C. ten pounds, (for the Of|fence aforesaid;) and that you do pay the moneys so levied to the Church-wardens of the aforesaid Parish of V. (for relief of the Poor of the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



Upon the second Conviction.
To the Constable, c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer22 Car. 2. cap. 1. of, c. as in the precedent War|rant, till you come to these words, contrary to the Act aforesaid; go on thus,) And forasmuch as the said T. Lord C. hath been once before that time convicted of the like Offence, (con|trary to the said Act: These are therefore, c. to levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said T. Lord C. twenty pounds, c.


Against a Peer for suffering a Con|venticle, c. to be kept in his House, c. the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices of the place or division where the Peer dwels. 1 of the Quorum.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer of this Realm) was this present day (according to the form of an Act of Par|liament lately made, intituled, An Act to pre|vent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) con|victed (by Record by us made) of wittingly

and willingly suffering an As|sembly, Con|venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of exer|cise of Religion in other manner than is allow|ed by the Liturgy or practice. of the Church of England to be held in his in House, Out|houses, Burns or Rooms, Yard or Back-side, Woods or Grounds. in the Parish of V. in the said County upon the 12. day of Iune now last past, (contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said T. Lord C. ten pounds, (for the Offence aforesaid;) and that you pay the moneys so levied to the Church-wardens of the aforesaid Parish of V. (for relief of the Poor of the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.


Upon the second Conviction.
To the Constables, c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)
K. ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices, c. (as in the prece|dent War|rant.) of this Realm, c. as in the pre|cedent Warrant) And forasmuch as the said T. Lord C. hath been once before that time con|victed of the like Offence, (contrary to the said Act:) These are therefore, c.



A Mittimus for a Nonconformist, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. proved before us, That A. B. Parson, Vicar, Cu|rate, Lec|turer, or other per|son. (in Holy Orders,) Stipendary, or other person who hath been possessed of any Eccle|siastical or Spiritual promotion, who hath not declared assent to the Com|mon Prayer, (prout the Act of 14. of this King, cap. 4.) or Preacher in Conventicle upon the 12. day of, c. or, c. was within five miles of not be within five miles of a City, Town-Corporate, or Borough that sends Burgesses to Par|liament, or of any Parish-town or place wherein he or they have since the Act of Oblivion been Parson, Vicar, Curate, Stipendary, or Lecturer, or taken upon them to preach in a Conventicle. Nor shall any teach School, take Boarders (to be taught) till he take and subscribe the Oath in this Act (pro|ut, c.) and frequent Divine Service. (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided, intituled, An Act for restraining Nonconformists from inhabiting in Corporations:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you to take the said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deli|ver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep for six months, (without Bail or Mainprise.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Certificate to the Militia, c. for Aid, in Case of a Conventicle.
To the Lieutenant, any Deputy-lieutenant, or any Commissioned Officer of the Militia, or any other His Majestie's Forces, the Sheriffs, Iustices, or other Magistrates and Ministers of Iustice, joyntly or severally.
Kent ss. THese are to certifie you, That I22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 1 Iustice, upon his in|formation or know|ledge. A. B. (one of His Majestie's Ju|stices of the Peace, c.) have received In|formation of an unlawfull an un|lawfull Meeting or Conventicle held or to be held. under under colour or pretence of the exerci|sing Reli|gion, c. or prevent. of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or practice, c. of the Church of England, (contrary to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) at T. in the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid; And that I (with such as|sistance as I can get together) am not able to dissolve, dissipate, suppress or dissolve the same. All which I do certifie unto you, to the end that you may repair unto the said place aforesaid, and doe therein as by the said Act is required and enjoyned. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



A Certificate made by a Iustice, where the Offenders live in a Corporation.
Kent ss. S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (two of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in His County aforesaid) To the chief Magistrate of the Corporation of Tenterden in the said County Greeting. Where|as W. S. of Tent. aforesaid in the County afore|said, Yeoman, was (this present day before us) convicted (according to an Act of Par|liament to prevent and suppress Seditious Con|venticles lately made and provided) of beingThis will serve to a particular Iustice in another County, (mutatis mutandis.) present in the dwelling-house of I. B. in the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid upon the sixth day of this instant Iuly at a Conventicle then and there held, (under colour of exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act afore|said;) and we have (by virtue of the said Act) imposed upon him a Fine of five shil|lings (for that his Offence;) And whereas also the said I. B. was this present day (before us) also (according to the said Act) convicted of his wittingly and willingly suffering the Con|venticle aforesaid to be held in his aforesaid dwelling-house, (contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid) for which his Offence he hath forfeited the summe of twenty pounds; And for that we do (in our judgments) think the said I. B. poor, and unable to pay the said summe of twenty pounds (by him as aforesaid forfeited:) We have therefore (by our discre|tions) adjudged one hundred shillings thereof to be levied of the Goods and Chattels of the

aforesaid W. S. (who, as aforesaid, was pre|sent at the same Conventicle.) And foras|much as the said W. S. is an Inhabitant in the Corporation aforesaid, we do therefore hereby certifie you of the premisses, to the end you may proceed thereupon as by the said Act is required. Given under our hands and seals at C. in the said County the one and twentieth day of Nov. An. Dom. 1679. 31, c.


A Certificate for the taking the Oath, according to the said Act.
Kent ss. I A. B. (one of His Majestie's Ju|stices15 Car. 2. cap. 1. of the Peace of the County of K.) do humbly certifie, That D. E. did this present day before me take the Oath men|tioned in an Act of Parliament lately made, (in|tituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) in these words, I do swear that I do not hold the taking of an Oath to be unlawfull, nor refuse to take an Oath on that account. In testimony whereof I the said A. B. have here|unto set my hand and seal the, c.




Corporations.

A Certificate upon taking the Oaths, and subscribing the Declarations mentioned in the Act for Regulating Corporations.
Kent ss. MEmorandum, That A. B. of C.13 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. did upon the 21. day of May last past, before us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) take the Oaths of Alle|geance and Supremacy, and the Oath appoin|ted to be taken by the Statute made in the 13. year of His now Majestie's Reign, (intituled, An Act for the well Governing and Regulating of Corporations) and did likewise before us sub|scribe the Declaration in the said Statute men|tioned. In testimony whereof we have here|unto set our hands and seals the, c.




Court-Leet and Court-Baron.

A Precept directed to the Bailiff of the Mannor by the Steward of the Court-Baron to warn the Court.
To the Bailiff of the said Mannor.
Kent ss. THese are to require you to warn all the tenants of the said Mannor (whose names are here under written) and all other the tenants of the same, personally to ap|pear at the Court-Baron to be holden for the Mannor aforesaid (at the place accustomed) upon Thursday the tenth day of this instant Month of August, at eight of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, then and there to doe and perform their several Suits and Ser|vices, (according to the custom of the said Mannor) and have you there the names of such persons as you have so warned, and this Precept. Given under my hand and seal the first day of August, 1676. 28. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.



A Precept to warn a Jury for a Court-Leet.
To the Constable, c.
Kent ss. THese are to will and require you to give publick notice within the said Hundred, That His Majestie's Court-Leet and view of Franck-pledge for the same, shall be holden at the house called the Red Lion in B. upon Thursday the seventeenth day of this instant October, at ten of the Clock in the Forenoon of the same day: And that you warn all persons that do owe any Suit or Ser|vice to the said Court, That they and every of them personally be and appear at the time and place aforesaid, then and there to do and per|form the same; And that more especially you warn four and twenty honest and lawfull men of the said Hundred, to appear at the time and place aforesaid, to enquire for our Sove|reign Lord the King of those things which to the said Court do appertain. And that you your selves be then and there also personally present, and have you there the names of such persons as you have so warned, and this Precept. Gi|ven under my hand and seal the second day of Octob. 1680. 32 Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.



A Precept for a Borsholder, or other Officer, to take upon him the said Office, and to repair to a Justice of Peace to take his Oath for his faithfull execution of the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of F. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as at His Majestie's Court-Leet holden this present day for the said Hundred of F. you are elected [name the Office. Borsholder] for the year to come: These are therefore to will and require you, upon receipt hereof, to take upon you the said Office; And forthwith to repair to one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County of K. before him to take your Oath for your faithfull execution of your said Office. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the second day of March, Anno Dom. 1680. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi tricesimo secundo.



A Precept to bring in a Scould to be tried at a Court-Leet.
K. ss. RIchard Kilburne, Esquire, Steward of His Majestie's Court-Leet, hol|den this present day for the said Hundred, to the Constable of the Hundred aforesaid, and Officer of the said Court greeting. Forasmuch as E. P. of the Parish of C. in the said County, Spinster, otherwise called E. the Wife of R. T. of the aforesaid Parish of C. in the County a|foresaid, Labourer; was at His Majestie's said Court, holden before me this present day, by the Oaths of twelve honest and lawfull men of the Hundred aforesaid, presented for her being a common Scould at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, within the Jurisdiction of the said Court, as well with her Neighbours as with other the Liege people of the King, whereby they are much molested, disquieted and grieved (against the Peace of the said King, his Crown and Dignity,) to the great disturbance and disquiet of His Majestie's Liege people, and against his Peace, These are therefore to command you to cause the said E. P. to come before me, or my sufficient De|puty, at the next Court-Leet of our Sovereign Lord the King, to be holden at C. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, (within the Juris|diction of the said Court) upon Saturday the second day of Octob. next ensuing, to answer the premisses. And further to do and receive as the said Court of the said King shall con|sider of her in that behalf. And have you

there this Precept. Given under my seal at C. aforesaid, the tenth day of April in the seven and twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, c.


The manner of making up of Court-Roles.

Cur' Baron' Thomae Bristow Arm' ibidem tent'The Title of a Court-Baron. die Lunae quarto decimo die Octobris Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi (Dei gratia) Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae  Hi|berniae Regis, Fidei Defensor. c. vicesi|mo quarto anno Dom. millessimo sexcentesimo septuagesimo secundo coram Richardo Kil|burne Armig' Senescallo ibidem.
Esson' Carolus Cox, de malo lecti.

Iur'
Johannes Hover,
Franciscus Jervas,
Johannes Shosmith, amp;
Johannes Cat.



Kanc. ss. QUi jurati super sacrm' suum adAd inquir' jur'. Ammerc' in ipsos qui fecer' defalt'. inquirend'  praesentand' ea quae ad Cur' praed' pertinent.
Super sacrm' suum praed' dicam  praesentant. quod Thomas Sampson, Johannes Bowles, Jacobus Hawes, gener', c. Tenentes hujus Manerii, debent sectam ad hanc Cur',  ad hunc diem sec' defalt' Ideo quilibet eorum in mia'

 amerceamentum cujusibet eorum inde per ho|magium praed' afferat' ad ij d.
Praesentant etiam quod Johannes Banks, quiAlienatio pro qua solvit Do|mino rele|vium. de Domino hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed' tenuit quatuor pecias terrae vocat', c. Continen' per aestimationem, c. cum pertin' in Breede per annualem reddit' duodecim denariorum  alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem, ejusdem Ma|nerii) alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin' S. Petter viduae  haered' suis, unde accidit Dom' relevium (videl. xij d.) Quodque praed' S. Pet|terAl' alie|natio pro qua, c. Et quod cepit in virum  alienaver' c. Solv. Dom. rel. c. Praecept' Ball' distr'. postea alienavit praemis. praed' cum pertin' Elizabethae Sloman  haered' suis, unde etiam accidit Dom' relevium (videl' xij d.) Et quod Elizabetha Sloman cepit in virum Georgium Boraston Clericum, Quodque praed' Georgius  Elizabetha alienaverunt praemissa praed' cum pertin' Carolo Cox  haered' suis, unde etiam accidit Dom' relevium (videl' xij d.)
Ideo praeceptum est Ball' Manerii praed' quod distring' praed' Carolum. Ita quod sit hic ad prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend' ad solvend' Dom' separalia relevia praed'  ad faciend' ei fidelitatem pro praemissis.
Praesent. etiam quod Edwardus Barton, QuiRel. super alienation' de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed' tenuit unum mesuagium,  quatuor acr' terrae (per aestimationem) cum pertin' in Breede prope quendam parcum ibid' (vocat' Breede pound) per annualem reddit' quatuor denariorum, Et alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem ejus|dem Manerii) alienavit praemissa praed' cum pert'Cui sic alienat ignorant  petunt diem ad inquiren|dum. unde accidit Dom' relevium (videl' iiij d.) sed cui vel quibus, praed' Edwardus sic alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin' Iuratores praed' penitus ignorant, Et petunt diem ad inquirend' inde us|que in prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend'  eis concedit.
Et praeceptum est Ball' Manerii illius quod di|stringatPraecep' distr. Alienatio. pro relevio praed'.
Praesent' etiam quod Richardus Edwardus gen. qui de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed') tenuit certas terras (vocat' le, c.) cum pertin' in Breede per annualem reddit' trium solidorum septem denariorum unius oboli  uniusSed cui ignorant. quadrantis, Et alia servicia (secundum consue|tudinem ejusdem Manerii) alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin', unde accidit Dom' relevium (videl' iij s. vij d. ob. q.) Sed cui, vel quibus, praemissa praed' sic alienat' fuer. Iuratores praed'Petunt di|em. penitus ignorant, Et petunt diem ad inquirend' inde usque in prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii praed' hic tenend',  eis conceditur.
Et praeceptum est Ball' Manerii illius distringerePraecept. distring. Jure ux. pro relevio praed'.
Cmque etiam Will. Foster  Elizabetha uxor ejus (jure ipsius Elizabethae) nuper tenue|runt de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed') quasdam terras (vocat' Totty) cum pertin' nuper terrarum (vocat' S.) In Paro|chia omnium Sanct' in Hasting parcel' per an|nualem reddit' quinque denariorum Et alia ser|vicia (secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) Modo Iuratores praedict' (super sacr. suum praed') dicunt  praesentant quod praed' Eliza|bethaObiit seis. unde acci|dit rel. c. Haeres in|de. accidit Dom. c. obiit inde seisita unde accidit Domino rele|vium (videlicet v d.) quodque (Fillus ipsius Elizabethae suit ejus haeres inde  quod praed' (Filius) postea alienavit praemiss. praed' cum pertin. Johanni Austen  haered. suis unde etiam accidit Domino relevium (vide|licet v d.)
Ideo praeceptum est Ball. Manerii praed' quodPraecept. distr. sepa|ralia rele|via. Et fa|ciend. si|delitatem. Relevium super Alie|nation. distringat praedictum Johannem Austen, Ita quod sit hic ad prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius ad solvend. Domino separalia relevia

praedicta, Et ad faciend. ei fidelitatem pro praemissis.
Praesent. etiam quod Thomas Marten Anna uxor ejus qui (jure ipsius Annae) tenuerunt de Domino hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo prae|dicto) unum messuagium,  dimidium unius acr. terrae cum pertin. in Breede per annualem reddit. quatuor denariorum Et alia servicia (se|cundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) aliena|verunt praemissa praed. cum pertin. in Breede, Samueli Horne Clerico  haered. suis, unde ac|cidit Dom. relevium (videlicet iiij d.)
Ideo praeceptum est Ball. Manerii praedictiPraecept. distr. quod distring. praed' Sam. Horne, Ita quod sit hic, ad prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius ad solvend. Dom. relevium praed.  ad faciend. ei fidelitatem pro praemissis. Cmque Jacobus Par|kerPraecept. quod tene|ment. na|tivum, di|rut. existit. nuper tenuit de Dom. hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo) quoddam tenementum nativum (vi|delicet unum messuagium  certas terras cum pertin. in Breede (prope parcum ibidem) per annualem reddit. duorum denariorum  alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Ma|nerii) Modo juratores praed. (super sacr. su|umEt quis ten. toftum  terras pet. diem ad inquir. praed.) Dicunt  praesentant quod messuagi|um praed. dirutum existit  quis modo tenet tof|tum inde  terras praed. Iuratores praed. penitus ignorant, Et petunt diem ad inquirend. inde us|que in prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius hic te|nend.  eis conceditur.
Et modo hic ad hanc Cur. prima proclamatioPrim. Proc. facta ad clam. te|nement. praed. sec. etiam ad prox. cur. Obiit seif. facta suit quod si aliquis legitime clamare potuit tenementum praed. cum pertin. quod veniret  audiretur. Et nullus venit, Ideo siat super inde secund. proclamatio ad praed. prox. Cur.
Praesentant etiam quod Johannes Cogger qui de Dom. hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed.) tenuit quoddam tenementum nativum (nuper

Johannis Tompson) cum pertin. in Breede perEt quis haeres ig|norant. Pet. diem ad inquir. annualem reddit. duorum denariorum  alia ser|vicia (secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) obiit de tenemento praed. cum pertin. seisit. sed quis est ejus haeres inde Iuratores praed. penitus ignorant Et petunt diem ad inquirend. inde usque in prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend.  eis conceditur.
Et modo hic ad hanc Cur. prima proclamatioPrima pro|clamatio ad clam. tenement. illud, c. Petunt ul|teriorem diem ad inquirend. quis est haeres, c. Concedit. Ad ulti|mam Cur. Bar. Jur. impanell. petierunt, c. quo|modo, c. tenuit, c. Ven.  protulit in Cur. quod|dam scrip|tum sub manum  sigill. Dom. Manerii. Per quod satis liquet facta fuit quod si aliquis legitime clamare poterit tenementum praed. cum pertin. quod veniret  audiretur  nullus veni, ideo fiat superinde secunda proclamatio ad praed. prox. Cur.
Et ulterius Iuratores praed. petunt ulteriorem diem usque in praed. prox. Cur. ad inquirend.  praesentand. quis est haeres Josephi Hunt Defuncti duarum peciarum terrae (Iacen. ad orientalem partem messuagii, in quo Johannes Hunt pater ipsius Josephi nuper habitabat, cum pertin. (per praed. Josephum nuper tent.) Nec non quarum|dam terrarum (vocat. Hamster Marst) contin. per aestimationem sex acr. cum pertin. nuper etiam per praed. Josephum tent.  eis conceditur.
Cmque ad ultimam Cur. Baronis hujus Man. hic tent. die Lunae sexto decimo die Octobris Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc vicesimo tertio Iuratores ad Cur. illam inpanellati petierunt ul|teriorem diem usque in hanc Cur. ad inquirend.  praesentand. quomodo Will. Ivy (Filius  haeres Johannis Ivy defuncti) tunc tenuit de Dom. hujus Manerii quoddam messuagium (vocat. le Hundred house) Et dimidium unius acr. terrae cum pertin.  eis adtunc concedebatur modo hic ad hanc Cur. venit praed. Will. (in propria persona sua)  protulit hic in Cur. quoddam scriptum manu  sigillo Henrici En|glish Arm. (nuper Domini hujus Manerii) signat. per quod satis liquet Curiae hic quod praed. Hen|ricus

dimisit cuidam Willielmo Butler praemissaCur. c. quod di|mis. c. est pro 90. annorum legitime devenit. per volunt. legavit term. suum adhuc ventur. Sup. tert. Procl. c. ad cla|mand. c. Ven.  clam. pre|script. di|mis. per Dom. Man. concess. praed. cum pertin. pro termino nonaginta anno|rum extunc prox' sequen. (unde maxima pars adtunc ventur. existit) Modo etiam apparet Cur. hic quod terminus ipsius Willielmi Butler de  in praemissis praed. cum pertin. postea eidem Johanni Jvy legitime devenit quodque praedictus Johannes postea per ultimam voluntatem suam in Scriptis legavit tantum termini praedicti de  in praemissis praedictis ad tunc ventur. quantum esset durante vita ipsius Willielmi  resid. ter|mini inde post mortem ipsius Willielmi ventur. Johanni Ivy (Filio ipsius Willielmi.)
Ad hanc Cur' super tertiam Proclamationem in ea parte factam, Quod si aliquis legitime clamare poterit quoddam tenementum (vocat. Hunts) cum pertin' in Breede per Johannem Ivy defunct' (tempore mortis suae) tent' quod veniret  audi|retur venit hic in Cur' Willielm. Ivy (Filius Jo|hannis Ivy) in propria pers. sua  protulit hic in Cur' quoddam Scriptum dimissionis tenementi praedicti cum pertin' per Thomam Lord Cleri|cum,  Willielmum English Generosum (nuper Dominos hujus Manerii) cuidam Willielmo Gram fact' pro termino diversorum annorum ad tunc ventur'  ulterius constat Curiae hic Quod terminus ipsius Williel. Gram, de  in tene|mento praedicto cum pertin' postea ad praedictum Johannem legitime devenit,  quod praedictus Johannes postea per ult' voluntat' suam in scriptis legavit Annae Uxori ejus tantum residui termini praedicti quantum esset in vita ipsius Annae  residuum termini praedicti dicto Willielmo (Fi|lio suo.)
Ad hanc Cur' venit Richardus Cox in propriaProtulit in Cur' In|dentur. c. persona sua  protulit hic in cur' quandam In|denturam sub manu  sigillo Jacobi Payton, ge|ren' dat' decimo die Julii, Anno Dom' millessi|mo

sexcentesimo quinquagesimo sexto RecitandoRecitan|do, c. quod Willielmus Steede miles, Thomas Culpep|per Arm'  Johannes Culpepper Arm' (nuper Dom' Manerii praedicti per Indenturam suam ge|ren'Quod Dom. hu|jus Maner. dimis. c. dat' primo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Domini Jacobi nuper Regis Angliae sextodecimo dimi|sisset Richardo Fuller executoribus  assignat' suis pro termino Mille annorum  Festo annuncia|tionis beatae Mariae Virginis, ult' praeterit' ante dat' Indenturae praedictae computan' (absque Im|petitione alicujus vasti) pro  sub annuali reddit. duorum solidorum proinde reservat' ad Festa Sancti Michaelis Arch'  annunciatio|nis beatae Mariae Virginis (per aequales portiones solvend') unum Cotagium  parcel' terrae continen' per aestimationem tria quarteria unius ar' ter|rae (majus sive minus) cum pertin' in Breede jacen' inter W.  S. ibidem (existen' parcel' Manerii praedicti  aliquando concess. per copiam rotulorum cur' cuidam B. postea Ric. Hunt  postea Thomae Jenner defunct'  haered' suis, qui quidem Thomas Jenner sursum reddidit eademSursum reddit. ad usum Dom' Ric. Fuller,  haered' suorum ac etiam recitando quod praedictus Ric. Fuller per Indenturam geren' dat' vicesimo octavo diePer al. In|dent. Dimissit Martii, Anno regni Domini nostri Caroli primi nuper Regis Angliae quarto decimo dimisisset Ja|cobo Payton executoribus administ'  assign' suis pro termino noningentor'  octoginta annorum  vicesimo quinto die Martii tunc ult' praeterit' ante dat' indenturae praed. computan' praed. messuagium sive cotagium (una cum pomario, gardino, clausulo,  pecia terrae ad tunc inde spectan. continen. per aestimationem quarterium unius acre (majus sive minus parcel. praemissorum) per Indenturam praedictam sub manu  sigillo ipsius Jacobi Pay|ton testan. quod praedict. Jacobus Payton (inin consid. Maritagii. consideratione Maritagii, inter ipsum  quan|dam

Elizabetham Clerke ad tunc solemnizand.) assignasset cuidam Ric. Barnet praemissa praedicta cum pertin. una cum toto residuo dicti termini mille annorum in eisdem ad tunc ventur' sub fidu|ciaUsus Mari|tagii. quod de  post Maritagium praed. solemniz. Tunc ad beneficium dictorum Jacobi Payton Elizabethae durant' vitis suis naturalibus  vi|ta diutius eorum viventis,  post decess. dicto|rum Jacobi Elizabethae  diutius eorum vi|ventis tunc ad beneficium exit. corporis Dict' Ja|cobi super corpus dict' Elizab. legitime procrean.  pro defectu talis exit. tunc ad beneficium exe|cutorum, administratorum  assignatorum dictae Elizabethae (  ad  pro nullo alio usu, in|tentione,  proposito quibuscunque,) prout per In|denturam praedictam apparet. Et inde Ric. Cox ulter' dicit quod Maritagium praedictum postea so|lemnizat. fuit praedictusque Jac. Payton postea obiit  praedicta Elizabetha ipsum super vixit  postea obiit (sine exitu super corpus suum perObiit sine exit in|testat. praedict' Jacobum procreat') intestat.  ulterius idem Richardus protulit hic in Cur' quandam In|denturam manu  sigillo Richardi Edwards (Administratoris bonorum  catallorum quae fue|runt praefatae Elizabethae (tempore mortis suae) signat. geren. dat. sexto die Martii, Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc vicesimo, per quam satis liquet Cur' hic quod praedictus Richardus per Indentu|ram illam assignavit eidem Richardo Cox exe|cutoribus administratoribus  assign. suis praemissa praedicta cum pertin.  totum residuum termini praedicti de  in eisdem ad tunc ventur'
Ad hanc Cur' secunda Proclamatio facta fuitSecunda Procl. fact. ad cla|mand. se|paral. te|nementa. quod si aliquis legitime clamare potuit separalia tenem. hic postea mentionat' videlicet. Quoddam te|nementum nativum (videlicet unum cotagium  unam peciam terrae cum pertin. in Breede (prope Parochiam de Udimer)  ad terras mo|do

vel nuper Danielis White Arm. adjungen. per Nicolaum Summons nuper tent.
Quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet u|num mesuagium  dimidium unius acr' terrae cum pertin. in Breede (ad vel prope quendam locum vocat. Stonelepe) per Johannem Jervas defunct. nuper tent.
Quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet u|num cotagium  unam peciam terrae, cum per|tin. in Udimer (ad quendam locum ibidem vocat. Cotham Greene) per Johannem nuper tent.
Et quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet unum Toftum cum pertin. nuper per Richardum Lindfield tent.
Sive eorum aliquae vel aliquod, quod veniret,  Si aliqui venirent audiren|tur. audiretur,  nullus venit Ideo fiat super inde tertia Proclamatio ad prox' Cur. Baronis ejusdem Manerii hic tenend.



The manner of making up of Estreates.
The Estreates of the Fines, Forfeitures and Amerceaments, at the several Courts-Leet, holden for the said Hundred on the several days, and in the several years herein after men|tioned.
That is to say,


Monday 12 Octob. 1668. XX. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.
Iohn B. (of the Borough of Combwell) for that he did not appear at this Court, to enquire for our Sovereign Lord the King, of those things which to the said Court do appertain, (though summoned so to do)12 d.
T. H. (of the Borough of C.) for the like12 d.
N. F. (of the same Borough) for the like12 d.
(c. as many as be)
In allc.


Monday 18 Octob. c. prout
N. F. for that he did not amend his six Rods of Ditch (in the Borough of C.) Adjoyning to the High-way between Struecrouch and Tiseherst within the time at the last Court limitted3 s.
(c. as before) In allc.



Thursday c. prout)
C. I. (Borsholder of the Borough of B.) for that he did not appear at this Court to doe those things, which to his said Office do appertain.5 s.
( c. prout) In allc.
Sum. total.c.
R. K. Arm. Senesc. ibidem.


To make up a Rentall.
A Rentall of the Mannor of Stone for one Year, ended at the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel, in the Year of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy six, as followeth. viz.


Katherine A. Widow.
For one Mess. and Lands in Cran. near upper Wilsley late of Richard A. (her Husband deceased)7 s.



Robert H. Gent.
For one Mess. c. in Cr. c. late of, c.3 s.
And for one Mess. c. late also, c10 d.
In all3 s. 10 d.
The Owners of one Mess. c.2 s.
(c. as many as be in such form)
In all39 s. 41 hens, 2 capons, and 2 cocks.

In case where several Mannors, then say at the top, A Rentall of the several Mannors, hereafter mentioned, for one year, c. and begin one first, and go through with it, then another, c.
In case where custom for Lord to have draught of Fish yearly, or such like, you must mention it in the Rentall, both when you come to the Tenant, and in Sum. total. And where several Mannors at the end of them se|verally you must say, In all, c. prout. and when they are all done at the end you must say,
R. K. Arm. Senescallus ibidem.
So these Rentals come to as followeth. viz.

Stone001101 q. 1 hen, c.
Sislingherstc.
Coptonc.
In all, c. (and here you must mention the custom for Fish.





Customs.

A Warrant against those who abuse an Officer of the Customs, in the due execution of his Office.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been made14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. appear unto me, That A. B. and C. D. Persons appointed by His Ma|jesty for managing the Cu|stoms, Offi|cers of the Customs, or their De|puties. have lately been forceably hin|dred, af|fronte a|bused, a|ten or woun|ded, to the hazard of their lives. in the due execution of Offices in the said place by E. F. G. H. armed with armed with Clubs or any manner of weapon, either on board any Ship or Vessel, or upon the land or water. And such as act in their aid and assistacce. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to re|quire you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said E. F. G. H. and them convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and them there deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Re|quiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive them into the said Gaol, and them there safely to keep till the next Quarter-Sessions, there to be dealt withall as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



Against carrying away Goods with|out paying Custom, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. 2 Witnesses. been made unto me, That A. B. Car|man, Por|ter, Water|man, or o|ther person. hath assisted in the taking taking up, landing, shipping off, or carrying away of of Goods goods, wares or merchandizes prohibited, or whereof the Custom, Subsidy, or other Duty are due and payable to the King at E. in the County aforesaid without without the presence of any of the Officers of His Maje|stie's Customs thereunto appointed, at hours or at hours and times not appointed by Law. Or goods passing by Certificates, Waste, Coquet, or otherwise, without the presence of, or notice given to one of His Majestie's Officers. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do apprehend the said A. B. and him bring before me, to answer the premisses, and farther to doe and receive as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



A Mittimus upon the precedent War|rant, for the first Offence.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at C. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. 2 Witnesses for the first Offence. Be commit|ted to Gaol, till he find Sureties for Good be|haviour. proved before me, That B. C. hath assisted in the, c. (as in the last War|rant.) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do convey the said B. C. to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and him there deli|ver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (to|gether with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill he shall find sufficient surety to be of Good be|haviour for so long time untill he be thereof discharged by the Lord Treasurer, Chan|cellour, Under-Treasurer, or Barons of the Exchequer. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



Upon the second like Offence.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. 2 Witnesses for the se|cond Of|fence. pay 5 li. proved before me, That C. D. hath assisted in the, c. [as in the Warrant last but one] And forasmuch as the said C. D. hath once before offended in the like kind: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you the said Constable and Borshol|ders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do convey the said C. D. to his Ma|jestie's Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep for the space of two months, (without Bail or Mainprise) or untill he shall pay the Sheriff of this County the summ of five pounds, (for the use of His Majesty) or untill he shall by the Lord Trea|surer, Chancellour, or Under-Treasurer, or Court of Exchequer, be thence discharged. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal, c.




Deer.

A Warrant for stealing Deer.
To the Constables, c. of T. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas information hath been given to me that A. B. of H. within your said Parish of T. hath lately with|in the space of six months last past coursed, killed, or taken forth of a Park situate in this County certain Deer contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided; These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straightly to charge and command you, and every of you, that immediately upon sight hereof you bring before me or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for this County, the Body of the said A. B. to an|swer the aforesaid premisses, and be procee|ded against according to Law. And hereof fail not at your perils, c.



A Warrant to levy 20 li. for stealing Deer.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Iustice. By Confessi|on, or one Witness, within six months. proved before me, That A. B. of C. hath unlawfully un|lawfully coursed, killed, hun|ted, or ta|ken away any Red or Fallow Deer Deer in in a|ny Forrest, Chase, Purlieu, Paddock, Wood, Park, or other Ground where Deer are or have been usually kept. Or shall be aiding or assisting therein. of E. F. against the form of the Statute in that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by way of Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. the summ of 20 li. by him forfeited for the Offence afore|said; the one moiety thereof to the use of C. D. (who informeth of the said Offence) and the other moiety to the use of the said E. F. Owner of the Deer aforesaid: And in case of want of sufficient Distress, that you certify me thereof forthwith. Given under my hand and seal this second day of May, Anno Dom. 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Se|cundi, c. 31.



A Mittimus to the House of Correc|tion for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent. ss. WHereas by my Warrant you13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Iustice, 1 or more Witnesses, 6 months hard La|bour, or 12 months Imprison|ment and Sureties for Good beha|viour for a year then following. the said Constable and Bors|holders were lately required to levy by way of Distress of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of C. the summ of twenty pounds by him forfeited for an Offence by him lately committed against the form of the Statute made in the thirteenth year of His now Majestie's Reign, (intituled, An Act to prevent the unlawfull coursing, hunting, or killing of Deer;) And you the said Consta|ble have returned unto me thereupon, that the said A. B. hath not sufficient Distress to be ta|ken for the moneys aforesaid: These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and de|liver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there detain and put him to hard labour for six months. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



Another Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. WHereas by my Warrant you the13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Iustice. said Constable and Borsholders were lately required to levy by way of Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of, c. the summ of twenty pounds, by him forfeited for an Offence by him lately commit|ted against the form of the Statute made in the thirteenth year of His now Majestie's Reign, (intituled, An Act to prevent the unlawfull cour|sing, hunting, or killing of Deer;) And you the said Constable have returned unto me thereup|on, that the said A. B. hath not sufficient Distress to be taken for the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and deliver him to the afore|said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keep|er, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep for the space of one whole year, (without Bail or Mainprise) and farther, untill he hath given sufficient Security for his Good behaviour for one whole year next ensu|ing after his inlargement. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



A Warrant for a Buck.
To the Keeper, c.
UPon sight hereof you are to kill and deliver to I. B. Esq one fat Buck of this Season, for which this shall be your War|rant.
A. B.



Drunkenness.

A Warrant for Drunkenness, the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to the Church|wardens of the Parish of, c. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath this present4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7. 1 Iustice. View. Confession. 1 Witness within six months. Upon Con|viction pay 5 s. to the Poor. day been duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. was on the fifth of May last drunk in the Parish (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Maje|stie's

name) to command you, that you the faid Constable or Church-wardens do require the said A. B. to pay (for the said Offence) to the hands of you the said Church-wardens (to be by you accounted for to the use of the Poor of the same Parish) five shillings of lawfull mo|ney of England within one week now next en|suing, and if the said A. B. shall refuse or ne|glect to pay the same as aforesaid, that then you the said Constable or Church-wardens do levy (to the use aforesaid) the said 5 s. of the Goods of the said A. B. by Distress and Sale of the same (rendring unto him the overplus of the moneys remaining of the said Sale,) and if the said A. B. be not able to pay the said summ of 5 s. that then you the said Constable do set him in the Stocks, there to remain by the space of six hours. Hereof fail not at your perils. Gi|ven under my hand and seal at, c.

Convicted upon my view.
Convicted by his Confession before me.



The second Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been this4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7. 1 Iustice. View. Confession. present day duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. was upon the fifth of May last drunk in the Parish (con|trary to the form of the Statute in that case

made and provided) And forasmuch as the1 Witness within six months. said A. B. hath been once before lawfully con|victed of the said offence of Drunkenness: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bors|holders, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. to come before me, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County, to be bound with two Sureties to His said Majesty in one Recognizance or Obliga|tion of ten pound, with condition to be from thenceforth of good behaviour (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) which if he shall refuse to doe, that then you do him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and deliver him there to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Pre|cept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep untill he shall be so bound with two Sureties as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.

Convicted upon my view.
Convicted by his own Confession before me.




Excise.
Note NOne shall meddle with any Office relating to the Excise till they have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before 2 Iustices of the Peace of the County where such Office is, or one Ba|ron of the Exchequer, and the Oath men|tionedVide Title Oaths. in 12 Car. 2. cap. 23.


A Certificate upon taking the Oath about Excise.
Kent ss. WE whose names are hereunto12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2 Iustices. subscribed (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid) do certify, That A. B. of C. in the said Coun|ty hath before us (this present day) taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath mentioned in the Statute made in the twelfth year of His now Majestie's Reign, (intituled, A Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquours, for the increase of His Majestie's Revenue during His life.) Gi|ven under our hands and seals the 2. day of May in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sove|reign Lord King Charles the Second.
None shall meddle with any Office relating to the Excise till they have taken the Oaths of Alle|giance and Supremacy before two Iustices of the Peace of the County where such Office is, or one Baron of the Exchequer. And the Oath of an Excise man. Vide Title Oaths.
This Oath is by the Justices to be certified to the next Quarter-Sessions, there to be Recorded.



A Warrant to summon those who refuse to pay the Excise.
To the Constable, c.
Kanc. ss. WHereas Complaint hath been made unto us this present day by A. B. of C. sworn Officer to the Com|missioners of Excise of Ale and Beer of the said County, That E. F. of G. in the said Coun|ty, Victualler, hath Brewed and put to sale cer|tain Barrels of strong Beer since the second day of May last past, without paying the duty of Excise in compounding with the Commissio|ners for this division contrary to an Act of Par|liament in that behalf made: These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said E. F. to be and appear before us at T. in the County aforesaid upon the tenth day of Iune, at nine of the Clock in the forenoon of the same day to shew cause why the said E. F. should not pay the duty of Excise as afore|said. Hereos fail not, c. Given under, c.



A Warrant for Distress on Alehouse|keepers, for not paying Excise.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2 Iustices. Innkeeper, Alehouse|keeper, Vic|tualler, and Retailer of Beer, Ale, Cyder, Per|ry, Methe|glin, Strong|water, brewing, making, or retailing the same. Every month make par|ticular En|tries there|of at the Office of Excise within their  . made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the said County of K. Alehousekeeper hath not paid or cleared off his Duty of Excise unto such person as by the Statute in that be|half made is appointed, according to the En|try of the said A. B. in that behalf made, as by the Statute aforesaid is directed; and upon ex|amination of the Complaint aforesaid we do find the same to be true: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the summ of, c. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. being the double value of the Duty so not paid or cleared off, and by him forfeited, according to the form of the said Statute, and to sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days;) and that you pay the moneys so levied to such person or persons as by the said Statute is directed, rendring to the said A. B. the overplus, (if any be;) And for want of sufficient Distress, that you do forth|with certify us thereof, to the end we may far|ther proceed touching the same as by Law is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Gi|ven under our hands and seals the, c.



A Mittimus where not sufficient to pay Excise.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas by Warrant under our12 Car. 2. cap. 24. Confirmed cap. 24. 2 Iustices. hands you the said Consta|ble and Borsholders were required to levy of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of C. in the said County, c. by him forfeited, (according to the form of the Statute, intituled, A Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquours, for the increase of his Majestie's Re|venue during His life,) and you the said Con|stable have this day certified us, that the said A. B. hath not sufficient Distress whereby the said, c. can be levied: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there imprison, till satisfaction be made of the aforesaid, c. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



To levy the Forfeiture for not ma|king a due Entry.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2 Iustices. Common Brewer for|feits 10 li. Innkeeper forfeits 5 li. Alehouse|keeper, Vic|tualler, Retailer of made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the said County of D, c. hath not made such due and particular Entry of Beer, Ale, Cyder, Perry, Me|theglin, or Strongwa|ter, forfeits 20 s. 15 Car. 2. 11, 12. as by the said Statute is required; and upon examination of the Complaint aforesaid we do find the same to be true: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the summ of, c. up|on the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. (being the double value of the Duty so not paid or cleared off, and by him forfeited, ac|cording to the form of the Statute aforesaid) and do sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days) and that you pay the moneys so levied to such person or persons as by the said Statute is directed, (rendring to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, if any be;) And for want of suf|ficient Distress, that you do forthwith certify us thereof, to the end we may farther proceed touching the same as by Law is oppointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Warrant to levy the double value of the Excise on a Brewer for not paying according to Entry made.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been12 Car. 2. cap. 23. cap. 24. 2 Iustices. made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the County aforesaid, common Brewer, hath not paid nor cleared off his Du|ty of Excise unto such person as by the Statute in that behalf made is appointed, according to the Entry of the said A. B. in that behalf made, as by the Statute aforesaid is directed; Com|mon Brew|ers forfeit (for omit|ting such Entries) for every default 10 li. Inn|keeper 5 li. Alehouse|keeper, Vic|tualler, or Retailer of Beer, Ale, Cyder, Per|ry, Metheg|lin, strong|water, brewing, making, or retailing the same forfeit for every de|fault 20 s. Brewer for not paying off within a week after En|try pay double the Duty. Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, Victular, or other Retailer not paying off within a month after Entry pay double the Duty. and upon examination of the Complaint aforesaid we find the same to be true: These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to will and re|quire you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the summ of, c. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. (be|ing the double value of the Duty so not paid or cleared off, and by him forfeited, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid) and to sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days) and that you pay the moneys so levied to such person or persons as by the said Statute is directed, ren|dring to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, (if any be;) And for want of sufficient Distress, that you do forthwith certify us thereof, to the

end that we may proceed touching the same as by Law is appointed. Hereof fail not, c.


Loss of Allowance for making false Entries.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as by the Statute in12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2 Iustices. Allowance 3 in 23 Barrels of Beer, and 2 in 22 Bar|rels of Ale. that behalf made it is enacted, That all common Brewers and makers of Beer or Ale, (not selling the same by retail) for and in consideration of waste by fillings and breakage of their Beer and Ale, shall have and be allowed out of the returns made by the Ga|gers, upon every three and twenty Barrels of Beer (whether strong or small) returned by the said Gagers, three Barrels; and upon every two and twenty Barrels of Ale, (whether strong or small) returned by the Gagers, two Barrels; And forasmuch as A. B. of C. in the said Coun|ty, common Brewer, hath this present day been duly convicted before us, that he hath wittingly and willingly made a faulse Entry of [as in Mar|gent] Ale, Beer, c. by him lately brewed, contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid: We do there|fore adjudge, that the said A. B. shall forfeit and lose (for his Offence aforesaid,) over and besides the Penalties in the said Act mentio|ned, the said Allowance so to be made, for six months now next ensuing. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



Upon Complaint of false Entry to appear.
To A. B. of C. in the said County.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2 Iustices. This upon complaint of false En|tries of Li|quours. been made unto us, That you A. B. of C. c. [as above] contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to re|quire you to appear before us at the house of D. in E. in the County aforesaid upon the 22. day of May, to answer the premisses. Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under our hands the 18. day of May, c.


Not suffering to gage the Vessels.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2 Iustices. been made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Maje|stie's Justices of the Peace of the said Coun|ty) That A. B. of C. in the County aforesaid Brew|er, Inn|keeper, Vic|tualler, or Retailer of Beer, Di|steller of Strongwa|ter, or Re|tailer of hath refused to permit C. D. (a Gager appointed according to the Statute aforesaid) to enter into his c. to gage or take account

of his Beer, Ale, Cyder, Perry, Me|theglin, or Strongwa|ter, over and above the double value pay 5 s. [Margent] And having been by the said Gager thereupon forbidden to sell, carry out or deliver to any of his Custo|mers any Ale, c. [as in the Margent] yet notwithstanding the said A. B. (after such warning given) hath sold and retailed, c. [as in the Margent] not having paid or cleared the Duty of Excise; And upon ex|amination of the said Complaint we do find the same to be true: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. five pounds for his Offence aforesaid, and sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days) and that you do pay the moneys so levied to such person or per|sons as by the said Statute is directed, (ren|dring to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, if any be;) And for want of sufficient Di|stress that you do forthwith certify us there|of, to the end we may farther proceed tou|ching the same as by Law is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given un|der our hands and seals the, c.



A Warrant against one that procu|reth a false Return to be made in the Office of Excise.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro|ved15 Car. 2. cap. 11. 2 Iustices. before us, That A. B. of, c. Brewer did bribe or corrupt, or give any money, fee, or other re|ward what|soever, to any Gager or other Of|ficer to make a false Return to make false return or report unto the Office of Excise into the Office of Excise of of any Beer, Ale, or other Liquours exciseable within his Charge, Division, or Walk; or to forbear or omit the doing or executing of his place or imployment. exciseable within his Division in the said County, against the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, (intituled, An additional Act for the ordering and collecting the Duty of Excise, and preventing the Abuses therein) whereby he hath forfeited ten pounds for his said Offence: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, to le|vy by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. the aforesaid ten pounds, rendring to him the overplus thereof. Fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at C. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas it was duly proved15 Car. 2. cap. 11. 2 Iustices. before us, That A. B. of, c. Brewer, did bribe C. D. Gager, to make a false Return into the Office of Excise of Beer, c. exciseable within his Division in the County against the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, (intituled, An addi|tional Act for the ordering and collecting the Duty of Excise, and preventing the Abuses there|in) whereby he forfeited ten pounds for his said Offence; and we did therefore by War|rant under our hands and seals charge and command you to levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A B. the aforesaid ten pounds; and you the said Constable have re|turned to us, that for want of such Distress you could not levy the same: These are there|fore (in his Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Borshol|ders, and every of you, to attach the said A. B. and him convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him

there safely keep by the space of three months, (without Bail or Mainprise.) Here|of fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
The like as in the two former Warrants (mutatis mutandis) against any sworn Gager or other Officer that shall take and receive any bribe, money, fee, gift, or other reward of any Brewer or other person, for any cause or matter relating to the Excise.


A Warrant (against several per|sons) to distrain for the Duties of Excise, c.
To Thomas Osborn and John Tiffin, Gent. and to either of them, and such other person or per|sons as they or either of them shall take to their or either of their assistance in execution hereof.
K. ss. WHereas Complaints were lately made unto us S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) by the Officers of Excise, That the several persons hereunder na|med had committed the several and respective Offences herein after mentioned, and severally added to their several names, against the form of several Statutes made for payment to His Ma|jesty of the Duties of Excise; And forasmuch as upon hearing of the said Complaints (this present day) it was duly proved before us,

that the said Complaints were true, and we have therefore (according to the form of the Statutes aforesaid) adjudged, that the said se|veral and respective persons shall, for his, her, and their several and respective Offences, for|feit and pay the several summs of money here|under added to their several and respective names, that is to say, Thomas Daniel of Hors|monden in the said County, Vintner, (a Retailer of Beer,) for forfeiture for neglect of entring (by the space of twelve months last past) of Beer by him retailed (within the said time,) twenty and four pounds, and for double the Duty of Excise for twenty and five Barrels, three Firkins and five Gallons of Beer of above six shillings the Barrel, and for three Barrels and three Firkins of Beer of six shillings permay set down for charges of levying. Barrel or under, (he not having paid the sin|gle Duty, or any of the same) eight pounds, fourteen shillings, and a half penny;
In all32 14 00 ob.
Iames Lewes of Horsmonden aforesaid Cord|winder, for forfeiture for neglect to appear before us this day, to give evidence for disco|veryAnd so all other Offen|ces (muta|tis mutan|dis.) The date hereof, and locus in quo, must be up|on the day and at the place of con|demnation. of breaches of the Laws of Excise, not|withstanding that he was summoned so to doe, (according to the Statute in that behalf made) forty shillings; Edward Budgen, late of Brench|ley, in the said County, Labourer, for the like, 40 s. and for forfeiture, for that he refusing to permit the Gager to gage or take account of Beer by him brewed, and being thereupon for|bidden by the said Gager to sell any of the Beer aforesaid, he (after such warning given) did sell the same, (not having paid or cleared the Duty of Excise) five pounds; and for costs and charges of the Officer and others imployed

in the service (touching the premisses) five shillings,
In all09 05 00
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to authorise and command you, and every of you, to levy the aforesaid several and respective summs of money upon the Goods and Chattels of the said several and respective Offenders, and to make sale of the said Goods and Chattels, if they shall not be redeemed within 14 days, (rendring to the parties the overplus, if any be;) And for want of sufficient Distress, to certify us, or one of us, of the same, to the end that such farther proceedings may be made therein as (by the Laws and Statutes afore|said) are required. And you are hereby far|ther commanded, to dispose of all such moneys as you shall (by virtue hereof) levy or receive in such manner as (by the Laws and Statutes aforesaid) is appointed. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
 All the before-mentioned Warrants upon the Statute of Excise 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. will also serve (mutatis mutandis) upon the other Statute touching Excise, made the same Parliament, intituled, An Act for taking away of the Court of Wards and Liveries.




Felony.

A Warrant to apprehend a Felon.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received In|formation1 Iustice. and Charge against A. B. of, c. for felonious taking of, c. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do attach the said A. B. of, c. and him bring before me, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be Examined touching the premisses, and to be farther dealt withall according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


A Mittimus of a Felon.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and H. the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, or his Deputy, and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name)2 Justices 1 Quorum. to command you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do safely

convey to His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, A. B. of, c. and him there safely to deliver to the Keeper of the said Gaol, or his sufficient Deputy, (according to the tenour of the Pre|cept in that behalf herewithall declared unto you.) Delivering also to the said Keeper the Precept aforesaid. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


Another.
To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. I Send you herewithall the Body of A. B. of, c. brought before me this present day, and charged with the Felo|nious taking, c. commanding you (in His Majestie's name) to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, till he shall be from thence delivered by due Order of Law. Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



A Warrant to search for a Felon on suspicion.
To the Constable and Borsholders of F.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto me by A. B. of C. that of late he hath had feloniously taken from him certain Goods, six Cows, c. (as the Case is) and that he hath in suspicion di|vers evil disposed persons within your Parish of F. These are to require you that imme|diately upon sight hereof, you make diligent search in all and every such suspected houses, and places within your Parish, as you and the said A. B. shall think convenient. And if up|on your search you find any of the said Goods in the hands of any person, or shall have any other just cause of suspicion of any person, that then you bring such suspected person be|fore me, or some other of His Majestie's Justi|ces of the Peace for the County of Kent, to answer such matter as shall be alledged against them. Hereof fail not, c.



A Warrant for apprehending of one that hath dangerously hurt another.
To the Constable and Borsholders, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I am credibly in|formed, That A. B. of your Town, Ioyner, hath now lately dangerously hurt one C. D. of your said Town, Bricklayer, by a blow which he hath given the said C. D. on the Head, and another on the Stomach, so as the said C. D. is in danger of Death thereby. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and command you, that im|mediately on sight hereof you, or one of you, do bring the said A. B. before me, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to find sufficient Sureties, as well for his appearance before the Justices at the next Gaol delivery to be holden for this County, then and there to answer unto the premisses, and doe and receive therefore what the Court shall enjoyn on him; As also, that he the said A. B. shall in the mean time keep the Peace towards our Sovereign Lord the King, and all His Liege people, but especially towards the said C. D. And hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at this, c.



A Liberate to deliver a Prisoner committed for Felony.
To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol in A. c. Greeting.
K. ss FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. c. Black|smith, hath before us found sufficient Mainprise to appear before the Justices of Gaol|delivery at the next general Gaol-delivery to be holden in the said County, there to answer to such things as shall be then on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord objected against him, and namely, to the feloniously taking of two Sheep, (for the suspicion whereof he was ta|ken and committed to your said Goal.) We command you on the behalf of our said Sove|reign Lord, that if the said A. B. do remain in your said Gaol for the said cause, and for none other, then you forbear to grieve or de|tain him any longer, but that you deliver him thence, and suffer him to go at large, and that upon the pain will fall thereon. Given un|der our hands and seals, c.



A Warrant to Bind persons to give in Evidence against a Felon.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and every of them.
K. ss. THese are to require you upon sight hereof to warn to be be|fore me, or some other of His Majestie's Ju|stices of the Peace of this County, within two days next following, A. B. C. D. E. F. c. to the end that they may be bound to make their personal appearance at the next general Gaol-delivery or Quarter-sessions to be holden for this County, then and there to testifie their knowledge concerning a Felony supposed to be done by R. H. now a Prisoner in the Castle of K. and that you do then go with them to the Justice with this Warrant. Hereof fail not, c.


Or thus:
To the Constable, c.
Kent ss. YOU are hereby required forth|with to warn the persons un|dernamed of your Parish to be before me at my dwelling house in D. c. upon Thursday next by eight of the Clock in the morning, to te|stifie their knowledge concerning certain felo|nious

acts supposed to be done by A. B. C. D. of, c. and that you your self be then there with this Warrant, to shew how you have executed it. Hereof fail not. Given under, c.


A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence against Principals and Accessary in case of Felony.
THE Condition of this Recognizance isSee Title Recogni|zance. such, That if the within bound A. B. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of K. and do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of Indict|ment against A. R. and I. R. for the felonious taking and stealing one Goose and two Hens from the aforesaid A. B. wherewith the said A. R. and I. R. are charged before the within named Justices, and against M. R. Wife of A. R. as Accessary to the Felony aforesaid, with which she is also charged before the Ju|stices aforesaid, and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth concerning the Felony aforesaid, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our So|vereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial of the said A. R. I. R. and M. R. or any of them for the same; That then, c.
T. G.



A Condition of a Recognizance where two Felonies are committed to give Evidence.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound I. W. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-deli|very to be holden for the within named County of K. and do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred one or more Bill or Bills of In|dictment against I. B. for the felonious taking and stealing of one Shirt and one pair of ustian Drawers from the aforesaid I. W. wherewith the aforesaid I. B. is charged before the within named Justices; for the felonious taking and stealing of six Napkins and one Table-cloath from Sir R. B. Baronet, with suspicion where|of the said I. B. is likewise charged before the Justices aforesaid; and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth against the said I. B. touching the several Felonies afore|said, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire thereof for our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trials of the said I. B. for the same; That then, c.



A Condition to give Evidence for Fe|lony, thus.
UPon Condition, That if you A. B. shall pursonally appear, and do then and there persue, and give such Evidence as you know against C. D. now prisoner in the Gaol of the Liberty aforesaid, for and concerning his felonious stealing of an holland Apron of the Goods of one E. F. and do not depart, c, then, c.


A Condition of a Recognizance to ap|pear upon Felony.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas at the last general Gaol-delivery holden for the within named County of K. it was ordered, that the within bound E. R. shall give very good Security in such summes as is within mentioned before the Justice within named, for his personal Appea|rance at the then next general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the County aforesaid, to answer a Felony and Robbery on the High-way, whereof he stands indicted in the said County, (as by the Record of the said Court reference thereunto being had may more fully appear) which Security he hath given, (as in the said Recognizance is mentioned:) If therefore the said E. R. do personally appear at the afore|said

next general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the said County, to answer the Felony and Robbery aforesaid, That then, c.


A Condition to appear upon suspicion of Felony.
UPon the Condition, That if the said A. B. shall personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of the Peace at the next general Sessions of the Peace and Gaol-delivery to be holden at A. and do then and there make answer unto all such matters which on the part and behalf of His said Majesty shall be objected against him, for and concerning the suspicion of his felonious stealing of a Horse [or of the Goods] of one C. D. and do not depart thence without Licence of the Court. Then your Recognizance to be void, or else to stand in force.


A Bond.
NOverint universi per praesentes, nos T. G. de C. in Com. K.  N. B. de C. in Com. praed. Yeoman, teneri  firmiter obligari W. P. de C. praed. Blacksmith, in quadragint. libris legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisd. W. P.  H. C. aut eorum alteri, vel eorum certo Attern. Executoribus vel Administratori|bus suis: ad quam quidem solutionem bene  fideliter faciend. obligavimus nos,  utrumque nostrum per se, pro toto  in solid. Haeredes,

Executores  Administ. nostros,  utriusque no|stri, firmiter per praesentes Sigillis nostris sigillat. Dat. c. Anno Dom. c. Annoque Regni, c.


A Condition to save one harmless who was bound for the appearance of a person suspected for Felony.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above named W. P. and H. C. at the special instance and request of the above bound T. G. and N. B. in and by one Re|cognizance bearing the date above written, ta|ken and acknowledged before S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the above named County of K.) do each of them the said W. P. and H. C. stand bound to His said Majesty in, c. of lawfull money of England, with Condition, that if the said T. G. do personally appear before His Ma|jestie's Justices of general Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-delivery to be holded for the said County, to answer unto His said Majesty, in and upon such matters as shall be then and there objected against him, touching the felo|nious taking and stealing of, c. (with suspi|cion whereof he standeth charged before one of the Justices aforesaid) and farther to doe and receive as by the said Court shall be en|joyned, and do not depart the said Court without licence of the same; That then the said Recognizance to be void, c. as by the same and the Condition thereof may more cer|tainly and at large appear: That if therefore the said T. G. do in all things perform the said

Condition of the said Recognizance, that then this Obligation shall be void, or else shall stand in full force and virtue.
If any man be Arrested for Felony, his Goods Ri. 3. c. 3. Coke. 8. 171. Stamf. 162. Br. forf. 58. shall not be seised until Attainder or Convic|tion, upon pain to forfeit the double value to the Party grieved; for the Party grieved may sell them bona fide for his maintenance in Prison before Conviction.
After Conviction the Town presently standsF. Cor. 3. 66. Stam. 193, 194. 3 Ed. 3. 3. Charged for the Felons Goods (if then in his possession,) and shall answer the Impair|ing of them, except they shew who detained them, and that they could not have possession of them.



Fire.

A Testimonial for Iustices of the Peace for Poor men that have had loss by Fire.
Kent ss. TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing or Te|stimonial shall come to be seen, heard, or read; A. B. C. D. and E. F. Esquires, three of the Justices of the Peace within the said Coun|ty of K. send greeting. Whereas it is both Godly, and consonant to Christian Charity, in matters doubtfull and ambiguous to certifie and

report the truth; We have thought it our duty, (at the earnest and lamentable Suit and Petition of our loving Neighbours the Bearers or Bringers hereof, G. H. I. K. c.) to pub|lish and declare unto your common knowledge, That on the twentieth of M. last past, between two and three of the clock in the morning, by casualty and great mischance by Fire, as well their several dwelling Houses, to the number of, c. and all other Edifices and Buildings to every of their said dwelling Houses belong|ing; and also all their Corn, and most of their several Goods and Houshold-stuff were consu|med, wasted, and burnt, to the great danger of the Bodies of them and their Families, and their exceeding great loss and impoverishment. And forasmuch as it is a Godly and Charitable deed, to further, help, and relieve such poor, needy, and miserable persons, (being of honest name, fame, and conversation) as they who have suffered this great loss; And for that the Bearers hereof in the behalf of themselves and their Neighbours, are inforced by reason of their Losses to seek for help and succour for their relief. And we knowing their Estate to be such as is premised, and moved with com|miseration of their sad Estate and Condition, Have therefore as much as in us lieth, given License unto them, and every of them, to make their repair from Parish Church to Pa|rish Church, and to every Parish Church and Chapel, Town, and Place within the County of K. to ask, receive, and take Charitable De|votion and Benevolence of all good and well disposed people towards the recovery of their said great Losses. And our request further is, That you, and every of you to whom they shall repair, do extend your lawfull favour

unto them, permitting them without your de|nial to execute the tenour of this our Licence. Desiring all Ecclesiastical Persons, to whom these distressed persons shall make their Address in this behalf, to declare the tenor hereof to their Parishioners in every of their Parish Churches and Chapels on the Sabbath days, or other Festival days, exorting them to ex|tend their Charity in this behalf; and those whom it concerns, to aid and assist them in the collection thereof. In Witness, c.


A Charitable Request made by certain Iustices of the Peace to the Inhabi|tants of a Division for Relief of F. S. who had been therein lately ruined by Fire.
K. ss. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, his Majestie's Ju|stices of the Peace of the County of K. and in|habiting in and neer the division of the said County, wherein the Parish of B. in the Coun|ty aforesaid is situate, having received cre|dible information that F. S. of the Parish afore|said Labourer, upon the second day of April last past (by a sudden Fire hapening in his said dwelling house in the said Parish) had his Flax (to the value of thirty and five pounds) suddenly burnt and consumed (to the utter undoing him, his wife and children) unless he be relieved by the Charity of well disposed people. We therefore taking the said Loss into consideration, and much commiserating

the same do, upon the humble Petition of the F. S. (so far forth as lawfully we may) ear|nestly recommend his said sad condition, to the charitable consideration and benevolence of all well disposed people inhabiting within the division aforesaid, desiring them to con|tribute (what God shall move their hearts unto) towards his help and relief, therein de|siring also the Ministers and Church-wardens of every the Parishes within the division afore|said to promote the said Charitable work. Given under our hands the, c. of May, 1681. c.



Forceable Entry.

A Warrant to return a Iury to inquire15 R. 2. cap. 2. of a Forceable Entry.
The Party grieved shall bear the Costs that the Iustice of Peace shall sustain in the execu|tion of the Statute of Forceable Entries. 8 H. 6. c. 9.
Kent ss. R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the County aforesaid) To the Sheriff of the said County Greeting. On the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King I command you, that you do cause to come before me at C. in the Parish of G. in the County aforesaid, upon Monday the tenth day of Iune next ensuing, four and twenty sufficient and indifferent men of the neighbourhood of L. in the said Coun|ty, whereof every one have lands and tene|ments of the yearly value of forty shillings by

the year at the least, (above reprises,) to en|quire upon their Oath for His said Majesty of a certain Entry by strong hand made into the mesuage of A. B. at L. aforesaid, against the form of the Statute in that behalf provided, (as it is said:) And that you do at the said day return twenty shillings issues upon everyThe second day 40 s. issues. The third 100 s. issues. Every day after dou|ble issues. of the Jurors by you in this behalf to be im|pannelled. Hereof fail not upon pain of twen|ty pounds to be by you forfeited to His said Majesty, and upon such other penalty as (by the Statute in that behalf provided) is decla|red, (if you shall be slack, and make not due execution hereof.) And have you there the names of the Jurors, and this Precept. Given under my hand and seal at, c. the second day of, c.


A Record of a Forceable Entry.
K. ss. EGO R. K. Armig. unus Iusticiario|rum Dom. Regis nunc ad pacem in Comitatu Kanc. praedicto conservandam assignato|rum, Certifico, quod secundo die Februarii, Anno Regni dicti Dom. Regis nunc tricesimo questus est mihi A. B. de C. in Comitatu Kanc. praedicto Yeoman, Quod E. F.  aliae personae ignotae perturbatores pacis dicti Dom. Regis nunc praedicto secundo die Februarii Anno supradicto in unum messuagium  unum Atrium cum pertin. ad|tunc,  adhunc, existens liberum tenementum W. I. Gent. ac in possessione praed. A. B. pro termino decem annorum adhuc venturorum, situa|tum in C. praedicta, in Com. praedicto pacifice  quiete intraver.  intrationem fecer. Et postea, viz. praedicto secundo die Februarii, Anno supra

dicto apud C. praedictam in Com. praedicto, prae|dictum A. B.  praedicto Messuagio,  Atrio cum pertin. vi,  Armis, c. illicite,  manu forti expuler. ejecer.  amover. Et praed. A. B. sic deinde expuls. ejectum,  amotum  Messua|gio,  Atrio, praedictis, cum pertin. ut praedici|tur vi  Armis, illicite  manu forti adtunc  ibidem extra tenuer.  detinuer. Ad grave damnum praedicti A. B. contra pacem dicti Dom. Regis nunc, c. ac contra formam Statuti in hu|jusmodi casu editi,  provisi. Et unde praedictus A. B. petiit  me remedium in hac parte rele|vari. Qu querela  petitione, praedict. per me auditis existen. Ego praefatus J. B. immediate personaliter accessi ad Messuagium  Atrium praedicta cum pertin. Ac in Messuagio praedicto ad|tunc  ibidem inventi praedictum E. F. praedic|tum Messuagium  Atrium cum pertinentiis,  praedicto A. B. vi,  armis illicite  manu forti, extra tenentem,  detinentem, contra for|mam Statuti in hujusmodi casu editi,  provisi, super quo, ego praefatus J. B. adtunc,  ibidem causavi praedictum E. F. capt.  arrestat.  misi ad Gaolam de M. in Com. Kanc. praed. ibid. remanere sub salva custodia donec inveniret co|ram me, sive aliquo alio Iusticiariorum dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praedict. sufficien|tem securitatem pro personali comparentia ipsius A. B. ad proximam generalem Quarterialem-Ses|sionem pacis dicti Dom. Regis in Com. praed. te|nent. ad respondendum transgressioni  contemp. praed. Ac quod interim se bene gereret in cujus rei testimonium ego praefatus J. B. praedictae Certifi|cationi manum  sigillum meum apposui, vicesi|mo die Maii, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,  Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, c. Trice|simo secundo Annoque Dom. 1680.



A Warrant to the Sheriff for Re|stitution.
Kent ss. R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the County aforesaid) To the Sheriff of the said County Greeting. Whereas by a certain Inquisition taken before me at A. in the County aforesaid the second day of Iune, c. upon the Oath of A. B. C. D. E. F. c. according to the form of the Statute in Case of Forceable Entry made and provided, it was found that G. H. c. and others [as in the In|quisition] as by the said Inquisition of Record doth more fully appear. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, (with the power of the County) if need re|quire, to go to the said Messuage, c. and other the premisses, and do cause the same with their appurtenances to be reseized, and the said C. D. to be restored in, and-to his full possession thereof, as he was before the same Entry, according to the form of the aforesaid Statute. And hereof fail not, c.



A Mittimus upon view of Forceable Detainour.
Kent ss. R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the County aforesaid) To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid Greeting. Whereas, upon Complaint unto me by A. B. of L. in the said County, I did this present day go to the dwelling house of the said A. in L. aforesaid, and there did find C. D. of, c. E. F. of, c. forceably, with strong hand and armed power holding the said house, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and against the form of the Statute in that behalf made and provided; I do therefore herewith|all send unto you the Bodies of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. convicted of the said forceable holding by my own View, Testimony and Re|cord, commanding you (in His Majestie's name) to receive them into the said Gaol, and them there safely to keep untill they have made fine and ransome to His said Majesty for their said trespasses, and shall be thence deli|vered by the order of the Law of this Land. Hereof fail not, c.




Foreign Wares.

A Warrant to search for, and seize Foreign Manufactures prohibi|ted, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. Forasmuch as I am informed, That14 Car. 2. 1 Iustice. great quantities of foreign Bone|lace, Cut-work, Imbrodery, Fringe, Band|strings, Buttons of Thread of Silk, and Needle-work made of Thread or Silk, have been lately brought into this Kingdom from parts beyond the Seas, (against the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to re|quire and authorize you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do enter and search for such Manufactures in the Shops be|ing open, Ware-houses and Dwelling-houses of such person or persons within the said Hundred as shall be suspected to have any such Imbrodery, foreign Bone-lace, Cut-work, foreign Band|strings, Buttons, or Needle-work, and to seize the same. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.




High-ways.

A Warrant to levy 5 li. on the In|habitants of a Parish for not chu|sing Surveyors of the High-ways.
To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Pa|rish of A. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as the Church-wardens,14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. Surveyors to be chosen yearly, the Monday or Tuesday in Easter|week. Constables, Borsholders and Inha|bitants of the said Parish did not chuse Sur|veyors of the High-ways aforesaid for this pre|sent year of our Lord, but made default of such choice, (against the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy, collect and gather the summ of five pounds by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said Church-wardens, Con|stables, Borsholders and Inhabitants, (ren|dring to the Parties so distrained the overplus, if any be;) And that you do imploy and bestow the moneys so levied, collected or ga|thered, in such manner as by the Statute afore|said is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



To distrain for High-way Tax.
To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Pa|rish of A. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com|plaint)14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. it appeareth unto us, That the several Persons hereunder named have not paid unto you the several summs hereunder specified, and severally added toNot paying within 20 days after demand forfeits dou|ble his As|sessment. their several names, assessed on them for the repairing and amending and enlarging of the publick and common High-ways in the said Parish, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy, collect and ga|ther, by Distress and Sale of the respective Goods of the said respective Persons, double so much money as was so as aforesaid respectively assessed on them, (rendring to the Parties so distrained the overplus, if any be;) And that you do imploy and bestow the moneys so le|vied, collected or gathered, in such manner as by the Statute aforesaid is directed and appoin|ted. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given un|der our hands and seals the, c.

A. B. of A. aforesaid 2 s.
C D. of A. aforesaid 3 s. c.




For not sending in Teams, to work in the High-ways.
To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com|plaint)14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. Forfeit 10 s. per diem for a Team, La|bourers 18 d. Vide 22 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 next Iu|stices. Proof by 1 Witness. it appeareth unto us, That the several Persons hereunder named were by you charged to send each of them a Team to work in the High-ways in the Parish afore|said, (according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made and provided;) and yet nevertheless they neglected so to doe by the space of such number of days as are hereunder mentioned, and severally added to their seve|ral names: These are therefore (in His Maje|stie's name) to will and require you, and eve|ry of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy, collect and gather, by Distress and Sale of the respective Goods of the said respective Persons, the respective summs of money here|under added to their respective names, (being moneys by them respectively forfeited for their said neglects, according to the Statute afore|said)To be im|ployed to|wards mending the High|ways. rendring to the Parties so distrained the overplus, (if any be;) And that you do em|ploy and bestow the moneys so levied, collec|ted or gathered, in such manner as by the Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.

A. B. of one day 10 s.
C. D. of two days 20 s. c.




Against those that refuse or neglect to work in the High-ways.
To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com|plaint)14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 next Iu|stices. Every La|bourer for|feits 1 s. 6 d. per diem that he neglects to work. Vide 22 Car. 2. cap. 12. it appeareth unto us, That the several Persons hereunder named were by you charged to come to labour in the High-ways in the Parish aforesaid, (accor|ding to the form of the Statute in that case lately made and provided;) and yet neverthe|less they neglected so to doe by the space of such number of days as are hereunder men|tioned, and severally added to their several names: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy, collect and gather, by Distress and Sale of the respective Goods of the said respective Persons, the respective summs of money hereunder ad|ded to their respective names, (being moneys by them respectively forfeited for their said ne|glect, according to the Statute aforesaid) ren|dring to the Parties so distrained the overplus, (if any be;) And that you do employ and bestow the moneys so levied, collected or ga|thered, in such manner as by the Statute afore|said is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not, c.

A. B. of A. aforesaid one day 1 s. 6 d.
C. D. of A. aforesaid two days, c. 3 s. c.




To impower the Surveyors to dig Gra|vel, c. upon Wasts or Commons out of the Parish.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (by the informa|tion14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. of the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid) it appeareth unto us, that there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cinders and Stones, within the said Parish to repair their common and publick High-ways: We do therefore (according to the form of the Statut~e in that case lately made and provided) hereby allow and approve, that the said Sur|veyors, or either of them, and such Person and Persons as they or either of them shall ap|point, shall and may dig, take and carry away Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cinders or Stones, out of any Waste or Common of any Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, neighbouring to the Parish aforesaid, or upon the Sea-coast, without pay|ing any thing for the same, (for the repai|ring and amending of the High-ways afore|said) so as they fill up the place within one month next after their digging aforesaid, (if required by the owner of the Soil.) Given under our hands and seals the, c.



To appoint what shall be paid by the Sur|veyors for digging Gravel, c. in any man's Ground.
Kent ss. WHereas (by the information14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. of the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid) it appeareth unto us, that there being not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Stones, Cinders and Sand, or other materials, for to amend and repair the aforesaid High-ways, within the common or waste grounds of the said Parish, they did (according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made and provided) enter into the ground of B. C. in the Parish aforesaid, near adjoyning to the High-ways to be repaired, and did dig, take and carry away materials which they judged necessary for the said Reparations; and for that difference did arise between the said Sur|veyors and the said B. C. about the Damages by the said B. C. suffered by the digging and carriage thereof: We do therefore (accor|ding to the Statute aforesaid) assess the Da|mages aforesaid at, c. of lawfull money of England, which the said Surveyors are to ren|der unto him for the same. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



Against Surveyors for not ac|counting.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's common Gaol for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath14 Car. 2. cap. 6. fol. 128. 2 Iustices. To account in a year after their Surveyor|ship, or to Gaol till they ac|count. been made unto us, That B. C. and D. E. Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the said County for the year, c. have not made such account touching their said Office as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is appointed; and upon examination of the business upon Oath, we do find the said Complaint to be true: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said B. C. and D. E. and forthwith convey them to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver them to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring al|so you, the said Keeper, to receive them into the Gaol aforesaid, and them there safely to keep, untill they have made such true and per|fect account touching their said Office as by the said Statute is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



Against the Surveyors who have not paid the moneys in their hands to the next Surveyors.
To the Constable, c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. been made unto us, That B. C. and D. E. Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the said County for the year, c. had in their hands (upon their account made touching their said Office, according to the form of the Statute in that case made) the summ of, c. overplus, which they have not returned or paid to the next Surveyors, or ei|ther of them, (as by the said Statute is ap|pointed;) and upon examination of the busi|ness upon Oath, we do find the said Complaint to be true: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to require you the said Consta|ble and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said B. C. and D. E. and forthwith convey them to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deli|ver them to the said Keeper of the same, (to|gether with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive them into the Gaol aforesaid, and them there safely keep, untill they have made payment of the said, c. to the aforesaid next Surveyors (as by the said Statute is appointed.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.




House of Correction.

A Warrant and Directions for general privy Search.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it is observed, That2 Iustices. 1 Iac. c. 4. The second part of the Institutes, pag. 728. (for want of due Execution of the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made and provided for the apprehending and punishing of Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beg|gars, and other wandring and idle Persons) the number of them does daily increase within this Division, to the great prejudice of the In|habitants therein: (For the better prevention whereof for the future, and of Robberies, Bur|glaries, and other Felonies, and Misdemea|nours often occasioned thereby) These are (in His Majestie's name) to command you, and every of you, diligently to observe and per|form our Directions in the premisses herewith sent unto you, as you, and every one of you will answer to the contrary at your perils. Gi|ving you farther hereby to understand, that we shall from time to time require a strict account of your due observance and execution of the same: and in case of negligence of you or any of you therein, we shall forthwith (upon know|ledge thereof) proceed with effect (according to Law) to punish such of you as shall so ne|glect the same. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
1. That you do henceforth take special care to apprehend all Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandring and idle Persons, and punish and pass them away according to Law.
2. That you do in one night within every week, between the date of the Precept afore|said and our next meeting, make a general search within the said Hundred in all suspicious places for the finding out and apprehending of all Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandring and idle Persons: And such as in the said search you shall find and apprehend, that you do punish and pass them away accor|ding to Law.
3. That you do cause Watches to be duly13 Edw. 1. cap. 4. Watch to be kept in eve|ry Town, from Mi|chaelmas to Ascen|tion day. kept in fitting places of the said Hundred by honest and able men of the same every night, from Sun-setting untill Sun-rising, untill the nine and twentieth day of September next en|suing; according to the Statute made at Westm. in the thirteenth year of the Reign of the late King Edward the First.
4. That you do forthwith bring before us, or some or one of us, or some other of His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace of the said Coun|ty, all such Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beg|gars, and other wandring and idle Persons as you shall apprehend by day or night, and con|ceive to be more than ordinarily dangerous, or to be suspected for any Murther, Robbery, Bur|glary, Felony, or other Misdemeanour, to the end they may be farther dealt withall as to Ju|stice doth appertain.
5. That you do from time to time (and more especially at every of our Assemblies or Meetings herein after mentioned) present unto us the names of all such Persons within the said

Hundred as be masterless, or live out of service or be common Alehouse-haunters, or expen|ders of their money in riot, (not duly labou|ring for their living, and not having whereby so to maintain them.)
And the names of all unlicensed Alehouse|keepers within the said Hundred, or notori|ously suspected so to be.
Together with the names of such licensed Alehouse-keepers within the same as are of evil behaviour, or do suffer evil Rule, Ga|ming, or other Disorder to be kept in their said houses.
And the names of such Witnesses as can or will testify the keeping of any such Alehouse unlicensed, or the evil behaviour of, or suffe|ring evil Rule, Gaming, or other Disorder by any of the said licensed Alehouse-keepers.
And that you do give notice unto all and every the said Witnesses, that they and every of them are by us required to appear before us accordingly, to testify their several knowledges touching the same.
And that you do likewise give notice unto all and every the said Persons so by you to be returned, all Persons out of service, riotous Spenders, unlicensed Alehouse-keepers, or dis|orderly licensed Alehouse-keepers; that they, and every of them, are by us required to ap|pear before us, or some of us, as aforesaid, to answer the premisses, and farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain.
6. That you do from time to time at every of our said Assemblies or Meetings deliver un|to us, or some of us, in writing an account of what you have done in pursuance of the di|rections before mentioned.
7. That (taking assistance of sufficient men7 Iac. c. 4. The search to be made twice in every year at the least. of the said Hundred) you do in the night be|fore every of our days of Assembly or Meeting hereafter mentioned, that is to say, (here name the days of meeting of the Iustices) make a ge|neral privy search within every of the Parishes, Villages and Hamlets within the same, for fin|ding out and apprehending of all Rogues, Va|gabonds, and wandring and idle Persons, in and about the said Parishes, Villages and Ham|lets; And that such Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandring and idle Persons, (as you shall then find and apprehend in the said search) you do cause to be brought before us, or some of us, on the day and at the place of our Assembly or Meeting aforesaid, at ten of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, there to be exami|ned of their idle and wandring life, and to be farther dealt withall according to Law.
And that you be then and there also ready to give account and reckoning (upon Oath in writing, and under the hand of the Minister of each respective Parish) what Rogues, Vaga|bonds, and disorderly Persons you have appre|hended within the said Search, and also be|tween every such Assembly and Meeting; and how many have been by you punished, or otherwise sent unto the House of Correction, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made in the seventh year of the Reign of the late King Iames;) and upon such Fines, Pains and Penalties as are in the said Statute contained, (in case you, or any of you, do neglect to perform what is in this behalf before commanded.)
Lastly, That upon some day (about three or four days before every of our said Assemblies or Meetings) you the said Constable and Borshol|ders

do meet and consult together touching the making of your Return to us of what you have done between every such our Assembly or Mee|ting; and do also then agree how to divide your selves in your then next Search, and where to meet in the morning then next fol|lowing, for your more ready giving to us your account of what you have done in the said Search.


A Mittimus of a Rogue thither, taken in the general Search.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto7 Iac. c. 4. me, That A. B. of, c. is of lewd life, c. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him or her safely convey, or cause to be conveyed, to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him or her to the said Keeper of the same, there to be punished and set on work during the space of, c. de|livering also to the said Keeper this Precept. Commanding likewise you, the said Keeper, to receive A. B. into the said House, and him or her there to punish and set on work, (ac|cording to the tenour of this Precept.) Here|of fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



Of an idle Person out of Service, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. of, c. (accor|dingDalt. 113. 7 Iac. c. 4. to the Crime as below) Is an idle, dissolute and disorderly fellow, one that will not keep his Service, follow any honest course of Life: Sturdy Beggar: Idle and disorderly Person: Of evil and disorderly Life and Conversation: Liveth idly out of Service, (notwithstanding our command to the contrary:) Will not be reformed of his said idle kind of Life, and evil and disorderly Conversation. Rogues, Vagabonds, and other wandring and idle Persons. Idle Persons. Idle or disorderly Persons. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bor|sholders, that you, some or one of you, do safely convey the said C. D. to the aforesaid House of Correction, and him there deliver to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keep|er, to receive him into the said House, and there set him to work and labour from time to time by the space of, c. next after such his delivery unto you; in the mean time to punish him according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.Dalt. 113. 2 Iustices 730. 7 Iac. c. 4.



A Mittimus to the House of Correc|tion of an idle Person, that would run away, and will not work to maintain his Family.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been proved7 Iac. c. . If run aw and lea his Fai to the Pa|rish, is ad|judged in|corrigible Rogue. 2 Iustices of that Di|vision. 2 Witnesses upn Oath. before us upon Oath, (accor|ding to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) That A. B. of the Parish of C. aforesaid (being able to work, and there|by relieve his Family) hath threatned to run away, and leave his said Family upon the Pa|rish of C. aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, (unless he do put in sufficient Securities for the discharge of the Parish) that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the said House of Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Com|manding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there deal with and detain him as a sturdy and wandring Rogue, and to be delivered at the next Assem|bly or Meeting within this lower Division of the Lath of Scray, for the better execution of an Act of Parliament made in the seventh year

of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Iames over England, (intituled, An Act for the due Execution of divers Laws and Statutes heretofore made against Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, and other lewd and idle Persons) or at the Quarter-Sessions, and not otherwise. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


A Liberate from thence.
To the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at A. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas C. D. was by War|rant from us sent to the said House of Correction, and is at present in your Custody there: Now if the said C. D. is in your Custody for the cause aforesaid, and no others, We do hereby authorize and com|mand you forthwith (upon receipt hereof) to set C. D. at large from your said Custody: For which this shall be your sufficient War|rant. Given under our hands and seals at A. in the said County the, c.




Huy and Cry.

The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way praying an Huy and Cry.
The Examination of A. B. of C. in the County of D. Gent. taken by E. F. Esq one of the Iu|stices of the Peace of the County of F. on the second day of October, Anno Dom. 1679. upon his Oath.
Kent ss. THIS Examinant deposeth and27 Eliz. cap. 13. saith, That as he was riding on Saturday the first day of April last past from the Town of A. in the County of B. to C. in the same County, he was assaulted in the com|mon High-way leading from one of the said Towns to the other, at or near a place there called K, at about eleven of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, by two Footmen, who there seised upon him this Examinant, and carrying him into a certain Wood, robbed him, and bound him. And this Examinant farther saith, That he is since informed, that the said place and Wood are both in the Parish of A. aforesaid, and so within the Hundred of A. and D. in the said County. And this Ex|aminant farther saith and deposeth, That the said Thieves did then seloniously take from him and rob him of 10 l. 17 s. in money, and one cloath Saddle with Stirups and Girts,

worth in all 10 s, and two leather Purses, two Knives, c. in all worth 5 s. And this Exa|minant farther saith and deposeth, That he then did not, nor yet doth know the Parties that committed the said Robbery, or either of them.
R. W.


Another.
Kent ss. A. B. of C. in the County of D.27 Eliz. cap. 13. did upon the present 10. day of October in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, c. per|sonally come before me E. M. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the said County of D. inhabiting in the Parish of Saint M. C. in the County aforesaid, in the Hundred of R. in the said County) and upon his cor|poral Oath then taken before me did say, That upon Friday the 8. day of May last past, at about the hour of seven of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, in the King's High|way, (at a certain place called E. F. in the Pa|rish of C. in the aforesaid Hundred of R. in the said County of D.) he was assaulted by five men, all unknown to him the said A. B; and they the said five men did then and there felo|niously take and carry away from him the said A. B. 100 li. in moneys numbred, of the mo|neys of him the said A. B. and also his Goods and Chattels (that is to say) one Ring with a deep Table-stone set in the same, one Watch in two gold Cases, c. to the value of 30 li. and robbed him the said A. B. of all and every

the Moneys, Goods and Chattels aforesaid. And the said A. B. was on the day and year first above mentioned (upon his Oath aforesaid) by me examined, whether he did know the Parties that committed the said Robbery, or any of them: And he then (upon his Oath) did say, that he (neither at the time of the said Robbery committed, nor at any time since) did know, or doth yet know the said Parties that committed the said Robbery, nor any of them. In testimony whereof I, the aforesaid Justice, have hereunto set my hand and seal the day and year first above written.
A. B.


The Examination of a Person rob|bed on the High-way by three Persons, one of which he knew.
The Examination of A. B. of C, c. sworn and examined before R. K. one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the County of K. on the 2. day of March, Anno Dom. 1679. deposeth and saith.
Kent ss. THat about three weeks since he3 Ed. 1. was riding from C. aforesaid, towards Feversham, in the said County of K. and in the High-way within the Parish of F. in the said County of K. he was set upon by three Persons, and was by them robbed, and they took from him, c. And he saith and deposeth that he doth know one of those Per|sons,

and saith that his name is E. F. an Essex man, born in, c. and of the age as he ad|judgeth him, of 30 years or thereabouts, and the others he saith he knoweth not.


An Huy and Cry upon the escape of a Prisoner from the Constable.
To the Constable, Borsholders, and other Officers, as well within the said County as elsewhere, within the Kingdom of England, to whom the Execution hereof doth or may concern.
Kent ss. WHereas A. B. Constable of3 Ed. 1.  Iustice. the Hundred of M. within the said County, having yesterday (together with two Precepts) delivered unto him the Body of C. D. of, c. before charged with the suspicion of his felonious taking of one Gelding, to be by him the said Constable and other Officers conveyed to the Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, hath this day (as the said Constable hath upon his complaint informed me) made a felonious es|cape from him: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, to make diligent search within your several Precincts for the said C. D. being a Person about 30 years of age, of a middle sta|ture, slender body, long black curled hayr, having on his body a short coloured close Coat, light grey Breeches and Stockings, a narrow-brim'd Hat; And also that you the said respective Officers do make Huy and Cry

after him from Town to Town, and from County to County, and that as well by Horsemen as Footmen; And if you shall find him the said C. D. that then you do convey him before some Justice of the Peace, within the County where he shall be taken, by him to be dealt withall according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given, c.


A Warrant for a Huy and Cry after a Felon.
R. W. Esq (one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace for the said County) To all Consta|bles, Borsholders, and other His Majestie's Of|ficers within the said County, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, whom the Ex|ecution hereof may concern, Greeting.
K. ss. WHereas I have received Infor|mation1 Iustice. 28 Ed. 3. cap. 11. and Charge against A. B. who is a Person of evil fame, (describe the Person, Age, and Apparel) who is char|ged before me to have assaulted and taken from the person of C. D. on the second day of Iune last, at, c. ten pounds in moneys numbred, c. (according to the Information) And he the said A. B. is very much suspected to have committed several other Felonies; and notwithstanding several endeavours for apprehension of him, he hath not as yet been apprehended, but hath withdrawn himself, and is fled: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you, and every

of you, to make diligent search within your several Precincts for the said A. B. and to make Huy and Cry after him from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, and that as well by Horsemen as Footmen, (according to Law:) And if you shall find the said A. B. that then you do carry him before some one of His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace within the Coun|ty or place where he shall be taken, to be dealt withall according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


A Warrant to search for a Person (who hath committed a Rob|bery,) and for Goods stoln.
R. W. Esq (one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the said County) To all Constables, Borsholders, and other His Ma|jestie's Officers within the County aforesaid, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, whom the Execution hereof may concern, Greeting.
Kent ss. WHereas I have received Information, That a bay Gelding about 15 hands high, with a bald Face, (his Head bigger than ordinary) two wall Eyes, a short Tail, aged about 7 years, his paces all Trot, being the Gelding of R. G. of B. in the said County, Gent. was in the night of the 18. day of this instant

Iuly stoln out of his Land in B. aforesaid, and that he suspecteth a Person (whose name he knoweth not) of a middle sta|ture, aged about 22 years, and in saddish|coloured Cloaths, to have stoln this Gel|ding aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, and eve|ry of you, to make diligent search (within your several Precincts) for the Gelding and person aforesaid, and to make Huy and Cry after the said Person from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, (according to Law:) And if upon your search or otherwise you shall find the said Person, or the Gelding aforesaid, or other just cause of suspicion, that then you carry the said Person, or other Persons suspected, before some one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County or place where he or they shall be taken, (to be dealt with ac|cording to Law.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal this, c.




Inns of Court.

A Warrant from one of the Judges, a Member of an Inns of Court, a|gainst one of that Society, for re|fusing to observe the Order of the House.
To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other His Majestie's Officers and Ministers, whom these presents may concern.
Mid. ss. WHereas I Sir R. R. Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench, am informed and fully satisfied, by some of the Masters of the Bench of the Society of, c. That F. M. Gent. lately a Member of the said Society hath for his con|tempt of several Orders of Council made for the compelling him to pay his Commons, and o|ther Duties amounting to a considerable Summ, been by order of Council expelled the Society, and his Chamber and Study seized to the use of the House; notwithstanding which, the said F. M. without performance of any of the said Or|ders, hath contemptuously broken off Padlocks, put upon his Chamber door, entred thereinto, and made use thereof, and both in Words and Deeds reproachfully and contemptuously sligh|ted and affronted the Governours and Govern|ment of the said Society, and that he con|tinues

at this present actually and obstinately in his contemptuous Carriage, to the distur|bance of the said Society, in contempt and violation of the Government thereof, and as a dangerous example to others, if not preven|ted by a speedy and severe proceeding against him. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and command you, and every of you, that you bring before us, or some other of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench, the Body of the said F. M. to answer to such Misdemeanors, Contempts, and Misbehaviour, as shall be objected against him by the Masters of the Bench, or others, on the behalf of the said Society, to the end that his Insolences may be repressed by such proceeding against him as shall be agreeable to Justice. Given under my hand and seal the 24th. day of Iune, in the 27th. year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second over England, Annoque Dom. 1675.
R. R.




Irish Cattel.

A Warrant to seize certain Cattel, imported from Foreign parts into England.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas I am given to under|stand,18 Car. 2. cap. 2. 32 Car. 2. cap. that there are lately Imported into England, out of Ireland or some other Foreign parts, and are now remaining in your Precinct, certain Cattel and Beasts, prohibited by the late Acts of Parliament to be Imported. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to give you notice thereof, and to will and require you, and every of you, forthwith after sight hereof, to use your utmost diligence and endeavour to enquire, find out, and discover the same Cattel and Beasts, and the same to seize and take into your Custody, to the intent the same may be proceeded with as by the said Acts is appointed. Given un|der my hand and seal this, c.



A Warrant to deliver to the Owners certain Cattel seized, as forfeited for being Imported from Foreign parts, upon proof that they were not so Imported.
To the Constables, c. ut supra.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath beenThe same Acts. made to me, that you, or some or one of you, have or hath seized and ta|ken into your Custody certain Cattel belong|ing to, or late in the possession of A. B. viz. 2 Oxen, 3 Kine, 4 Heifers, 5 Yearlings, 100 Sheep, and 6 Swine as forfeited for being Imported out of Ireland into England, con|trary to the late Acts of Parliament in that be|half. Now forasmuch as the said A. B. within 48 hours after such seizure hath made it appear to me, by the Oath of two credible Witnesses, viz.
That the same Cattel were not Imported from Ireland aforesaid, nor any other place be|yond the Seas contrary to the said Acts. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you forthwith upon sight hereof, to deliver unto the said A. B. the said Cattel, aud every of them, without delay, according to the said Acts, as you will answer the con|trary. Given under my hand and seal, c.



A Warrant to kill the said Cattel.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them. If not them, To the Sizor or Seizors of the Cattel, as the Case is.
Kent ss. WHereas I am given to under|stand,The last Act. That you, or some of you, having seized within your Precinct certain great Cattel, Sheep, and Swine, viz. (here name the Sorts and number of each Sort of the Cattel as the Case is) late belonging to or in the possession of A. B. as forfeited for being Imported out of Ireland, or some other Fo|reign parts beyond the Seas, contrary to the late Acts of Parliament in that behalf. And that the Importer or Importers thereof have been convicted of such Importation and For|feiture of the said Cattel, yet nevertheless you the said Seizor or Seizors by the space of six days next after such Conviction and Forfeiture, have delayed and do still delay, or neglect to cause the same Cattel to be killed, whereby the distribution thereof according to the said Act is retarded and hindred. These are there|fore to require you immediately upon sight hereof, to cause the said Cattel to be killed, to the end the same may be forthwith distri|buted as by the said Acts is required. And hereof you are not to fail. Given under my hand and seal, c.



A Warrant to levy 40 s. upon the Seizor or Church-wardens that shall fail in killing, or making distribution as aforesaid.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, c.
Kent ss. WHereas I am given to under|stand,The last Act. That A. B. having seized within your Precinct certain great Cat|tel, Sheep and Swine, viz. (here name the Cattel ut supra) lately belonging to or in the possession of C. D. as forfeited for being Im|ported from Foreign parts beyond the Seas, contrary to the late Acts of Parliament in that behalf. And that the same are convicted and forfeited according to the same Acts, yet the said A. B. by the space of six days next after such Conviction and Forfeiture, have delayed and do still delay to cause the same Cattel and Beasts to be killed, and distribution to be made thereof according to the said Acts. Now forasmuch as Oath hath been made before me of the premisses: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you forth|with after sight hereof, to levy or cause to be levied the summe of 40 s. for every one of the said great Cattel, and 10 s. for every of the said Sheep, and 10 s. for every of the said Swine which should have been killed and distri|buted as aforesaid, in pursuance of the said Acts by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. rendering the said A. B. the

over-plus, (necessary Charges of destreyning being first deducted) and in default of such Distress, to commit the said A. B. to the com|mon Gaol of the said County, there to remain for the space of three months without Bail or Mainprise, according to the Statute in that behalf. Hereof you are not to fail. Given un|der my hand and seal, c.
According to these Presidents may like Warrant or Warrants be made for Fish or other Goods, prohibited by the said Acts, Mutatis mu|tandis.



Lent.

A Warrant for the observing of Lent.
To the Constables and Borsholders, c.
Kent ss. THese are therefore in His Ma|jestie's name, and in pursuance of His said Majestie's late Proclamation, to will and command you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause to come and ap|pear before us upon Thursday the second day of March, (name the place) all Inn-holders, Tavernors, Alehouse-keepers, Butchers, and all other Victuallers whatsoever within the said Hundred of, c. And that you give notice to

the said persons, that they bring with them two sufficient Sureties to enter into several Re|cognizances for His said Majestie's use, for the due observation of Lent, according to the ef|fects and contents of the said Proclamation, and according to the Law in that case made and provided. And that you your selves, or one of you, be then and there present, and make a return in writing of all such as you shall have warned by virtue of this Warrant. Hereof, c. Given, c.



Licences.

A Licence for a Badger of Corn.
Kent ss. AT the general Sessions of the6 Ed. 6. cap. 14. 13 Eliz. 25. made perpetual. 5 Eliz. 5. 31 Eliz. 5. 21 Iac. 22. 2 Iustices. 1 Quorum. Not for a|bove a year. Peace holden at M. in the County aforesaid this present day, A. B. of H. in the County aforesaid is admitted, licen|sed, and appointed by the Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be a common Badger, Lader, Kedder, Carrier, Buyer or Transporter of all manner of Corn, or Grain, in any Mar|ket or Fair within the Realm of England, and the same so bought to convert to Meal, and the same to carry to the City of L. or the Suburbs of the same, or to any other Market or Fair, so that he use the same, according to the tenour and true meaning of the Statute in that case made and provided, against Fore|stallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers, and not

otherwise. The same Licence to have conti|nuance from the day of the date hereof, until the next general Sessions of the Peace after the Feast of E. next coming, to be holden at M. aforesaid. In Witness whereof we have here|unto set our hands and seals this second day of November, 1680.
R. K. R. H. T. B.
A Licence as before may be granted to Drovers of Cattel, to Buy and Sell again, by the same Statute.


A Licence for a petty Chapman.
To the Bailiffs, Constables, and other of His Majestie's Officers of the same County, and to every of them Greeting.
Kent ss. KNow ye that we R. K. and G. H. Esquires, two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace within the County afore|said, have licensed, and by these presents do license T. W. of M. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, to be a petty Chapman, to wander and go from Town to Town, Village to Vil|lage, and place to place, to sell Pins, Points, Tapes, Laces, Knives, Gloves, Purses, c. and such other kind of small Wares, and also to gather and buy Coney-skins, and such kind of small Wares within the County aforesaid, and not else-where. Provided that this our

Licence shall continue in effect, only for the term of one whole year coming from the day of the date hereof, and no longer. In witness whereof, c.


A Licence or Pasport for a Poor man to his Friends for Relief.
To all Constables, Borsholders, Bailiffs, and other His Majestie's Officers of the same County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. R. K. and T. B. Esquires, two of39 Eliz. cap. 4. His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the same County greeting. Foras|much as A. B. of C. c. the Bearer hereof, being reduced to great poverty and necessity, hath desired a Testimonial or Licence for his safe travel unto the City of D. in the County of S. where he saith he was born and hath some Friends yet living, by whose Means and Friendship he hopeth to be fully relieved and holpen. In consideration whereof, Know ye that we the said R. K. and T. B. (as far as in us lieth) have licensed the said A. B. to travel and pass the direct way from C. unto the said City of D. so that his Journey be not for longer or further continuance than twenty days next after the date hereof, praying you, and every of you, not to molest or trouble the said poor man in his travel; but to permit and suffer him to pass, so that he shew himself in no respect offensive to His Majestie's Laws. In witness whereof, c.



Another.
K. ss. R. K. and T. B. two of the Ju|stices,It is con|venient that the party be particular|ly described in this Pas|port, lest others make use thereof. c. Whereas the Bearer hereof A. B. of C. c. having (shewing the cause of his travel) desired one Testimonial or Licence for his safe travel to the City of D. (shew to what place he goeth) Wherefore we (as much as in us lieth) do license the said A. B. to travel the direct way from C. in the said County of K. to the said City of D. so as his Journey be no longer than twenty days next after the date hereof, praying you, and every of you, to suffer him to pass in Peace, so that he demean himself orderly. In witness, c.


A Licence to Beg.
To all Constables, Borsholders, Bailiffs, and all other His Majestie's Officers within the County of K. and to every of them.
Kent ss. R. K and T. H. Esquires, two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace within the County aforesaid greeting. Whereas the Bearer hereof A. B. of C. in the County aforesaid, being a very poor man and blind, by reason whereof he is not able to La|bour, nor get to live of himself, without the charitable Relief of others, and being now Re|sident

in the said Town, is therefore to be re|lieved; and being likewise informed that the Town is at this present charged with more poor and impotent people than it is able to relieve. Know you therefore, that we the said Justices have licensed and allowed the said Poor man and his Leader, to go abroad and beg, gather, and receive the charitable Alms of well disposed people, inhabiting and dwelling within the Hundred of c. in the said County, requiring you not to molest or trouble the said Poor man or his Leader for so doing, but desiring you rather to relieve him and his Leader in their necessity, as to you shall seem meet. This our Licence to remain and be in force for one whole year next ensuing the date hereof, and no longer. In witness whereof we have here|unto set our hands and seals, c.
R. K. T. H.


A Licence to Travel by Water on the Lord's day.
WHereas by Act of Parliament made in29 Car. 2. the 29th. year of His Majestie's Reign that now is, it is Enacted, That no person or persons shall use, employ, or travel upon the Lord's day with any Boat, Wherry, Lighter, or Barge, except it be upon extraordinary oc|casion, to be allowed by some Justice of the Peace of the County, or Head-Officer, or some Justice of Peace of the City, Burrough; or Town-Corporate where the Fact shall be com|mitted, upon pain that every person so offen|ding shall forfeit and lose the summe of five shillings for every such Offence, as by the said

Act, (among other things) it doth and may appear: And forasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of Saint A. in the County of M. Gent. having extraordinary occasion to travel on the next Lord's day to B. in the County of S. and to use and employ a Boat, Wherry, or Barge in his said Journey, hath desired my Allowance thereof: These are therefore (in pursuance of the said Act) to will and require all Con|stables, Church-wardens, Overseers of the Poor, and all other Officers whom these presents may concern, to permit and suffer the said A. B. quietly and peaceaby to perform his said Jour|ney on the next Lord's day as aforesaid, and to use and employ any Boat, Wherry, or Barge, at his discretion, without any Molesta|tion or Disturbance whatsoever at their peril. Given under my hand and seal this tenth day of Iuly, Anno Dom. 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 31.


Another.
K. ss. THese are to certifie that A. B. C. D. E. F. the Bearers hereof have made it appear before me, that they have ur|gent occasions to pass on the next Lord's day from A. to B. by Water. All Constables, Church-wardens, and other His Majestie's Offi|cers, are therefore required to permit the said Gent. to pass without interruption. Given under my hand and seal this second day of October 1680.
I. C.



A Licence to Travel on the Lord's day.
To all Constables, c.
THese are to certifie that A. B. of C. c. where he now dwelleth, having infor|med me that he hath a Brother living at C. in the County of H. where he lieth now very Sick, and he hath a desire to see him. Know ye that for this cause I do hereby license him to travel upon the next Lord's day the direct way to his Brother. Willing and requiring you not to molest or hinder him for the same, so that he behave himself orderly in his travel. Given under my hand, c.



Misdemeanours.

A general Warrant for the same re|tornable before a particular Justice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's1 Iustice. Dalt. 481. name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause A. B. of C.

to come before me, to answer unto such mat|ters of Misdemeanour as (on His Majestie's be|half) shall be objected against him, and far|ther to doe and receive as to Justice doth ap|pertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


Or thus:
THese are to will and require you (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and command you, and either of you, that imme|diately upon the sight hereof (or upon Thurs|day next at two of the clock in the afternoon) you bring A. B. of your said Town, Barber, before me, to answer to such matters of Mis|demeanours as (on His Majestie's behalf) shall be objected against him. And hereof fail you not at your perils. Given under, c.


The like retornable before any Ju|stice, and the Accuser to have Notice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause A. B. of, c. to come before me, or some other of His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County

to answer unto such matters of Misdemeanour as (on the behalf of His said Majesty) shall be objected against him by E. F. of, c. Husband|man, and farther to doe and receive as to Ju|stice doth appertain. And you are farther hereby required to give convenient notice to the said E. F. of the time and place when, whither, and before whom you shall cause the said A. B. so to come, in execution of this Precept, to the end that the said E. F. may then and there also be personally present, to make appear the Misdemeanour aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


A Condition of a Recognizance for Misdemeanour.
UPon this Condition, That if you A. B. hall personally appear before our So|vereign Lord the King's Justices of the Peace at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the Liberty of Saint A. and do then and there make answer unto all such things which (on His Majestie's behalf) shall be ob|jected against you, and do not depart thence without Licence of the Court, Then your Re|cognizance to be void, or else to stand in full force, c.




Murther.

A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment, and to give Evidence at the next general Gaol|delivery, alias Assizes, to both Iu|ries in case of Murther.
THE Condition of this Recognizance isSee Title Recogni|zances. such, That if the above bound W. B. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-de|livery to be holden for the within named County of Kent, and do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of Indictment against A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and I. K. for murther of L. M. Gent. deceased, where|with the said A. B. and C. D. are chargeable before the within named Justice, and with suspicion whereof the said E. F. G. H. I. K. are also charged before the Justice aforesaid, and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth concerning the Murther afore|said, as well to the Jurors as shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial of the said A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. or any of them for the same, then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force and virtue.



A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence at Assizes.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the above bound A. B. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in the above named County of C. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at the Castle of C. in the County aforesaid, and do then and there prefer or cause to be pre|ferred one or more Bill or Bills of Indictment against M. W. of, c. and do then and there also give such Evidence as he knoweth concer|ning the same against the said M. W. to the Ju|rors that shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is; That then this Recognizance shall be void and of no effect, or else it shall stand in full force.


A Recognizance to prefer a Bill of In|dictment, and to give Evidence to both Iuries at the next general Gaol|delivery, alias Assizes, in case of an Abettor in Murther.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound W. B. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of the Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol|delivery to be holden for the within named

County of K. do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of Indictment against Sir P. H. Knight, touching his the said Sir P's being an Abettor to the Murther of M. C. de|ceased, (wherewith e is charged before the within named Justices) and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth con|cerning the matter aforesaid, as well to the Ju|rors that shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial of the said Sir P. H. for the same; That then this Re|cognizance shall be void, or else stand in full force, c.



Nets, Dogs and Conies.

A Warrant to search for Nets and Setting-dogs, upon the Statute of 7 Iacobi.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of Parlia|ment7 Iac. c. 11. 2 Iustices, and their hands. in that behalf made, These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to authorize and command you, and every of you, to enter into and search the house or houses of any person or persons within the said Hundred, other then such person or persons

which have Free-Warren, or is Lord of a Man|nor, or is such Freeholder which is seized in his own right or the right of his Wife, of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, to the clear yearly value of forty pounds or more by the year, (over and above all charges and re|prises) of some estate of inheritance; Or of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, in his own right, or in the right of his Wife, (for term of life or lives) of the yearly value of fourscore pounds, (over and above all charges and reprises) Or which is worth in Goods orPheasants, c. to be taken onely between Michael|mas and Christmas. Chattels four hundred pounds, suspected to have Setting-dogs, or Nets (for the taking of Pheasants and Partridges.) And that where|soever you, or any of you, shall find any such Setting-dog or Nets, the same you take, carry away, and detain, kill, destroy, and cut in pieces, as things prohibited by the Act afore|said, and forefeited to such of you as shall find out and take the same as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at M. in the said County the, c.


The like upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Caroli Secundi.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.22  23 Car. 2. 1 Iustice (under his hand and seal.)
Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made, These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to authorize and command you, and every of

you. (in the day time) to search the houses, out-houses, or other places, of any person or persons (within the said Hundred,) other then of such person as hath Lands and Tenements, or some other estate of inheritance, (in hisThis may be directed to any special person or persons, (as well as to the Offi|cers. own or in his Wife's right) of the clear yearly value of one hundred pounds per annum, or for term of life, or which hath a Lease or Leases of ninety nine years (or for any longer term) of the clear yearly value of one hundred and fifty pounds, or which is the Son and Heir ap|parent of an Esquire, (or other person of higher degree,) or which are Owners or Keepers of Forests, Parks, Chases or Warrens, (being Stocked with Deer or Conies, for their neces|sary use, in respect of the said Forests, Parks, Chases or Warrens) as upon good ground shall be suspected to have or keep in his or their cu|stody any Guns, Bows, Grey-hounds, Setting|dogs, Ferrets, Cony-dogs, or other Dogs, (to destroy Hares or Conies) Hays, Tramels, or other Nets, Low-bells, Hare-pipes, Snares, or other Engines for the taking and killing of Conies, Hares, Pheasants, Partridges, or other Game, and such Guns, Bows, Grey-hounds, Setting-dogs, Ferrets, Cony-dogs, or other such Dogs, as aforesaid, Hays, Tramels or other Nets, Low-bells, Hare-pipes, Snares, or other Engines aforesaid, as you, or any of you, shall so find, to seize, detain, and keep, to and for the use of the Lord of the Mannor or Royalty where the same shall be so found, or taken, or otherwise to cut in pieces or destroy, as things by the said Act prohibited to be kept by persons of their degree. And what you shall doe in the premisses, you shall make known un|to me (with all convenient speed.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



A Mittimus against persons that re|fuse to enter into Recognizance, to appear at Sessions for their keeping Ferrets, and Nets to kill Conies.
To the Constables, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. and C. D. of E. in the County aforesaid, be|ing this present day brought before me by Warrant by the Constable of E. aforesaid, and being examined did upon their examination confess that they had kept and used Nets and Ferrets for the taking and killing of Conies by the space of a year last past, contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided. And being required to enter into Recognizance for their appearance at the next general Quarter-Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County they did both refuse so to do: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and command you, that you receive into your Custody the Bodies of the said A. B. and C. D. whom I send you by H. T. one of the Constables of E. aforesaid, and them safely to keep, untill they shall enter into such Re|cognizance as aforesaid, or that they be other|wise discharged according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal, c.



A Warrant for one that Hunts with Spannels in Ear'd Corn.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been23 Eliz. cap. 10. made unto me, That A. B. of your Town of C. Gent. did in September last past Hunt with his Spannels in the Ground of R. H. where Corn did then grow, at which time the same Corn was Eared or Codded, and Standing, (without the consent of the said R. H. then Owner of the same Ground) contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided, by which he hath forfeited forty shillings to the said R. H. the Owner of the said Ground: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you, and every of you, that some or one of you, do warn him the said A. B. to come before us at T. the se|cond day of Iune next, to answer the premisses, and to be then there your self with this War|rant. Given under our hands and seals, c.
If he appear not, then say, to put in Sure|ties for his appearance at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County, to answer the said offence, and pay the penalty. And in case he refuse so to doe, that then you, some or one of you, safely con|vey him to the Gaol of, c. and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the

said Keeper to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill he shall find Sureties as aforesaid. Given under my hand and seal, c.



Oaths.

The Oath which is usually ministred to a Iustice of the Peace in the several Counties of England.
YE shall Swear, that as Justice of theWith this is to be taken the Oath of Supremacy. Peace in the County of K. in all Ar|ticles in the King's Commission to you directed, you shall doe equal right to the Poor and to the Rich, after your cunning, wit and power, and after the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and Statutes thereof made: And ye shall not be of Council of any Quarrel hanging before you: And that you hold your Sessions after the form of the Statutes thereof made: And the Issues, Fines, and Amercements that shall happen to be made; and all Forfeitures which shall fall before you, ye shall cause to be entred without any concealment (or imbeziling,) and truly send them to the King's Exchequer; ye shall not lett for gift, or other cause, but well and truly you shall doe your Office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf: And that you take no|thing for your Office of Justice of the Peace to be done, but of the King, and Fees accustom|ed, and Costs limited by the Statute: And ye

shall not direct, nor cause to be directed, any Warrant (by you to be made) to the parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bailiffs of the said County, or other the King's Officers (or Ministers,) or other indifferent persons, to doe Execution thereof.
So help you God, c.


The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. of, c. do utterly testifie and declare in1 Eliz. c. 1. my Conscience, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second is the onely Supreme Governour of this Realm, and of all other His Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal. And that no foreign Prince, Per|son, Prelate, State or Potentate hath, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Au|thorities. And do promise that from hence|forth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness, His Heirs and lawfull Suc|cessors. And to my power shall assist and de|fend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminen|ces and Authorities, granted or belonging to the King's Highness, His Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.
So help me God.



The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge,3 Iac. c. 4. profess, testifie, and declare in my Con|science before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second is lawfull and rightfull King of this Realm, and of all other His Majestie's Dominions and Coun|tries, and that the Pope neither of himself nor by any authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other, hath any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of His Majestie's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him, or His Countries, or to discharge any of His Subjects of their allegiance and obedience to His Ma|jesty, or to give licence or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumult, or to offer any violence or hurt to His Majestie's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majestie's Subjects, within His Majestie's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration or Sen|tence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any autho|rity derived, or pretended to be derived, from him, or his See, against the said King, His Heirs or Successors; or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience. I will bear saith and true allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and Him and Them will defend to the uttermost of my power,

against all Conspiracies and Contempts what|soever, which shall be made against His or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or colour of any such Sentence or De|claration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavour to disclose and make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all Trea|sons and Traiterous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against Him, or any of them.
And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Po|sition, That Princes which be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murthered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.Upon this Oath the party ta|king it shall subscribe his name or mark.
And I do believe, and in Conscience am re|solved, That neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, hath power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknow|ledge by good and full authority to be lawful|ly ministred unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear according to these ex|press words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation what|soever. And I do make this recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian.
So help me God.



A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of Allegiance.
To the Keeper or Gaoler, c.
WE A. B. and C. D. two of His Ma|jestie's2 Iustices, one of the Quorum. Justices of the Peace for the County of K. whereof A. B. is of the Quorum, do hereby commit to your custody the Body of E. F. for refusing to take the Oath of Alle|giance. Requiring you to take and safely in Prison to keep him, till he shall be delivered by due course of Law, and for so doing this shall be your Warrant. Given under our hands and seals this second day of Iune, c.


The Oath of Abjuration.
YOU shall swear, That you shall depart out35 Eliz. cap. 1. Stam. 119. Wilk. 40. of this Realm of England, and out of all other the King's Majestie's Dominions, and that you shall not return hither, or come again into any of His Majestie's Dominions, but by the Licence of our said Sovereign Lord the King, or of His Heirs.
So help you God.



The Oath of an Excise-man.
[With this must be taken the Oaths of Alle|giance and Supremacy.]
YOU shall swear to execute the Office of12 Car. 2. cap. 23. 2 Iustices, who must certifie (the taking of this Oath) to the next Quarter-Sessions there to be Recorded. (name the place) truly and faithfully, without favour or affection, and shall from time to time true account make and deliver to such person or persons as His Majesty shall ap|point to receive the same; and shall take no fee or reward for the execution of the said Office, from any other person then from His Majesty, or those whom His Majesty shall ap|point in that behalf.


The under Sheriffs Oath touching the Impannelling of Iuries.
I A. B. shall not use or exercise the Office27 Eliz. cap. 12. before two Iustices, one of the Quorum. The Oath of Supremacy must be also taken by him, or for|feit 40 li. of under Sheriff corruptly, during the time that I shall remain therein; Neither shall or will accept, receive, or take, by any colour, means, or device whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any manner of Fee or Reward of any person or persons for impanelling or returning of any Inquest, Jury or Tales in the said Court for the King, or betwixt party and party above two shillings, or the value thereof; and such Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; But

will according to my power truly and indif|ferently, with convenient speed, impanel all Jurors, and return all such Writ or Writs touching the same as shall appertain to be done by my Duty or Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office.
So God me help.


The Oath of a Bailiff.
I I. D. shall not use nor exercise the Office27 Eliz. cap. 12. This Oath and that of Supremacy ought to be taken by e|very Bai|liff that executes any Writ, or forfeit 40 li. of one of the Bearers of the Verges of His Majestie's Houshold, and one of the Officers and Ministers of the Court of our Sovereign Lord the King, of the King's Palace of West|minster corruptly, during the time that I shall remain therein: Neither shall or will accept, receive, or take by any colour, means, or de|vice whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any manner of Fee or Reward of any person or persons for impaneling or returning of any Inquest, Jury, or Tales in the said Court, for the King, or betwixt party and party, above two shillings, or the value thereof, and such Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; But will according to my power truly and indiffe|rently, with convenient speed, impanel all Ju|rors, and return all such Writ or Writs touch|ing the same, as shall appertain to be done by my Duty or Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office.
So help me God.
Iurat' ad utraque Sacrament' supra dict'  duo|decimo die Maij, Anno Dom. 1680. coram nobis.
A. B. C. D..



The Oath usually given to Church|wardens.
YOU shall execute the Office of Church|warden in the Parish where you are chosen for this ensuing year, according to His Majestie's Laws Ecclesiastical; So help you God.


Or thus:
You shall execute the Office of Church|warden in the Parish where you are chosen, according to your discretion and skill in His Majestie's Laws Ecclesiastical; So help you God.


The Oath of Obedience Canonical.
I A. B. do swear that I do approve theCan. 6. of 1640. Doctrine and Discipline, or Government established in the Church of England as concer|ning all things necessary to Salvation: and that I will not endeavour by my self, or any other, directly or indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine contrary to that which is so establi|shed, nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of this Church; by Arch|bishops, Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons, c. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand; nor yet ever to subject it to

the Usurpations and Superstitions of the See of Rome: And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, accor|ding to the plain and common sense and un|derstanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasior, or secret re|servation whatsoever; And this I do heartily, willingly and truly upon the Faith of a Chri|stian: So help me God in Jesus Christ.
If any Ecclesiastical person refuse this Oath, the Bishop shall give him a months time to inform, which if then denied, to be suspended ab offi|cio, upon refusal at a second month granted, to be suspended, ab officio  beneficio; and after a third month granted, to be deprived of all his Ecclesiastical Promotions whatsoever, and execution of his Function which he holds in the Church of England.


The High Constable's Oath.
YOU shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King in the Office of a Constable: You shall see and cause His Majestie's Peace to be well and truly kept and preserved according to your power: You shall arrest all such Persons as in your sight and presence shall ride or goe armed of|fencely, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of His Majestie's Peace. You shall doe your best endeavour (upon com|plaint made) to apprehend all Felons, Bar|rettors, and Rioters, or Persons riotously as|sembled: and if any such Offenders shall make

resistance (with force) you shall levy Huy and Cry, and shall pursue them untill they be ta|ken. You shall do your best endeavour, that the Watch, in and about your Hundred be du|ly kept, for the apprehending of Rogues, Va|gabonds, Night-walkers, Eves-droppers, Scouts, and other suspected Persons, and of such as go armed, and the like; And that Huy and Cry be duly raised and pursued according to the Sta|tute of Winchester against Murtherers, Thieves, and other Felons; And that the Statutes made for the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and such other idle Persons as come within your Bounds and Limits be duly put in execu|tion: You shall have a watchfull eye to such Persons as shall maintain or keep any common House or Place, where any unlawfull Game is or shall be used; as also to such as shall fre|quent, or use such Places, or shall use or exer|cise any unlawfull Games there or elsewhere contrary to the Statutes. At your Assizes, Ses|sions of the Peace or Leet, you shall present all and every the Offences done contrary to the Statute made 1 Iacobi, 4 Iacobi and 21 Ia|cobi Regis, to restrain the inordinate haunting and tipling in Inns, Alehouses, and other Vic|tualling houses, and for repressing of Drunken|ness; You shall there likewise true presentment make of all Bloudsheddings, Affrays, Outcrys, Rescues, and other Offences committed or done against the King's Majestie's Peace within your Limits; You shall once every year during your Office present at the Quarter-sessions all Popish Recusants within your Liberty, and their Chil|dren above 9, and their Servants (scil. their monthly absence from Church) 3 Iac. 4. You shall well and duly execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed from the Justice of

Peace of this County, or higher Officers; You shall be aiding to your Neighbours against un|lawfull Purveyances: In the time of Hay or Corn Harvest, upon request, you shall cause all Persons to meet to serve by the day for theIn this Oath is briefly comprehen|ded the whole Duty of a Consta|ble, and principal matters of his Office. mowing, reaping, or getting in of Corn or Hay; You shall in Easter-week cause your Pa|rishoners to chuse Surveyors for the mending of the High-ways in your Parish or Liberty; and you shall well and duly according to your knowledge, power and ability, doe and exe|cute all other things belonging to the Office of a Constable, so long as you continue in the said Office. So help you God.


The Oath taken by the Officers of the Marshal's Court.
YOU shall well and truly behave your self in the Office which you now un|dertake of one of the Bearers of the Virges of the Household of our Sovereign Lord the King, and one of the Officers and Ministers of the Court of our Sovereign Lord the King of His Majestie's Palace of Westminster; you shall well and truly execute all process of the said Court that shall come to your hands, and which may be by you executed with as much expedition as possibly you can; you shall execute no Writ but such as is signed and sealed with the sign and seal of this Court. You shall take no bribe, reward, or other gratuity for the exe|cuting of any process of this Court, other than the Court will allow of, or the Parties them|selves without exaction shall willingly afford

you; you shall make a true and just return of all such Writs of this Court as shall be by you sued the next Court day after the same are executed. You shall not disclose any process of the said Court to the Defendant or any other whereby he may have intelligence there|of; you shall not conceal any wrong or injury done or offered to the said Court, but shall forthwith disclose the same to the Judges thereof, and shall be ready with all diligence to perform the uttermost; you shall be com|manded by the Judges of the Court aforesaid.
So help you God.


The Oath of a Constable.
YOU shall well and truly serve the King's Majesty in the Office of a Constable of the Parish of A. all Commissions, Precepts and Warrants that are directed to you, and shall come to your hands, you shall to the best of your power cause to be duly and truly execu|ted, all Riots and Misdemeanours and breach of the Peace suppress. You shall punish all Rogues, Vagrants and idle persons, according to the Laws of this Land in that case made and provided; you shall diligently pursue all Hues and Cries; you shall see that the King's Maje|stie's Watch within the said Town of A. be duly and truly set according to His Majestie's Laws; you shall also do your best endeavour to suppress Drunkenness within the said Pa|ish, and to see the Laws and Statutes concer|ning the same to be duly put in execution; and all other things belonging to the Office of

Constable, so long as you shall continue in your Office, you shall well and truly perform and doe so near as you can.
So help you God.


The Oath of an Ale-caster.
YOU shall swear that you shall well and truly serve the King's Majesty in the Office of an Ale-caster or an Assiser of that Li|berty or Hundred for this year to come; you shall duly and truly see from time to time, that the Bread brought to be sold be truly weighed, and that the same do contain such weight ac|cording to the prizes of Wheat, as the Sta|tute in that case hath provided; likewise you shall have diligent care during the time of your being in office, to all Brewers and Tiplers with|in your Liberty; that they and every of them do make good and wholsome Bear for man's Body, and that the same be not sold before it be assayed by you, and then to be sold agreeable to the prices limited and appointed by the King's Majestie's Justices of the Peace; and all faults committed and done by the Bakers, Brewers and Tylers, or by any of them, you shall make known and present the same at the next general Sessions to be holden for the said County; you shall likewise present all Offences of Drunkenness and haunting of Inns and Ale|houses by the Inhabitants of the Parish, or of any other neighbouring Parishes whereby due punishment may be inflicted upon them for their Offence accordingly; and in every other thing you shall well and truly behave your self

in the said Office for this year to come; so help you God, and by the Contents of that Book.


The Oath of a Commissioner of Sewers.
YE shall swear, that you to your cunning3 H. 8. cap. 5. wit and power, shall truly and indiffe|rently execute the Authority to you given by this Commission of Sewers without any favour, affection, corruption, dread or Malice to be born to any manner of Person or Persons; And as the case shall require, ye shall consent and indeavour your self for your part to the best of your knowledge and power, to the making of such wholsom, just, equall and in|different Laws and Ordinances as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent number of your fellows being in Commission with you, for the due redress, reformation and amendment of all and every such things as are contained and specified in the said Commission; and the same Laws and Ordinances to your cunning, wit and power cause to be put in due execution without fa|vour, meed, dread, malice or affection, as God you help and all Saints.



The Oath of a Searcher in the Custome House.
YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of the Searcher-ship in the Port of N. and doe the King's Profits in all things that belongeth to you to doe by way of your Office, and well and truly ye shall make due search of all the Ships and Vessels, coming in or passing out of the said Port, and truly answer the King of all that shall belong unto him in your said Office without fraud or malign, after your wit and power, As God help you.


The Oath given to a Iury, before Evi|dence given in against a Priso|ner at the Bar.
YOU shall true deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at the Bar, as you shall have in charge according to your Evidence, as near as God shall give you Grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.



The Oath given to a Bayliff or Ser|jeant that attendeth on any Iury or Inquest at an Assise.
YOU shall well and truly keep this In|quest from Meat and Drink, Fire and Candle; you shall not suffer any man to speak with them, neither shall you your self speak with them, more than ask them if they be agreed, untill such time as they be agreed. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.


The Oath of him who craves the Peace against another.
YOU shall swear that the surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is not for hatred or malice which you ear him, but for safety of your Body from harm, which you fear he will doe or procure to be done unto you.
So help you God.



Or thus.
YOU shall swear that the surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is not of any private malice, hatred or evil will, but meerly that you are afraid of your life, or the hurting or maiming of your Body, or the burning of your houses.
So help you God.


Another Oath to give a man upon exa|mination or upon information.
YOU shall true answer make to all such matters as shall be demanded of you concerning the beating of A. B. you shall speak the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
So help you God.


The Oath of him that gives In|formation.
THE Information that you shall give on the King's Majestie's behalf against A. B. shall be the truth, the whole truth, and no|thing but the truth.
So help you God.



Sometimes you pump a Witness by this Oath, thus.
YOU shall true answer make to all such questions as by me shall be demanded of you.
So help you God.


The Oath to be given to any Iury, by whom a Nisi prius is to be tryed.
YOU shall truly try this Suit of Nisi prius between Party and Party, accor|ding to the Evidence as shall be given you in Court, as near as God shall give you Grace.
So help you God, c.


The Oath to be given to such as are to give Evidence between a Party and Party at a Nisi prius.

THE Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest concerning the matter in vari|ence, shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth so near as God shall give you Grace.
So help you God, c.



The same Oath that your Foreman hath sworn, you of your part shall well and truly keep.
So help you God, c.



The Oath of a great Inquest.
YOU shall truly enquire and due present|ment make of all such things as you are charged withall on the King's behalf, the King's Council, your own, and your fellows, you shall well and truly keep; and in all other things the Truth present.
So help you God, c.


The Oath of those that give Evidence upon Bills of Indictment.
THE Evidence that you shall give to the Inquest upon this Bill shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; and you shall not lett so to doe for malice, hatred or evil will, nor for meed, dread, savour or affection.
So help you God, c.




Officers.

The Nomination of Officers by Iustices of the Peace.
Kane. ss. WE His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, whose hands and seals are hereunto set, do nominate and appoint A. B. of the Township of C. in the said County, Bailiff of the Township aforesaid, and D. E. of the said Township under-Bailiff of the same; commanding each of them to take upon him his respective Office aforesaid, untill he shall be from thence lawfully discharged, and forthwith to repair to one of His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace of the Coun|ty aforesaid, before him to take his Oath for the Faithful execution of the said re|spective Office. Given under our hands and seals at F. in the said County the tenth day of Sept. 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Ca|roli Secundi 31.




Orchards.

A Warrant against Robbers of Orchards, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of A. in the said County, c.43. El. c. 7. 1 Iustice, 1 Witness, or Conses|sion.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been du|ly proved before me, That A. B. of your Town of A. Weaver, hath within three months last past, robbed the Orchard or Garden of C. D. of your Parish, and carried away great quantities of Ap|ples, c. or digged up or pulled up his Fruit-trees or cut or carried away his Corn, Grain or Hay growing, or cut his Hedges, Pales, Rales, or Fences, or cut and spiled his Woods or Under|woods, Pools or Trees stan|ding in A aforesaid. to the value of 50 s. And that F. G. of your said Town, Baker, hath pro|cured and abetted him so to doe, and re|ceived and bought of him divers of the same things, to the great damage of the said C. D. contrary to the lae Act of Par|liament in that case made and provided. I do therefore hereby order and require, That the said A. B. shall within six days after notice to him given of this my Or|der, pay the said C. D. 20 s. and that the said F. G. do within six days after notice to him given of this Order, pay unto the said C. D. 30 s. in recompence to him for his wrongs aforesaid; and that these payments he made in the presence of the said Con|stable hereby commanded upon request to

see it done; and hereof you are forthwith to give them notice, and if either of them shall not pay the same, that then you do give me notice thereof, to the end they may be far|ther proceeded against according to the said Statute. And hereof fail not, c. Given under our, c.


Upon non-payment, to be whipt.
To, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been dulyThe Officer upon neglect to suffer imprison|ment till the Offen|der be pu|nished. proved before me, That A. B. of your Town of A. Weaver, hath within three months last past, robbed, c. (as be|fore) so made and provided; Wherefore the premisses considered, and that I judge the said Offenders A. B. and F. G. unable to make satisfaction for the said wrong, I do hereby order that they be forthwith com|mitted to the said Constable of A. to be whipped, the which you are hereby requi|red forthwith to doe at your peril. Given under our hands, c.




Peace.

A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. hath this1 Iustice by the first Assignavi|mus of the Commission of the Peace. Any of these cau|ses are suf|ficient. Lamb. 47. 3 Ed. 1. c. 9. W. 1. 1 R. 2. c. 2. 1 H. 4. c. 1. 2 H. 4. c. 1. 7 H. 4. c. 1. present day taken his corporal Oath before me, that C. D. of, c. That he is afraid that A. B. of C. will beat, wound, maim, kill him, or burn his house. That A. B. of. C. hath already assaulted, beaten, bruised him; and farther, hath threatned him in such sort, that he is afraid that the said A. B. will beat, wound, maim, kill or do him some other bodily harm. That A. B. hath already threatned that he will beat, wound, maim, kill or do him some other bodily harm. Or burn his house. And that he is afraid that he will accordingly so doe. Where the Warrant is against two; for the Peace say, As well for their respective personal ap|pearance, c. And that they respectively will in the mean time, c. And if they or either of these A. B. and C. D. shall refuse so, c. Convey them or him so refusing to the Gaol aforesaid, c. And them or him so conveyed, there to deli|ver, c. To receive them or him so delivered, unto the said Gaol, and them or him so delivered there safely, c. Untill they or he so delivered shall find, c. And

hath therewithall prayed Surety of the Peace against the said C. D. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said C. D. to come before me or some o|ther of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to find sufficient Security, as well for his personal appearance at the next general Session of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the said Court shall be injoyned, as also that he will in the mean time keep His Majestie's Peace towards His said Majesty and all His liege People, and es|pecially towards the said A. B. and if the said C. D. shall refuse so to doe, that then (with|out expecting any further or other warrant) you, some or one of you, do safely convey him to the Gaol aforesaid, and him there de|liver to the said Keeper of the same, (toge|ther with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep untill he shall find such sufficient Security as afore|said. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace where an Assault is made upon an Officer in discharge of his Office.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint was this day made unto us by W. W. Borsholder of the Borough of the Town of C. in the said County, That R. L. of C. in the said County, Gent. and I. W. the younger of C. aforesaid, Shoemaker, did in the month of February last past at C. aforesaid, within the Borough aforesaid, assault and beat seve|ral Persons, and the said W. W. then Bor|sholder of the Borough aforesaid, being then and there present, did then and there (in His Majestie's name) command the said R. L. and I. W. to keep His Majestie's Peace, yet notwithstanding they did con|tinue in breaking the same in his pre|sence, and then and there assaulted him, and threatned to kill him, all which he hath maintained upon his Oath before us, and that he is afraid that the said R. L. and I. W. will kill, wound, beat, or do him some bodily harm, and hath prayed Secu|rity of the Peace to be by us granted un|to him against the said R. L. and I. W.

These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bor|sholders, that you, some or one of you, do bring the said R. L. and I. W. before us, some or one of us, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to find several and respective suffi|cient Security for their several and respec|tive personal appearance at the next gene|ral Quarter-Sessions of the Peace to be hol|den for the said County at M. aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the Court shall be injoyned; and in the mean time to be of good behaviour, as well towards our Sovereign Lord the King, as all His liege People. And in case that they the said R. L. and I. W. or either of them shall refuse so to doe, that then (without expecting any further or other Warrant) you do convey him or them so refusing to the Gaol aforesaid, and them or him to de|liver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper (in His Majestie's name) to receive them or him so delivered unto you into the said Gaol, and them or him there safely keep untill they or he shall give such Security as aforesaid. Given under our hands and seals at, c.



A Supersedeas of a Warrant for the Peace.
To all Iustices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other his Majestie's Officers (to whom it shall or may concern) within this County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as R. I. of H. hath personaly appeared before me, and hath found two sufficient Sureties, viz. A. B. of C. and E. F. of G. either of them in the summ of ten pounds, and the said R. I. in twenty pounds, which they have acknow|ledged before me, by Recognizance to His said Majestie's use, upon condition that the said R. I. shall appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County, and in the mean time to keep the Peace towards His said Majesty and all His liege People; and especially towards L. M. of, c. Therefore these are (in His Majestie's name) to command and require you, and eve|ry of you, That you do forbear and surcease to arrest, attach, take, imprison or otherwise by any means, (for the said occasion) to mo|lest the said R. I. And if he be or hereafter shall be, for the said occasion, and for none other taken, or imprisoned, that then imme|diately, upon sight hereof, you do cause him to be delivered and set at liberty without fur|ther delay. Given under, c.



A Mittimus for breaking the Peace.
Kent ss. I Send you herewithall the Body of A. B. whome I charge and require you, (in His Majestie's name) to take into your safe custody for divers Mis|demeanours committed by him against His said Majestie's Peace). untill he shall pro|cure two good and sufficient Sureties to be bound with him in a Recognizance (to His said Majesty) either of them in the summ of ten pounds, and himself in twenty pounds to appease His said Majestie's Ju|stices of the Peace, at the next Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County; and in the mean time to be of good beha|viour towards His said Majesty and all His hege People. Whereof fail not, c. Gi|ven under, c.


A Release of the Peace.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod Tricesi|mo die Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Nostri Caroli secundi Dei Gratia Angliae, c. Tricesimo, prae|fatus, A. B. venit coram me praedic|to C. D.  Gratis remisit  relaxa|vit (quantum in ipso est) praedictam securitatem pacis, per ipsum versus in|fra

nominatam Prudentiam Pell, coram me petitam, die  anno supradictis.


The Condition of a RecognizanceSee Title Recogni|zance. to appear at Sessions and keep the Peace.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do personally appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the within named County of Kent at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the said Court shall be enjoyned, and do in the mean time keep His Majestie's Peace towards His said Majesty and all His liege People, and espe|cially towards C. D. of, c. That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else to stand in full force.




Plague.

A Pass or certificate in the time of Plague.
To the Constables, Borsholders, and all and every other His Majestie's Officers within the said County, to whom these Presents shall come re|spectively.
Kent ss. WHereas A. B. of C. having occasion to go unto F. and several other Places in the said County to dispatch business in which he is imployed, hath this day desired a Pass from us, that he may go and return without molestation or interruption. These are therefore to certify all whom these Presents may concern, that the Parish of C. aforesaid is free from the Infec|tion of the Plague; And also to will and re|quire you, and every of you to permit and suffer the said A. B. peaceably and quietly to go into and return from F. aforesaid, and such other Places as the said A. B. shall go unto by reason of his business aforesaid. The said A. B. in his passage to and from the Places aforesaid, demeaning himself civilly, without disturbing or interrupting the King's Majestie's Peace. Given under our hands and seals at, c.




Poor.

A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to account and name other fit persons.
To the Constable and Borsholders of A. in the Hundred of B. and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. Within one month after Easter. name) to command you to give notice to the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of A. that they are by us required personally to appear before us at the house of S. M. in C. c. upon Monday the tenth day of May, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to make and yield up unto us a true and perfect account in writing of all summs of money by them recei|ved,43 E. 2. or rated and assessed and not received, for and towards the relief of the Poor of B. and also of such stock (to set the Poor on work) as is in their hands, or in the hands of any of their said Poor to work, and of all other things concerning their said office; And that hereof they fail not at their perils. And you are farther hereby commanded to signifie unto them, that they do then and there also certifie unto us the names of such other sub|stantial Housholders of A. as are thought meetDalt. 364. to be Overseers of the Poor there for the year ensuing. Fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at the, c.



A Warrant for the making new Over|seers of the Poor.
Kent ss. ACcording to the form of the43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices. Quorum unus. Statute in such case made and provided, We whose names are hereunto sub|scribed (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) do nominate and appoint you (whose names are hereunder written) to be (together with the Church-wardens of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid) Over|seers of the Poor of the said Parish for the year to come, (and to doe and perform all such things in and touching the said Office as by Law is required.) Whereof you are not to fail at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, the tenth day of September, c.
A. B. C. D. c.


A Warrant to make Overseers of the Poor, impowering them, and the Church-wardens to collect the Poors Tax, and upon non-payment to de|strain.
Kent ss. WHereas by virtue of an Act of43 Eliz. cap. 2. Parliament, intituled, An Act for Relief of the Poor, in the 43. year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth; We whose names are subscribed, His Majestie's Justices of the Peace in the said County of K. and one of

us of the Quorum dwelling in or near the Pa|rish of Saint A. B. in the said County of K. have nominated and appointed A. B. and C. D. (together with K. L. Church-warden for the time being) according to the said Act of Par|liament, to be Overseers for the Poor of the said Parish; and receiving of the several summs of money taxed and assessed by them, on the several persons on the nineteenth day of Iune instant: These are therefore, according to the said Act of Parliament, to authorize you the said Church-warden and Overseers of the Poor, or any of you, to collect and receive all such summs of money as aforesaid, and the same respectively to levy of all such persons as shall refuse to pay the aforesaid Assessment by way of distress and sale of their Goods for so much, rendring the over-plus, if any be, to the party or parties destrained, and for de|fault of distress, We require all Constables and other Officers to bring before us or some other His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of this County the Bodies of all such persons where no distress can be had, that further course may be taken with them according to Law. Dated the 23. day of Iune, in the 32. year of His now Majestie's Reign, Annoque Dom' 1680.
A. B.


A Confirmation of the Rates for the Poor.
Kent ss. SEen, ratified, and allowed by us whose names are hereunder writ|ten, two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace within the County aforesaid. And we do

hereby authorize the present Church-wardens and Overseers for the Poor within the Parish of A. and every of them, to levy by way of distress and sale of the Goods of all such per|sons, as shall refuse or neglect to pay the several Taxations aforesaid (upon them imposed) rendring to the Owners the overplus, which shall remain upon the said Sale according to the Statute in that case made and provided. Given under our hands and seals, c.


A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish) from the former Overseers Account, by Distress.
To the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your com|plaint)43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices, 1 Quorum. it appeareth unto us, That A. B. and C. D. Church-wardens of the Parish aforesaid, and E. F. and G. H. Over|seers of the Poor of the said Parish in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty six, upon their Account by them made and yielded of and for the moneys by them recei|ved and disbursed for and in execution of their said Office, (according to the form of the Sta|tute in that case made and provided) were in arrear and behind to the said Parish five pounds, and have not yet paid the same over unto you: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of

you do levy the said five pounds by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. C. D.Refusing to account, to be commit|ted to Gaol. and E. F. (rendring to them the overplus) And in default of such Distress, that then you do forthwith certifie the same unto us, to the end that we may farther doe therein as to Ju|stice doth appertain. Hereof fail not. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


A Warrant against an Overseer of the Poor for not keeping of Monthly Meetings.
To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices. 1 Quorum. proved before us, That A. B. (one of the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid, for the year of our Lord one thou|sand six hundred seventy six) did for the space of, c. within the said year, absent himself from such monthly Meetings as (by the dutyTo meet monthly on Sunday evening, or forfeit 20 s. for each de|fault allow|ing a just excuse. of his aforesaid Office) he was (by the Statute in that he half made) injoyned, (contrary to the Statute aforesaid) whereby he hath for|feited five pounds for his absence aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the aforesaid five pounds by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. and the same to imploy and dispose of to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, and

such other uses as by the said Statute is ap|pointed; And in case of default of such Distress, do you certifie the same to us, to the end that there may be such farther proceedings touch|ing the premisses as by Law is required. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


A Warrant to distrain for the Poors Tax.
To the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices, 1 Quorum. All things that are real, and a early Re|venue must be taxed to the Poor. Dalt. 165. The causes of Taxes are three. 1. To set the Poor a Stock. 2. To re|lieve the Impotent money. 3. To put out Appren|tices. Dalt. 150. made by you unto us, That the several persons here under-named have refused to pay unto you the several summs of money adjoyning to their several names, (being asses|sed upon them severally for and towards the necessary Relief of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said several and respective summs of money by Distress and Sale of the several and respective Goods of the said several and respec|tive Offenders, rendring to the parties the over-plus; And in defect of such Distress, that then you, some or one of you, do certifie the same unto us, to the end that there may be such farther proceeding touching the premisses

as to Justice doth appertain. Given under our hands and seals at A. the, c.

A. B. 1 s. 6. d.
C. D. 1 s. 8. d.



A Mittimus where there is not suffi|cient to Distrain.
To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto2 Iustices, 1 Quorum. us, That A. B. of, c. was as|sessed and rated at the summe of, c. for and towards the necessary Relief of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the form of the Sta|tute in that case made and provided) and that for his refusal of payment of the same a War|rant was (according to the form of the said Statute) directed to the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid under the hands and seals of E. F. G. H. c. His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid; and for that it now appeareth unto us, that the said A. B. hath no Goods or Chattels by Distress and Sale whereof the said moneys can be levied, nor will he yet pay the moneys aforesaid: We therefore do send you herewithall the Body of the said A. B. commanding you to receive him into the said Gaol, there to remain (without Bail or Mainprise) untill he shall pay the moneys

aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.


A Warrant for removing one come to a Parish.
To the Church-wardens and others the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been4 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Iustices. 1 of the Quorum, upon com|plaint to  Iustice. made by you to us, (ac|cording to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) That A. B. hath within forty days before the said Complaint come into your said Parish to settle there in a Tenement under the yearly value of ten pounds, and that he is likely to be chargeable to the Parish afore|said, and was last legally settled at B. in, c. by the space of forty days at the least as a Na|tive Native, Housholder, Sjourner, Apprentice, o Servant. there: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require and authorize you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do remove and convey the said A. B. to B. aforesaid, where he was so last legally settled, unless he give sufficient Security for the discharge of your said Parish (to be al|lowed by us.) Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Warrant to send a Wife and Child to her Husband, in the Pa|rish from whence they came.
To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been2 Iustices. by you made unto us, That H. the Wife of R. D. (an Inhabitant in the Pa|rish of C. in the County aforesaid) is lately come into your said Parish of H. and hath brought with her thither a Male-child (of the said R. and H.) of the age of, c. (or there|abouts) and that both the said H. and Child are likely to be chargeable to your said Parish, and you have thereupon craved from us such Relief (touching the premisses) as by Law is appointed: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to authorize and require you, that you, some or one of you, do convey the said H. and Child to the said Parish of C. and there to deliver them to the said R. (in case you can there find him) to be with him settled according to Law; And in case that you can|not there find him, then to deliver the said H. and Child to the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish of C. to be disposed of according to Law. Given under our hands and seals the, c.



A Warrant for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from which he was removed.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas A. B. in May last le|gally1 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. settled as a, c. in the Parish of T. came into the Parish of V. to settle in a Tenement there under the yearly value of ten pounds, and likely to be chargeable to the said Parish, was upon complaint there|of made by the Church-wardens and Over|seers of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made) by Warrant to the said Church-wardens and Overseers (according to the Statute aforesaid) directed, by them removed and conveyed to the aforesaid Parish of T. there to remain (ac|cording to the said Statute;) since which the said A. B. did return (of his own accord) to the said Parish of V. (from whence he was so removed:) These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. to come before us, some or one of us, at the house of T. Inn-holder, called the George Inn in the said County, the fifth day of Iune next ensuing, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to shew cause why he returned to the said

Parish of V. and farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.


Against those who come to Work, and return not at the end of their Work.
To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Iustices. If he shall not return when his work is fi|nished, or shall fall sick or im|potent whilst he is in the said work. made by you unto us, That A. B. an Inhabitant in C. came into your Pa|rish to work, and is not returned upon his finishing thereof: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require and authorize you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do convey the said A. B. to C. aforesaid, there to remain an Inhabitant as formerly he was. Given under, c.



A Mittimus to the House of Correc|tion of one that refuseth to be re|moved after his Work finished.
To the Constables and Borsholders, c. and to the Keeper of the House of Correction, c.
Kent ss. WHereas upon complaint (ac|cording14 Car. 2. cap. 4. 1 Iustice. Vide in the Margin of the Prece|dent War|rant. to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made) That A. B. an Inhabitant in D. came into the Parish of C. in the said County to work, and was not re|turned upon his finishing thereof. And there|upon the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish were (according to the Statute aforesaid) required and authorised to convey the said A. B. to D. aforesaid, there to remain an Inhabitant as formerly he was. Nevertheless the said A. B. (though lawfully required) refused to go thither. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you the said Constables and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there to deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requi|ring also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said House, and there punish him as a Vagabond. Hereof fail you not at your peril. Given, c.



A Warrant and Mittimus for one who runs away, and leaves his Family upon the Parish.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly7 Iac. c. 4. Such person is adjudged an incorri|gible Rogue. 2 Iustices of that Di|vision. Fit to have 2 Witnesses upon Oath. proved before us that A. B. of the Parish of H. being able to labour, and thereby to relieve himself and his Family, did nevertheless lately run away out of this said Parish, and leave his Family upon the Parish: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bors|holders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper, to receive him into the Gaol aforesaid, and him there safely keep untill he shall be from thence delivered by due order of Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.



A Mittimus on the foregoing Warrant.
To the Keeper of the House of Correction.
WE send you herewithall the Body of A. B. of, c. for that he did run away, and left his Wife and two small Chil|dren in the said Parish which are become a Parish charge to the said Parish of, c. straitly charging and commanding you the said Keeper to receive the said A. B. into the said House of Correction, to be dealt with as an incor|rigible Rogue, and him there safely keep, un|till he shall be thence delivered by order of Law. Hereof, c.


A Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor to pay Arrears, and continue weekly Relief to Poor persons.
To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. and to every of them.
K. ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto me by A. B. of your said Town, That you I. S. and K. S. the now Overseers for the Poor of your said Parish formerly paid unto the said A. B. the

summe of 1 s. 6 d. per weeek, for and towards the maintenance of herself and Children, and that you do now suspend the payment thereof, whereby the said A. B. is utterly disabled to provide for herself and Children. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Overseers that pre|sently upon sight hereof, you, or some, pay unto the said A. B. all such Arrears as are accrued since your forbearing the payment of it, and that you continue to her the former allowance of 1 s. 6 d. unto her for the future, or forthwith to shew cause why you refuse to make the same. And hereof, c.


A Warrant to levy Relief for the Poor.
To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. and to every of them.
K. ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto me, That S. G. of your said Town who is a very Poor woman is now very sick and weak, and is utterly dis|abled to provide for herself, or her Children, so that all of them are in danger of perishing for want of Sustenance. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and command you, and every of you, that im|mediately upon sight hereof, you, or some of you, do by a general Levy throughout the whole Town, or otherwise, make such an al|lowance to the said S. G. as may be convenient

for and towards the Relief of herself and Chil|dren; or forthwith shew cause, if you can, why you refuse to make the same. And here|of, c.


A Bond and Condition to the Church|wardens and Overseers of the Poor to save a Town harmless upon in|habiting there.

NOverint universi per praesentes nos R. J. de P. in Com. N. Agricol.  H. B. de T. praedict. pastor. tenen.  firmiter obligar. S. C. de M. in Com. N. praed. Agricol.  T. G. de M. praedict. Agricol. in sexagint. Libris bonae  Le|galis monetae Angl. solvend. eisdem S. C.  T. G. seu eorum alteri vel eorum certis Atturnat. Exe|cutoribus Administratoribus vel Assign. suis ad quam quidem solutionem bene  fidelit. facien. Ob|lgamus nos  utrumque nostr. Haeredes, Executo|res, Administrator. nostros firmiter per praedict. sigil. nostr. sigillat. dat. Sexto die Maij, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae Hiberniae Regis, c.


THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas one E. I. Labourer, is now lately come to inhabit and dwell within the said Parish of M. and likely to be chargeable to the same. If therefore the said R. I. and H. B. or either of them, their or either of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assignes, or every ot any of them doe, and shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter fully

and clearly acquit, discharge, save harmless and indempnifie, as well the within named S. T. and T. G. Church-wardens of the Parish Church of M. aforesaid, and the now Over|seers for the Poor of the said Parish, and their Successors, as also all the Inhabitants and Pa|rishioners of the said Parish, which now are, or at any time hereafter shall be there resident, and every of them, of and from all, and all manner of costs, charges, payments, taxes and expences whatsoever, which shall or may at any time hereafter, in any manner of wise arise, happen, come, grow due, or be impo|sed upon them, or any of them, for or by rea|son or means of the said E. I. his Wife or Children, or any of them, their or any of their residing, living, or inhabiting in the said Pa|rish of M. and of and from all troubles, char|ges and demands whatsoever concerning the same, That then this Obligation to be void, and of none effect, or else to remain in full force and virtue.
Sealed and delivered, c.



A Release (from the Overseers of the Poor) to one that pay'd five pounds to be free'd from keeping a Bastard Child.
To all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, We E. C. of A. in the Parish of K. in the County of N. Gent. and E. W. of K. aforesaid, Baker, the now Overseers of the Poor for the said Parish of K.

send greeting. Whereas there was lately a Ba|stard Child born within the said Town of K. begotten on the body of one F. P. And whereas R. E. of B. in the County of C. Taylor, is adjudged the reputed Father thereof; And whereas it is agreed by and between the said E. C. and E. W. and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said Town of K. and the said R. E. That for and in consideration of the summe of 5 li. of lawfull money of England, to be paid to us the Overseers for the Poor, by the said R. E. We the said Overseers, and our Successors, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said Town of K. should provide for, take care of, and maintain the said Child, and save harmless and indempnifie the said R. E. of and from the keeping and maintaining it, and of and from all taxes, charges and payments, now already or hereafter to be taxed or charged upon the said R. E. for or in respect thereof. Now know ye, That we the said E. C. and E. W. have according to and in full of the said Agreement had and received of the said R. E. the summe of 5 li. and do, by and with the consent and direction, and for and on the behalf of our selves, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said Town of K. ac|quit, release, and for ever discharge, and free him the said R. E. of and from the said summe of 5 li. and from the keeping or main|taining the said Child, and of and from all charges, taxes and payments, now already or hereafter to be charged or taxed upon him the said R. E. to or for the same. In witness whereof we the said E. C. and E. W. have here|unto set our hands and seals, c.




Prisoner.

To allow a poor Prisoner Relief.
To A. B. Gent. Treasurer for Relief of the Pri|soners in His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas T. S. (now Prisoner in the said Gaol) is in very great necessity for want of present Relief for his subsistance there: These are therefore (so far forth as in us lieth) to appoint and autho|rize you the said Treasurer, to allow unto the said T. S. competent Relief (during his neces|sity) in the said Gaol. Given under our hands and seals the third day of Iune, Anno Dom. 1679.


A Discharge of a Prisoner to a Gaoler.
To the Gaoler or Keeper of the common Gaol at A. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. WE R. K. and A. B. Esquires, two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, greeting.

Forasmuch as A. H. of C. c. Barber, hath found sufficient Sureties before us for his per|sonal appearance at the next Quarter-Sessions to be holden at C. aforesaid. These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to require and authorize you, that forthwith upon sight here|of you discharge the body of A. H. aforesaid, if he be detained, for no other cause but upon A. B. and C. D. their Warrant, and this shall be your Discharge. Given under our hands and seals at A. c.


Or thus:
To the Gaoler or Keeper, c.
WHeres A. B. being by me committed to your Custody in your Gaol, till he put in Sureties for the Peace or good Beha|viour, as the case requires. These are there|fore, c. as before.


For a Prisoner to be Bailed.
THese are to charge and require you, that immediately (upon your Receipt of this) you bring before me the body of A. B. now in your Custody to be Bailed, as Law re|quireth.



A Warrant from a Judge to bring a Prisoner from a Gaol to give Evidence.
To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol of N. or his Deputy.
YOU are hereby required to bring the body of T. S. in safe Custody to West|minster, upon Monday next being the seventh day of this instant February, by one of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, to testifie the truth according to knowledge in a certain Cause now depending in the Court of King's Bench, and there to be tried by Nisi prius before the Lord Chief Justice of the said Court, Between P. Earl of C. Plaintiff, and G. B. Defendant, in a plea of Trespass on the case on the part of the Plaintiff, and after his Evidence given to remove him back safe to your Gaol. Hereof fail not. Given under my hand and seal this fifth day of February, 1675.




Quakers.

A Mittimus of Quakers.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at B, in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received in|formation,13  14 Car. 2. cap. 1. 1 Iustice. That A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and I. K. being persons com|monly called Quakers, and every of them of the age of sixteen years or upward, have late|ly departed from the places of their several habitations, and assembled themselves at T. in the said County, (under pretence of joyning in a Religious Worship not authorized by the Laws of this Realm: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name.) to will and require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and I. K. to come before me, or some other of His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace of the said Coun|ty with sufficient Securities to be bound with them to appear at the next Quarter-Sessions, in order to their Conviction of the Offence afore|said; and in case of their, or any of their re|fusal, or neglect so to doe, that then you do convey such of them so refusing or neglecting, to the aforesaid Common Gaol, and deliver

them or him so refusing or neglecting to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive them or him into the said Gaol, and them or him there safely to keep, untill they or he shall be bound with such Se|curities as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.
Upon Conviction by verdict or Confession, The first Offence a Fine not exceeding 5 li. The second Offence 10 li.
Upon every Offender on non-payment, first Of|fence 3. months imprisonment, second Offence 6 months, the third Offence, abjure the Realm. But upon taking the Oaths, Con|forming, and giving Security not to meet in such unlawfull Assemblies, to be dischar|ged of all the penalties.



Rape.

A Warrant concerning a Rape.
To the Constables and Borsholders, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as we received Informa|tion13 Ed. 1. 24. 2 Iustices. and Charge against A. B. of C. c. touching a certain Felony, (that is to say) with the carnal Knowledge and Ravish|ment of M. the Wife of C. D. of, c. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com|mand you, and every of you, that, you some or one of you do attach the body of the said A. B.

and bring him before us, or some of us, to the house of, c. on the twelfth day of this instant May, at one of the clock in the afternoon, to be examined touching the premisses, and to be further dealt with according to Law. Here|of fail not at your perils. Given under, c.



Rates for Hay, Oats, c.

A Warrant to appoint Rates for Hay, Oats, c. upon His Ma|jestie's passing through any place.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A- in the said County, and to every of them.
K. ss. WHereas we have received notice from the Green-cloath, that His Majesty will shortly pass through the Road13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices. in this County leading between B. and C. We therefore (according to the form of the Sta|tute in that case made and provided) do set down and appoint the Rates and Prices to be paid during His Majestie's abode within this Division, for Hay, Oats, and other Accommo|dations for Horses, as is here under written: (which Rates are to be observed and kept and obeyed by all persons concerned at their perils.) And we do will and require you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do in the Market-town within the said Hundred, on the Market-day now next ensuing, cause to be pro|claimed the Rates aforesaid; as also that you

do in the like manner cause to be proclaimed the Rates aforesaid, in all the Towns and Villa|ges within the said Hundred within, c. days now next ensuing; to the end that notice may be taken of the same Rates and Prices. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.
For a Bushel of Oats, c.
And so ratably for every greater or lesser quan|tity, c.


A Warrant for levying the Penalty forfeited for not observing the Rates aforesaid.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro|ved13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 1 Iustice. Lodging, Horse|meat, Sta|ble-room, or other Ac|commoda|tions. before me, That A. B. of C. in the said County, Inn-keeper, hath taken of C. D. Yeoman of the Guards, more for his Lodg|ing, c. during His Majestie's late abode within this Division than by the Justices of the Peace of this County was (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) set down and appointed, (contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy (to the use of the said C. D. by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B.) 40 s. by him forfeited to the said C. D. for the Offence aforesaid, returning the over-plus to the said A. B. (the charge of the Distraining being first deducted.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.




Recognizances.

When you take a Recognizance of anyDirections thereupon. it must be in Latine; set down the time of making it, the Principal's name and dwelling Place, and his Trade or Calling, and so of the others his Sureties, and bind them (in a summ of money) to the King; and that being done, you reade the same Recognizance in English thus, (viz.) for the Peace.
YOU A. B. of C. c. do acknowledge your self to owe unto our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty twenty pounds. And you C. D. of H. c. and E. F. of I. c. his Sureties do likewise each of you acknowledge to owe unto our said Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty ten pounds apiece to be levi|ed of your several Goods and Chattels, Land and Tenements to His said Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, upon condition, That if the said A. B. shall personally appear before our said Sovereign Lord the King's Majestie's Ju|sticesA Condi|tion for the Peace. of the Peace at the next general Ses|sions of the Peace to be holden for this Bur|rough of A. and do then and there make an|swer unto all such matters which on His Ma|jestie's behalf shall be objected against him, and in the mean time to keep the Peace to|wards our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty

and all His Liege-people, but especially to|wards one G. H. and do not depart thence without Licence from the Court, then your Recognizance to be void or else to stand in full force.
The Recognizance being made is to be en|grossedDirections. in Parchment, and subscribed with the Justice's hand onely, But he that en|ters into it, need not put his hand or seal to it.
Note, All Recognizances for the Peace are to be stiled, At the next Sessions of the Peace; And for Felony, At the next Gaol-delivery.


The manner of entring the note of Recognizances in your Book of Recognizances.
A. B. de C. c. xx li. ad Comparen|dum ad proximam Sessionem Pacis  conservare versus C. D. c. E. F. de C. c. x li.  G. H. de C. c. x li.

Subscribe the Cause thus.
Bound over for the suspicious stealing of a [Cow] being the Goods of A. H. c. [as the Case requireth.]
R. P. de Paroch. A. c. Victular 10 li.The Re|cogni|zance for the Li|cence of an Alehouse.
R. S. de Paroch. A. c. Victular 5 li.
P. S. de Paroch. A. c. Victular 5 li.
Sub Conditione quod praedict' R. P. bene  fideliter observavit omnes  singulos Articulos in Licentia sua pro Tipulatione Content' Capt'  Recogn' XX die Maii Anno Dom. 1680. Coram Nobis, c.
The Recognizance must be certified to the3 H. 7. c. 1. 1  2 Ph.  M. c. 13. 2  3 Ph.  M. c. 10. next Sessions or Gaol-delivery where he or they is, are, or hath been Justices; that the Party so bound may be called: And if the Par|ty make default, the same then there to be re|corded; and the same Recognizance, with the Record of that default shall be sent and certi|fied in the Chancery, the King's Bench, or in|to the Exchequer.


Every Condition of a Recognizance must have these things.

1. It may be in English.
2. It may have the first words [The Condi|tion of this Recognizance is such, That if the above bounden A. B. c.]
3. It must shew what he is bound to doe, As [personally to appear at the next Quarter|sessions

to be holden for the County of K. and in the mean time to be of Good behaviour to|wardsBehaviour. our Sovereign Lord the King and all his People,] or as the case requireth.
4. The Close thus [That then this Recogni|zance to be void or else to stand in force.]

All this may be done on the back of the Recognizance or underneath it.



A single Recognizance taken before Justices of the Peace.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod tertio die Aprilis anno Regni Domini no|stri Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defenso|ris, c. venerunt coram A. B. C. D. Armig. Iust. dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com. K. conservand. Assig. R. H. de S. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, T. H. de eodem Carpenter, ac R. S. de F. in Com. praed. Mercer,  Recog|nover. se debere dicto Dom. Regi, (viz.) quill|bet Manucaptor praed. Quinque libras  praed. R. H. decem libras bonae  legalis monetae An|gliae (solvend. eidem Dom. Regi in Festo Nati|vitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae proximo futuro post datum praesent.) Et nisi fecerint, concesse|runt pro se Haered. Executor.  Administra|tor. suis per praesentes, quod dictae separales summae leventur  recuperentur de Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Bonis, Catallis  Haereditamentis ipsorum R. H. T. H. R. S. haered. Executor.  Assign. suorum, ubicunque fuerint invent. Dat. c.



Another single Recognizance.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Ja|nuarii Anno Regni Dom. nostri Ca|roli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, c. A. B. de C. in Com. praed. Yeoman, personaliter venit co|ram R. K. Armig. uno Iust. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praedict. Conservand. Assign.  Recognovit se debere dicto Dom. Regi decem li|bras bonae  legalis monetae Angliae, de Bonis  Catallis, Terris  Tenementis suis fieri  Le|vari, ad opus dicti Dom. Regis, Haered.  suc|cessor. suorum, si defecerit in Corditione in|dorsat.


A Recognizance to prefer an In|dictment, or to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Septemb. anno Regni Dom. nost. Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defenso|ris, c. A. B. de C. in Coin. K. Yeoman in propria persona sua, venit coram me R. K. uno Iusticiariorum dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in dicto Com. conservandam necnon ad diversas Felonias, Transgressiones,  alia malefacta in eodem Com. perpetranda audiendum,  determinandum as|signat. Et cognovit se debere dicto Domino Re|gi Quadraginta Libras de Bonis  Catallis, Terris  Tenementis suis ad opus dicti Domini Regis levandas, sub Conditione indorsata, viz.



A Recognizance for two to give Evidence.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod decimo die Februarii anno Regni Dom. nost. Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Fran|ciae Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, c. W. B. de S. in Com. praedict. Husbandman, W. R. de S. in eodem Com. Husbandman, in propriis personis suis venerunt coram me R. K. uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem, in Com. praed. conserv. necnon ad diversas Felonias, Trans|gressiones,  alia Malesacta in eodem Com. per|petrand. audiend.  determinand. assignat. Et quilibet uterque eorum per se cognovit, se debere dicto Domino Regi viginti libr. de Bonis,  Ca|tallis, Terris  Tenementis suis ad opus dicti Do|mini Regis levandas, sub conditione indorsata.


A Recognizance to give in Evidence against a Prisoner.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo ter|tio die Maii anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, c. T. R. de E. in praed. Yeoman, venit coram me R. K. uno Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assignat.  cognovit se debere dicto Domino Regi Quinque libr. legalis monetae Angliae, sub conditione, quod si ipse perso|naliter comparebit coram Iust. dicti Domini Re|gis

ad proximam generalem Gaolae delib. in Com. praed. tenend. ad tunc  ibidem ostendendum in Evidenc. secundum formam stat. vers. A. B. nu|per de C. in Com. praed. qui modo attach.  sus|pect. Feloniae Gaolae dicti Domini Regis Com. praedict. commissus existit; quod tunc, c. alio|quin, c.


For the Good behaviour.
MEmorandum, Quod R. A. de C. in Com. praed. Gen. B. A. de W. in eodem Com. Gen. S. A. de W. praed. Yeoman, B. R. de W. praed. Yeoman, A. C. de W. praed. Yeoman, veniunt coram me W. M. Armig. uno Iusticiar. Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem in Com. praed. con|servand. assign.  quilibet praed. B. A. S. A. B. R. A. C. manucepit pro dicto R. A. in vi|ginti libris legalis monetae Angliae,  praed. R. A. manucepit pro seipso in viginti libris consimilis mo|netae, viz. quod dictus R. A.  modo se bene ge|rat erga dictum Dominum Regem  cunctum populum suum,  praecipue erga T. P. de S. in Com. praedict. Husbandman, pro uno anno nunc proxim. futur. ita quod ipse non inferet nec inferri procurabit, per se nec per alium, nomine suo ei|dem T. P. seu alicui de populo dicti Domini Re|gis damnum aliquod seu gravamen de Corporibus suis per insidias, insultus, seu aliquo alio modo quod in laesionem seu perturbationem Pacis dicti Domini Regis cedere valeat quovismodo: quas quidem separales pecuniarum summas praedictas, quilibet manucapt. praedictorum per se, ac dictus R. A. per se recognov. se debere dicto Domino Regi  concessur. eas de terris, tenementis,  catallis suis,  cujuslibet eorum, ad opus

dicti Domini Regis levand. si dictus R. A. in praemissis, seu in aliquo praemissorum deliquerit,  inde legitimo modo convictus fuerit. Dat. de|cimo die Aprilis. Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia, c.


Another.
K. ss. MEmorandum, c.  quod ipse A. B. interim se bene geret erga Dom. Reg.  cunctum populum suum,  praeci|pue erga L. M. Et quod ipse non inferet nec in|ferri procurabit per se nec per alios, damnum ali|quod seu gravamen praefato L. M. seu alicui de populo ipsius Dom. Regis de Corporibus suis, per insidias, insultus, seu aliquo alio modo, quod in laesionem seu perturbationem pacis dict Dom. Regis cedere valeat quovis modo, viz. uterque praedict. D. E. H. J. sub poena Quinquagint. libr.  praedict. A. B. sub poena Cent. libr. c.


A Recognizance to give in Evi|dence against one that is suspec|ted of Felony.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo die Novemb. Anno Regni Dom. no|stri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor', c. Tricesimo R. T. nuper de C. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, venit coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praedict. conservand. assignat.  Recognovit se de|bere

dict. Dom. Reg. Quinque libras legalis mo|netae Angl. sub conditione, quod ipse personaliter comparebit coram me  sociis meis Iustic. praed. ad proximam generalem Gaolam in Com. praed. tenend. Et ad tunc ibidem ostend. in Evidenc. secundum formam Statuti versus D. E. in Com. praed. qui modo attach.  suspect. Feloniae Gaolae dict. Dom. Reg. Com. praed. commissus existit quod tunc, c. alioquin, c.


A Recognizance for keeping of a Tavern.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Octob. Anno Regni Dom. nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, c. vicesi|mo tertio venerunt coram nobis R. K. H. W. Armig. Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem dict. Dom. Reg. in Com. E. conservand. necnon alia malefacta ac diversas transgress. perpetrat. audiend.  terminand. assignatis A. B. de E. in Com. praed. L. R. A. in Com. praed. H. W. T. de eadem in eodem Com. Weaver, Et Manuceperunt, viz. quilibet manucapt. praedict. sub paena Quinquagint. solid. Et praedict. M. T. assumpsit pro se sub poena Quinque libr. quod ipse W. T. bene gerat Tabernam secundum formam Statuti. Quas quidem seperales summas quilibet eorum cognovit se debere dict. Dom. Reg. Atque volunt,  concedunt de Terris  Tenementis, Bo|nis  Catallis suis  cujuslibet eorum fieri  levari, si praedict W. T. defecerit.



A Recognizance for one that is Bail for a Boy that lay under a Bed in the Night.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo sep|timo die Martii Anno Regni Re|gis Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, c. vi|cesimo T. H. de B. in Com. K. Taylor, in pro|pria persona sua venit coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in dicto Com. K. conservand. assignat.  ma|nucepit pro T. H. de B. praed. filio suo quod ipse praedict. T. H. filius comparebit coram Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in dicto Com. con|servand. assignat. ad proximam generalem Sessio|nem pacis in Com. praed. tenend. ad respondend. F. D. pro fractione  intratione in domum Mansionalem ipsius F.  omnibus quae versus ipsum tunc  ibidem objicientur sub poena ma|nucapt. praed. quadragint. libr. quam quidem summam quadragint. libr. praed. manucapt. re|cognovit se debere dicto Dom. Regi de terris  tenementis, bonis  catallis suis ad opus dicti Domini Regis haered.  suceessorum fieri  Levari si contingerit ipsum T. H. filium prae|missa in aliquo infringere in cujus rei Testimoni|um ego praedict. W. P. sigillum meum apposui dat. die  Anno supradict.



A Recognizance for Bastardy where two are Manucapters for the man in custody.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod septimo die Augusti Anno Regni Regis Ca|roli Secundi Angliae, c. Tricesimo primo An|noque Dom. 1679. M. F. de S. in Com. praed. Victualler, E. W. de S. praed. Gen. venerunt Coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iustic. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assign. Et manuceperunt  uterque eorum manucepit pro H. I. de parochia D. in Com. praed. Husband|man, sub poena vigint. libr. legalis monetae An|gliae, quas quidem summas dict. Domino Regi debere concesserunt  uterque eorum concessit de bonis  catallis, terris  tenementis suis fieri  levari ad opus  usum dicti Dom. Regis haered.  successor. suorum si praefat. H. I. defe|cerit in conditione indorsat. c.


A Recognizance for a married Wo|man upon a Rescue.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod tricesimo die Julii Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, c. Angliae, c. vicesimo quarto Anno Domini 1672. W. M. de E. in Com. praed.  R. G. de F. in Com. praed. Gen. venerunt coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini Re|gis ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assign. Et

manuceper.  uterque eorum manucepit pro AnnaIf 3. quili|bet eorum. uxore T. C. de I. infra Parochiam S. in Com. praed. Taylor, sub poena vigint. libr. legalis monetae Angliae, quas quidem summas dicto Domino Regi debere concesserunt  uterque eorum concessit de bonis  catallis, terris  tenementis suis  utriusque eorum ad opus  usum dicti Domini Regis fieri  levari si praefat. A. C. defecerit in conditione indorsata.
Capt.  Cogn. die  Anno supradict. coram me.


A Recognizance for one that hath hurt another, and on the War|rant of Behaviour.
MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Mail Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, c. Angliae, c. Annoque Domini, c. venerunt coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com praedict. con|servand. assign. apud N. in Com. praed. W. H. de B. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, R. H. de eadem  assumpserunt pro seipsis sub poena ducentarum libr. legalis monetae Angliae E. L. de eadem villa praedict. Malster, E. L. de M. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, tunc  ibidem in propriis personis suis simi|liter venerunt  manuceperunt  uterque eo|rum seperatim manucepit pro praefat. W. H. R. H. sub poena sexagint. libr. legalis monetae Angliae, quas quidem separales summas dicto Domino Regi debere concesserunt  quilibet

eorum concessit de bonis  catallis, terris  tenementis suis,  cujuslibet eorum fieri  levari ad opus  usum dicti Dom. Regis hae|red.  successor. suorum si praefat. W. H. de|fecerint in Conditione indorsat.


For the Peace.
MEmorandum, Quod R. W. de S. in Co|mitatu1 Iustice. praedicto Labourer, J. B. de S. praed, Husbandman, R. C. de W. in dicto Comitatu Com. Husbandman, ven. coram me E. Littleton Armig. uno Iusticiar. Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem in Comitatu praedicto conservand. assign. apud W. in Comitatu praedicto,  quilibet praedictorum. J. B. R. C. manuceperunt pro dicto R. W. in decem libris legalis monetae An|gliae,  dictus R. W. manucepit pro seipso in vi|ginti libris consimilis monetae Angliae, viz. quod dictus R. W. comparebit ad generalem Sessionem Pacis in Comitatu praed. proxim. tenend.  quod ipse interim Pacem dicti Domini Regis erga ipsum Dominum Regem  cunctum populum suum,  praecipue erga J. A. de S. in Comitatu praedict. Yeoman, conservabit: quas quidem separales pe|cuniarum summas praed. quilibet eorum recognovit se debere dicto Domino Regi,  eas concessur. de terris, tenementis, bonis,  catallis suis, ad opus dicti Domini Regis levand. si dictus R. W. in aliquo praemissorum deliquerit,  inde legitimo modo convictus fuerit. Dat. decimo die Jan. Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia, c.



For Felony.
MEmorandum, Quod 20 die Maii Anno1 Iustice. Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia, c. R. C. de L. Gent. E. C. de L. praedict. Gent. J. B. de eadem, Gent. M. C. de eadem, Yeoman, veniunt coram me J. H. Armigero uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com. praedict. conservand. assign.  manuceperunt pro R. B. de L. in Com praedict. Gent. viz. quilibet eorum Corpus pro Corpore, quod idem R. B. personaliter comparebit coram praefat. Iusticiar.  sociis suis, ad proximam generalem Sessionem Pacis, in Com. praedicto tenend. ad stand. recto in Cur. si quis ver|sus eos tunc loqui voluerit de diversis Feloniis  transgress. unde idem R. B. indictatus ex|istit (ut dicitur)  ad respond. dicto Do|mino de eisdem, prout debet. Datum, c.


A Release of a Recognizance writ|ten under the Recognizance thus, by the same Iustice, or by some other, c.
EGO praefatus A. B. qui supra nominatum C. D. de Preston ad securitatem Pa|cis inveniendam ex mea discretione compuli, eandem securitatem de se bene gerendo quan|tum in me est ex mea discretione; sexto die

Maii, Anno Domini 1680. Remisi  Relaxa|vi, In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Re|laxationi meae sigillum meum apposui Datum.


The Parties Release of the Peace.
MEmorandum, Quod tertio die Julii An|no 32. Regis Caroli Secundi, c. A. B. venit coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiariorum Domini Regis nunc ad Pa|cem, c.  Gratis Remisit  Relaxavit (quantum in se est) praedictam securitatem pacis per ipsum versus supra nominatum T. H. petitam. In cujus rei testimonium ego praefa|tus R. K. c. Dat. apud, c.
And in like sort the Justice or Justices of Peace may doe, which took Sureties for Good behaviour if they see cause.




Riot.

A Precept to the Sheriff to return a Iury to inquire upon a Riot, Rout, or unlawfull Assembly.
Kent ss. W. B. and R. R. Esquires;2 Iustices. 13 H. 4. cap. 7. To be inqui|red within one month after the Riot. 19 H. 7. cap. 13. two of His Majestie's Ju|stices assigned to keep the Peace in the Coun|ty aforesaid; to the Sheriff of the said Coun|ty, Greeting. On the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King we command you, that you do cause to come before us at H. in the Parish of G. in the said County, upon Thursday the 10. day of Iune next ensuing, four and twen|ty honest, sufficient and lawfull men, dwelling within the said County, (whereof every of them have to Lands and Tenements within the County aforesaid, to the yearly value of twen|ty shillings of Charter-hold or Free-hold, or twenty six shillings eight pence of Copyhold, or of both, over and above all charges) for to inquire for His Majesty of some Riots, Routs, and unlawfull Assemblies, committed and done at S. in the said County, (as it is said.) And that you do return upon every Person so by you impannelled in issues, at the first day twenty shillings, at the second day forty shillings to be by them forfeited if that they appear not, and be sworn to inquire the premisses at the first day: All which you shall in no case omit upon pain of twenty pounds.

which you shall forfeit to His said Majesty (if you shall make default in not returning the said Persons or issues in form aforesaid.) And have you then the names of the said Jurors, and this Precept. Given under our hands and seals at T. in the said County, c.


The like Precept in Latine.
K. ss. T. C.  R. K. Armigeri (duo Iu|sticiariorum2 Iustices. 13 H. 4. cap. 7. (To be in|quired within a month af|ter the Riot.) 19 H. 7. cap. 13. Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. suo praed. conservand. assign. necnon ad diversas felonias, transgressiones  alia malefacta in eodem Com. perpetrat. audiend.  terminand. assignat.) Vic. ejusdem Com. salutem. Ex parte Dom. Regis tibi praecipimus, Quod venire facias coram nobis apud S. in Com. praed. die Iovis 26 die Aprilis prox. sequen. ad horam octavam ante meridiem ejusdem diei viginti  quatuor probos, sufficientes  legales homines infra Com. praed. commorantes, quorum quilibet habeat terras  tenementa infra eundem Com. ad valentiam viginti solidorum per chart. tent. sive liberi te|nementi, vel viginti  sex solidorum  octo de|nariorum terrae per copiam rotulorum Curiae tent. (ultra omnia onera) Ad inquirend. pro Dom. Rege super sacram. suum de quibusdam Riotis, Routis,  illicitis aggregationibus commiss.  perpetrat. apud H. in Com. praed. (ut dicitur) Quodque retornes super quamlibet personam per te impanellat. in exitibus viginti solidos per ipsos forisfaciend. si non compareant ut jurati sint ad inquirend. de praemissis ad diem illum, omnia quae nullatenus omitt. sub paena viginti librar. quam noveris te forisfactur. eidem Dom. Regi

si defalt. feceris in non retorn. personas prd. sive exit. in forma praed. Et habeas ibi tunc no|mina Iur. ill.  hoc praeceptum. Dat. sub Si|gillis nostris, apud S. ultim. die Martii, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi (Dei gra|tia) Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae  Hiberniae Regis (Fidei Defensor. c.) 27.


A Warrant for certain Riotous Persons.
To the Constables, c.
Kent. ss. FOrasmuch as I am credibly in|formedHis Maje|sty shall bear the los|ses that the Iustice of Peace shall sustain in the execu|tion of the Statute. 13 H. 4. cap. 7. Of Riots, c. 2 H. 5. c. 8. by A. B. Gent. that C. D. c. and diverse and sundry other Per|sons unknown, have come upon the Ground of the said A. B. in M. aforesaid, and there have been aiding and assisting to these Persons here|under named, in forceable manner, to carry away the Wood and Timber, c. there of late growing, being the Wood and Timber of A. B. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, and every of you, to arrest as well the said Parties hereunder named, as the said Parties unknown, being shewed unto you by the said A. B. and to bring the same before me, and this shall be your Warrant and Dis|charge. Given under, c.




Rogues.

For Apprehending and Committing a dangerous Rogue.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the County afore|said.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a Rogue, Vagabond, wandring, idle or dis|orderly Person was1 Iac. c. 7. 2 Iustices. found and apprehended at C. in the Hundred and County aforesaid, in a ge|neral privy Search by our command made (ac|cording to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) and brought before us this present day at our Assembly at T. in the County aforesaid: We do therefore (in His Majestie's name) command you the Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do (at the charge of the said Hundred) con|vey the said A. B. to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Pre|cept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there set him to work and labour, or otherwise to deal with him according to Law, untill he shall be from thence lawfully delivered. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at A. aforesaid the, c.



A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a wandring39 Eliz. cap. 4. 2 Iustices of the Quor. Rogue doth appear to be dan|gerous Dan|gerous to the inferi|our sort of People, or one that will not be reformed of his roguish kind of life by any other provision contain'd in the Statute in that behalf made. We do therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) charge and command you the said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do safely convey the said A. B. to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep untill the next Quarter-sessions of the Peace, to be hol|den for the said County at A. aforesaid, that he may then and there be farther dealt withall according to the Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under, c.




Sacrament.

A Certificate for Receiving the Sacra|ment and Oath.
Kent ss. WE A. B. Minister of the Pa|rish-Church25 Car. 2. cap. 2. of C. in the County of D. and E. F. Church-warden of the same Parish and Parish-Church, do hereby cer|tify, That M. N. of O. in the County of P. Gent. upon the Lord's day, commonly called Sunday, the 10. day of Iune, immediately af|ter Divine Service and Sermon, did in the Pa|rish-Church aforesaid receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the usage of the Church of England. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our hands the 10. day of, c.
A. B. Minister of the Parish and Parish-Church of C.
E. F. Church-warden of the said Parish and Parish-Church.
H. I. of K. in the County of K. Gent. and L. M. of, c. do severally make Oath, That they do know M. N. in the above written Cer|tificate named, and who now present hath de|livered the same into this Court; and do far|ther severally make Oath, that they did see the said M. N. receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in the Parish-Church of C. c. in the said Certificate mentioned, and upon the day,

and at the time in the said Certificate in that behalf certified and expressed; and that they did see the Certificate above written subscribed by the said A. B. Minister of the said Church, and E. F. Church-warden there; and farther, that the said H. I. and L. M. do say upon their respective Oaths, that all other matters or things in the said Certificate recited, mentioned or ex|pressed, are true, as they verily believe.


A Certificate of Receiving the Sacrament according to the Act.
K. ss. MEmorandum, That at the Quarter|sessions for the said County hol|den at C. in the County aforesaid, upon Tues|day the 22. day of Iuly in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy three, and from thence adjourned to M. in the said Coun|ty, and there holden (by the same Adjourn|ment) upon Monday the 28. day of Iuly afore|said, R. W. of the Parish of M. in the County aforesaid Esq did (upon the said 28. of Iuly in the said Court of Quarter-sessions there) de|liver into the said Court a Certificate under the hands of I. P. Clerk, Minister of the Parish and Parish-Church aforesaid, and I. M. Church|warden of the same Parish and Parish-Church, by which they certified, that the said R. W. up|on the Lord's day (commonly called Sunday) the 18. day of M, in the said year of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy three, (im|mediately after Divine Service and Sermon) did (in the Parish-Church aforesaid) receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the usage of the Church of England.



A Testimonial upon the Receiving the Sa|crament according to the Act.
Kent ss. MEmorandum also, That at the time and place of the said de|livery of the said Certificate, A. B. C. D. and E. F. did (upon enquiry made by the said Court) then and there severally make Oath, that they did know the said R. W. in the said Certificate named; and that they were present, and delivered the same into that Court; and that they did see the said R. W. receive the Sa|crament of the Lord's Supper at the time, day and place, and in the manner in the said Certi|ficate certified; and that they did also see the Certificate aforesaid subscribed by the said Mi|nister and Church-warden; and that the said R. W. did upon the 20. day of May then last past (and for several years before) inhabit, and then did inhabit in the above named Pa|rish of H. and County of Kent.


A Declaration to be subscribed ac|cording to the Act.
I A. B. do declare, That I do believe that25 Car. 2. cap. 2. there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine at, or after the Consecration thereof by any person what|soever.




Scavingers.

A Warrant for Scavingers to Distrain.
To the Constables and Headboroughs, and other His Majestie's Officers of the Liberty of A. c.
Kent ss. WHereas Complaint hath been made unto us, That the se|veral Persons whose names are hereunder writ|ten, being Inhabitants in the Liberty of A. have refused, and yet do refuse to pay the summs of money hereunder mentioned, being respective|ly rated, assessed and taxed on them for and towards the scouring and clensing of the Streets according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and com|mand you, and every of you, to bring the said Persons so refusing before us to shew cause for such their refusing; And if they or any of them shall refuse to come before us, or shall absent themselves, or refuse to be spoke withall, due notice in writing being left at their respective Houses, That then you immediately levy all and every the said several summs unpaid, and all the Arrearages thereof of all and every the said Per|sons so refusing by Distress and Sale of the Of|fenders goods, you rendring to the Parties the overplus that shall remain upon the Sale of the said Goods, if any shall be. And for your so doing this shall be your Warrant. Given un|der our hands and seals this, c.




Search.

A Warrant to Search for stoln Goods.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received In|formation Iustice. by A. B. that two Sheep were lately feloniously taken and stoln from him: These are therefore (in His Maje|stie's name) to command you, that immedi|ately upon receipt hereof you do make dili|gent Search for the said Sheep in all and every such suspected Houses and Places within the said Hundred as you and the said A. B. shall think convenient; And if upon your said Search you find any of the said Sheep, or o|ther just cause of suspicion, that then you bring all such suspected Persons before me, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be examined touching the premisses. And farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



A Warrant to make general Search for Rogues, Vaga|bonds, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's7 Iac. c. 4. name) to command you, and every of you, that (taking assistance of sufficient men of the said Hundred) you do (in the night before the twentieth day of October next ensuing) make a gene|ral privy Search within every of the Pari|shes, Villages and Hamlets within the same, for the finding out and apprehending of all Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandring and idle persons, in and about the said Parishes, Villages, and Hamlets; And that such Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandring and idle persons, as you shall then find and apprehend, (in the said Search) you do bring before us, or some of us, on the aforesaid twentieth day of October, at the house of Iohn Price in C. at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, there to be examined of their idle and wandring life, and to be farther dealt withall according to Law; And that you do then and there also give unto us an account and reckoning (upon Oath, in wri|ting, and under the hand of the Minister of each respective Parish) what Rogues, Vaga|bonds,

and wandring and disorderly persons you have apprehended, both in the same Search, and also since the last like general Search made, and how many have been pu|nished, or otherwise sent to the House of Correction. (All which you are not to ne|glect upon forfeitures of such fines, pains and penalties as (by the Statute in such case made and provided) may be by us in|flicted upon you for such your neglect.) We do likewise hereby (in His Majestie's name) farther command you, and every of you, to bring before us, or some of us, (at the time and place aforesaid) all such persons (within the said Hundred) as be masterless (or live out of Service,) or be common Alehouse-haunters, or expenders of their mo|neys in riotous living, (not duly labouring for their living whereby so to maintain them) to the end that we may proceed against them as to Justice doth appertain; And that you your selves be then and there also personally present, to give account of the execution of this our Warrant. Hereof fail not at your pe|rils. Given under our hands and seals at, c.




Servants.

For sending a Servant to his Service to serve the time agreed, to pre|vent Charge on the Parish.
To the Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as you have complained2 Iustices, 1 Quorum. unto us, That B. C. being re|tained into Service by D. E. of T. c. for on year (not yet expired) is come out ofhe or she. her Service in the said Parish of T. and likely to be chargeable to the same: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith convey the said B. C. to her said Master (or Mistress) and deliver her unto him (or her) to remain with him (or her) untill she shall be from him (or her) lawfully discharged; and in case of refusal of the said D. E. to receive the said B. C. accordingly, That you, some or one of you, do forthwith certifie us, or one of us of the same, to the end that such farther proceedings may be thereupon had as by Law is required. Hereof fail not. Given under our hands and seals at A. the, c.



A Mittimus against one that retur|neth into a Parish after he was removed.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas upon complaint (ac|cording to the form of the14 Car. 2. cap. 12. Statute in that behalf lately made) That A. B. an Inhabitant Native, Housholder, Sojourner, Apprentice, or Servant. Last legally settled in, c. as, c. in D. came into the Parish of H. in the County aforesaid, To work if the case be so, otherwise leave these words out. To settle in a tenement there under the yearly value of 1 li. to work, and was not returned, and thereupon the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, did (according to the Sta|tute aforesaid) convey the said A. B. to D. aforesaid, there to remain an Inhabitant as for|merly he was; after which said conveying, the said A. B. did return of his own accord to the aforesaid Parish of H. from whence he was re|moved: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the aforesaid House of Correc|tion, and there deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Pre|cept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there punish him as a Vagabond. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.



A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the Ma|ster for putting away his Servant before the end of his term.
To the Constables and Borsholders of A. c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto us5 Eliz. 4. this day upon Oath, That A. B. of your Town of A. Yeoman, hath put C. D. his Servant (lawfully retained with him) out of his service, before the end of the term agreed, contrary to the Law of this Realm. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, forthwith upon the receipt hereof that you levy the summ of 40 s. (by him the said A. B.20 s. to the King, and 20 s. to the Prosecutor. forfeited by the Statute for his offence) by way of Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods, upon his not payment thereof, rendring to the said A. B. the over-plus, (if any be) And that you bring with you the said 40 s. at the next general Quarter-Sessions of the Peace to be holden for these parts of K. except the said A. B. shall shew good cause to the contrary, to His Majestie's Justice of the Peace at A. afore|said, upon Thursday next being the twelfth day of this instant December. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given at the general Quarter-Sessions of the Peace at B. the second day, c.
A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.



For not paying Wages.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are in (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause A. B. to come before me, or some other of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, to answer unto such matters as shall be objected against him by C. D. touching his detention of 20 s. due unto C. D. (as he saith) for wages, and farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain, unless the said A. B. shall forth|with pay unto the said C. D. the wages afore|said, or do otherwise give satisfaction unto him for the same; And you are hereby also farther required to give unto the said C. D. convenient notice of the time, places when, and whither, and before whom you shall cause the said A. B. to come (in execution hereof) to the end that he may be also then and there present to make appear his due to the wages aforesaid. Hereof fail not, c.



A Warrant for Relief of a Man-ser|vant that is out of Service.
To the Constables, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint is made43 Eliz. cap. 2. unto me by A. B. That he being lawfully retained in the Service of C. D. of your Town of E. Yeoman, at Lady day was twelve-month, and being discharged his Ser|vice at Lady day last, hath been at the Statute Sessions, and cannot find himself a Service, and being destitute of means whereby to re|lieve himself. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and com|mand you, and every of you, that presently upon the receipt hereof you do receive the said A. B. into your Town, and see him set on work and provided for according to the Statute in that case made and provided. Here|of fail not, c.



A Warrant against one that depar|teth out of Service before his time expired.
To the Constable and Borsholders, c.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do attach C. D. of E. and bring him before me, or some other Ju|stice of the Peace of and within the said Coun|ty, to answer for that he is departed out of Service from A. B. of C. (his time of Cove|nant with him made being not expired,) con|trary to the Statute in that case made and pro|vided. And farther to e dealt with accord|ing to Law. Hereof, c.


To fetch back a Servant.
To all Constables, Borsholders, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a Servant to C.5 Eliz. 4. of D. Joyner, hath gone from his said Master without his lawfull Licence or Testimonial, in the County of E. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to re|quire and command you, some or one of you, that forthwith upon sight hereof you go with

the Bearer hereof, and as speedily as may be apprehend the said A. B. and him to bring be|fore me, or some other of His Majestie's Justi|ces of the Peace for the said County, to the end that such farther proceedings may be thereupon had as by Law is required. Hereof fail not, c. Given under, c.


A Discharge of a Servant from his Service within the time agreed, upon his absenting himself.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto1 Iustice. me, That A. B. was retained by C. D. to serve him for a term (not yet ex|pired.) And the said A. B. without consent of him the said C. D. hath for the space of, c. now last past absented himself from the said Ser|vice, and is gone into some place unto the said C. D. unknown. I therefore upon the conside|ration of the premisses, and of the equity there|of, on the part of the said C. D. allow the cause and matter aforesaid to be reasonable and suf|ficient to discharge the said C. D. from any farther keeping the said A. B. in his said Ser|vice, and do accordingly discharge the said A. B. from his Service aforesaid. Given un|der my hand and seal at T. the twenty second day of May, c.



A Testimonial for the discharge of a Servant.
MEmorandum, That A. B. Servant to C. D.5 Eliz. 4. of E. Husbandman or Taylor, c. in the said County, is licensed to depart from his said Master, and is at his liberty to serve else|where, according to the Statute in that case made and provided. In witness whereof, c.
In a Town, to be under the Seal of the Town and two Housholders there; if in the Couny, under the Seals of the Constable or Consta|bles, and two Housholders there, where he last served.
A Master that retains a Servant without such a Testimonial forfeits 5 li.
It must be Registred by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the Parish who is to have 2 d. for doing thereof.




Silk-Throsters.

An Order for the payment of monies to a Silk-Throster by his Workman who imbezils his Silk.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the complaint14 Car. 2. cap. 15. 1 Iustice. of A. B. of C. Silk-Throster, made that he having delivered to C. D. of E. Silk|winder, or Doubler, or Iourny|man. of Silk to be by him Silk|winded or Silk-dou|bled. for the said A. B. and the aforesaid C. D. hath Unjust|ly or deceit|fully and falsely pur|loin-imbe|zil, pawn, sell, or detain. Buyer or Receiver. par|cel thereof, which complaint upon my exa|mination of the same (according to the form of the Statute in that case made) hath been made, apparent unto me to be true, I have thereupon determined the offence aforesaid, and do hereby order and appoint, that the said C. D. shall give and pay to the said A. B. the summ of 40 s. for his damages, losses, and charges thereabouts, within fourteen days now next ensuing. Given under my hand and seal, c.



Against an Offender for not perfor|ming the Order before mentioned.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the complaint of A. B. of C. Silk-Throster, to me made, That he having delivered to C. D. (a) to be by him (b) for the said A. B.As afore. And that the aforesaid C. D. had (c) parcel thereof, which complaint upon my examina|tion of the same (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made) was made appear unto me to be true. And I did there|upon determine the offence aforesaid, and did by Warrant under my hand and seal order and appoint, that the said C. D. should give and pay to the said A. B. for his damage, loss, and charges thereabouts, 40 s. within fourteen days then next ensuing. And forasmuch as the said C. D. did not within the said fourteen days, nor at any time since, make such Recom|pence or Satisfaction to the said A. B. as was by me as aforesaid ordered and appointed, al|though he had convenient notice so to doe. These are, c. to will and require you, that you, some or one of you, do apprehend and whip the said C. D. or set him in the Stocks, in the place where the same offence was commit|ted, or in some Market in this County near unto the place aforesaid. Given under my hand, c.
The like Warrant against the Receiver, Buyer, or Taker to pawn.



Souldiers.

A Warrant to warn in a Muster at a certain day, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of S. and to every of them.
K. ss. BY Command from the Right ho|nourable H. Earl of W. (Lord Lieutenant of the said County) I require you to warn all the persons mentioned in a List hereunto annexed, to appear compleatly Armed and Furnished with Coats (according to for|mer Orders) at S. near C. upon Monday the twelfth day of this instant September, at eleven of the Clock in the forenoon of the same day (at the furthest;) And every of them is to bring with him four days pay, and the Muster|master's Salary. The Musqueteers to bring with him one pound of Powder, and Match and Bullets proportionable, then and there to receive further Orders. And you the said Constable to be then and there present, to make appear what you have done in execution hereof, of what is here commanded. No per|son concerned herein is to fail at his peril. Gi|ven

under my hand and seal the seventh day of May 1681. 33. Regni Regis, c.


A Certificate for a Trained Souldier.
THese are to certifie you, That A. B. the Bearer hereof is a Trained Souldier of the Burrough of S. for his Majestie's service appointed under my command, and therefore not otherwise to be charged or molested, as you will answer the contrary at your perils. Given under my hand at, c.


To order an Allowance to a poor Souldier out of the Stock for Maimed Souldiers.
To the Treasurer of the said County for maimed Souldiers.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Officer, Souldier, or Marriner, maimed, indigent, aged, or dis|abled in bo|dy for work in the ser|vice of His late Maje|sy, or His Majesty that now is, or under the late Wars, or so impoverish|ed by his sufferings under any the late usurped Powers, as that he is dissolute of any competent subsistence or livelihood. hath according to the form of the14 Car. 2. cap. 9. 2 Iustices. Statute (in that behalf lately made) made ap|pear unto us, that he hath continued faithfull to his trust, and not deserted the same by ta|king up Arms against His late Majesty, or His Majesty that now is, or otherwise; And hath repaired to W. in the said County, (being the place where he wa last settled before he took Arms: We do therefore (according to the said Statute) assign for his Relief until the

next Quarter-Sessions to be holden for the County of K. which you are hereby required to pay unto him. Given under our hands and seals, c.


The like for Allowance to Wife or Orphan.
To the Treasurer of the said County for maimed Souldiers.)14 Car. 2. cap. 9. 2 Iustices.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Widow or Orphan of such per|son as is described in the Margin of the last before going Warrant. hath (ac|cording to the form of the Sta|tute in that behalf lately made) made appear unto us, that A. B. late of C. continued faithfull to his trust, and not deserted the same by ta|king up Arms against His said late Majesty, or His Majesty that now is, or otherwise: We do therefore (according to the said Statute) ad|judge that over and besides such relief as she or they. shall gain by her or their. work and labour, and shall be allowed by the charity and benevolence of the Parish of A. where she or they. is now settled. Given under our hands and seals this, c.




Swearing.

To pay 1 s. for Swearing in the pre|sence of a Justice of the Peace.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of D. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B. in the County afore|said, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of, c. in the1 Iac. cap. 20. 1 Iustice, within 20 days after the Offence, by Conses|sion, or 2 Witnesses. County aforesaid, Butcher, (be|ing of above the age of twelve years) did in my hearing this present day (in the Parish aforesaid) prophanely swear one Oath, for which Offence he forefeited and was to pay (to the use of the Poor of the Parish) the summ of 12 d. These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to command you to levy to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, the aforesaid 12 d. by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. (rendring to him the over-plus.) And in defect of such Distress, that you the said Constable do set the said A. B. in the Stocks, by the space of three whole hours. Hereof fail not, c.



A Warrant to levy Monies for pro|phane Swearing.
To the Constables and Borsholders, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it was this present day proved before me, that A. B. of, c. did in the said Parish offend by pro|fane Swearing four Oaths, by reason where|of he hath forfeited to the use of the Poor of the said Parish the summ of, c. that is to say, 3 s. 4. d. for every time he did so offend, according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said forfeiture of, c. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. by Distress and Sale of the same, returning the over-plus. And that forthwith after your levying of the said forfeiture of, c. you pay the same to the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, or to some or one of them to the use of the Poor aforesaid. And in case no sufficient Distress shall be found, and that the said A. B. shall not pay the said for|feiture, or give security for the same. That then you do set him in the Stocks there to remain the space of three whole hours Hereof fail not, c.



A Certificate of Conviction for Swearing.
Kent ss. I R. K. Esquire, one of His Ma|jestie's Justices, c. do hereby certifie to the Clerk of the Peace of the Coun|ty of K. that the persons whose names are hereunto subscribed were, since the last Ses|sions, committed before me for Swearing one prophane Oath a piece. Given under my hand and seal this, c.



Tax.

A Warrant to the Assessors to make a Tax upon an Act of Parliament for Royal Aid.
K. ss. BY virtue of an Act of this present Parliament, intituled, An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the King's Majesty of 2477500 li. to be raised, levied, and paid in the space of three years in manner following, (that is to say) 68819 li. 9 s. by the month, for thirty six months, beginning from the 25. day of Decemb. 1664. These are to will and require you, and every of you, whose names are hereunder writ|ten for the purpose aforesaid, for the second

and third quarterly payments of the said six months Assessments, with all care and diligence to assess on all Lands, Tenements, Heredita|ments, Annuities, Rents, Parks, Warrens, Goods, Chattels, Stock, Merchandise, Offices, (other than Judicial and Military Offices, and Offices relating to the Navy, under the com|mand of the Lord High Admiral, and Offices within His Majestie's Houshold) Tolls, Profits, and all their Estates both reall and personal, within the Limits, Circuits and Bounds of your Hundred of A. the full and just summ of, c. by a pound rate wherein you are to assess the Tenant, one sixth part of the whole in respect of his stock upon Land, and you are to assess all other persons for their personal estate, (other then their stock upon Lands and Houshold-stuff) for every 20 li. proportio|nably to 1 li. by the year in Lands. And you are to take especial care that therein you assess not any part of the said monies upon the Rents and Revenues due, and payable to ei|ther the Universities, or any other Colleges, Halls, Hospitals, Almes-houses or Free-schools. Nevertheless you are to assess the Tenants of all such Lands and Tenements for so much as the same are worth by the year, over and above what Rents or Revenues they pay to the said Universities, Colleges, c. And you are here|by further willed and required that you bring the said Assessment fairly written, exactly cast up, and by you signed unto us at the house of, c. (tali die) by two of the clock in the afternoon of the same day; Of all which you nor any of you, are to fail, upon pain of 20 li. Given under our hands and seals at A. the, c.
To A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.



The Preamble of the Tax Book.
The Hundred of A. c.
Kent ss. A Tax made the second day of May, Anno Dom. 1664. and in the sixteenth year, c, by us whose names are hereunder subscribed, in pursuance of a War|rant to us directed under the hands and seals of A. B. C. D. E. F. Esquires, and others, Com|missioners, nominated in an Act of this present Parliament, intituled, An Act for granting, c. (as before.) We are required to assess upon the said Hundred, on all Lands, Stock, Goods, c. the summ of, c. by a pound rate wherein the Tenant is to be assessed one sixth part of the whole which we have accordingly assessed, viz the Landlord at 5 d. in the pound Rent, and the Tenant 1 d. on the pound in respect of his Stock, upon the said Lands, and for all other Goods, Stock, c. for every 20 li. proportio|nably to 2 s. per annum, on Lands as followeth. viz.A Burrough


Tenants.
Rents. per Annum.
Tax on Lands.
Tax on Stock Lands andLandlords. Trade.


C. D.
20 li.
0. 08. 04.
0. 1. 8.A. B. Esq E. F. J. K.


G. H.
50.
1. 00. 10.
0. 4. 2.


L. M.
80.
1. 13. 04.
0. 6. 8.


Abatement to be allowed to the Landlord, in respect of the Water, In-lets, and other Charges imposed on the said Lands.



A Warrant to the Collectors of the Tax upon the Royal Aid.
Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of this present Parliament, intituled, An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the King's Majesty of 2477500 li. to be raised, levied, and paid in the space of three years. These are to will and require you, and every of you, whose names are hereunder written, to collect all and every the summs of money mentioned in the Assess|ment hereunto annexed, so that you duly pay the summ (which you are hereby required so to doe) unto A. B. of, c. whom we have no|minated and appointed head Collector of the moneys aforesaid, at his house in A. aforesaid, in manner following, (that is to say) one Moiety thereof (being the second quarterly payment of the said three years Assessment) on or before the twentieth day of, c. next ensuing, and the other Moiety thereof, (being the third quarterly payment of the said three years Assessment) on or before the twentieth day of October then next following And in ase any person or persons shall neglect or re|se to pay any summ of money whereat he is in the said Assessment rated or assessed, then you, and every of you, are hereby authorized and required to levy the summ assessed by Di|stress and Sale of the Goods of such person or persons so refusing or neglecting to pay, de|ducting the summ assessed and reasonable char|ges of Distraining; and you shall restore the e|ver plus to the Owner thereof. Yo, and every of

you, are hereby likewise authorized to break open in the day time any House, Trunk, Chest, Box, or other thing where any such Goods are, and to call to your assistance the Constable, Tithing-man, and Headburrough within the place where any such refusal, neglect, or re|sistance shall be made, which said Officers are by the said Act required to be aiding and assist|ing in the premisses, as they will answer the contrary at their perils. And in case any per|son or persons shall refuse or neglect to pay his or their Assessment, and convey his or their Goods, or other personal Estate, where|by the summ of money so assessed cannot be levied according to the said Act, that then you certifie to us, or any two of us, the name or names of such person or persons so refusing, or neglecting, or conveying as aforesaid. To the end such proceedings may be had there|upon against him, her, or them, as by the said Act is directed. And in case any Lands or Houses within your Hundred shall lie unoc|cupied, and no Distress can be found on the same, by reason whereof your said Hundred is forced to pay and make good the Tax asses|sed upon such Lands lying unoccupied, Then you, and every of you, are hereby authorized and required, at any time after, with the assi|stance of the Constable or Tithing-man within your Hundred for the time being, to enter and distrain upon the said Lands and Houses when there shall be any Distress thereupon to be found, and the Distress and Distresses (being the proper Goods of the Owner, or any claim|ing any Estate, Interest, or Profit under him) if not redeemed within fourteen days, by pay|men of the Tax and Charges of Distraining, to sell, rendring the over-plus to the Owner or

Owners of such Distress. And you are hereby enjoyned to distribute the money raised by the Sale proportionably to the parties who contri|buted to the Tax of the said unoccupied Lands, you, and every of you, are hereby further enjoyned, that where any Wood-land shall be Assessed and no Distress can be had, that in such case, with the assistance of the Constable, Headburrough, or Tithing-man, you cut and sell to any person or persons so much of the Woods growing on the said Wood-lands as will pay the Assessment or As|sessments so behind and unpaid, and the charge incident thereunto. And the person or persons and his Assigns, to whom such Woods shall be sold, are by the said Act authorized to fell, cut down, dispose, and carry away the same to his own use, rendring the over-plus (if any be) to the Owner thereof. You, and every of you, are hereby likewise authorized, that where any Tax or Assessment within your said Hundred shall be laid upon Tiths, Tolls, Pro|fits of Markets, Fairs, or Fisheries, or other annual Profits not distreinable, in case the same shall not be paid within fifteen days after such Assessment so charged, or laid, and demanded, That then you, or any of you, seize, take and sell so much of the said Tithes, Tolls, and other Profits so Charged as shall be suffidient for the levying of the said Tax and Assessment, and all Charges occasioned by such non payment thereof, rendering the over-plus to the Owner (if any be) of all which you, nor any of you, are to fail upon such pains and penalties as by the said Act may in such case be inflicted on you. And lastly, we do hereby declare unto you, that upon your Collection of the whole summe appointed to be Collected by you, and pay|ment

thereof as is hereby appointed: you are to have and receive for your pains in collec|ting and paying the moneys one penny in the pound, which the said head Collector is by us authorized, to pay unto you accordingly. Gi|ven under our hands and seals at A. the, c.
To A. B. C. D. E. F. Collectors for the Hun|dred of A. in the said County.


A Warrant to levy 5 li. upon the Collectors for neglecting to col|lect their Assessment.
To the Constable and Borsholders, c.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto us this present day by A. B. of, c. high Collector of the second and third quarterly payments of the Royal Aid granted to His Majesty, That the severall Persons whose names are here|under written, being petty Collectors of the said two quarterly payments within your said Hundred, have wilfully neglected and refu|sed to pay unto the said A. B. the several summs of money charged upon them to collect and pay unto the said high Collec|tor on the several days and times to them limited and appointed for the payment of the same notwithstanding several Warrants have been issued out unto them to make payment thereof as they would avoid the Penalties to be inflicted upon them by the

Law for their non-payment thereof. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do immediately upon receipt hereof levy upon the several Persons whose names are hereunder written upon each of them the summ of 5 li. for such his neglect and refusal as aforesaid by way of distress and sale of his Goods, according to the Act of Parliament in that case made and provided. Hereof fail not at your perils. And for so doing this shall  your suffi|cient Warrant. Given under our hands and seals at, c.



Testimonials.

A Testimonial for conveying a Rogue who hath been punished.
A. B. a sturdy Vagrant Beggar (of middle personage, Black haired, having a Scar in the right Cheek) aged about 30 years, was this 10. day of Novemb. in the 32 year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second over England, c. openly whipped at T. in the said County (according to Law)39 Eliz. cap. 4. 1 Iustice and Consta|ble hands and sals. But by Lamb. Iu|stice, p. 206. 1 Iustice sufficient. for a wandring Rogue, and is assigned to pass forthwith from Parish to Parish by the Officers thereof the next streight way to R. in the

County of H. where (as he confesseth he was born (or dwelled last by one whole year, c.) if the case be such,) and he is limited to be at R. aforesaid within twelve days now next ensuing at his peril. Given at T. under the hand and seal of R. K. Esquire, one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County of Kent, and R. H. the Constable of T. aforesaid.


A Testimonial for one that hath suffered shipwreck.
R. K. of M. in the County of Kent Esq one of His Majestie's Iustices, c. To all Constables, Borsholders, c.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as the Bearer hereof A. B. aged about, c. having lately been at Sea in a Ship called, c. hath suffered Shipwreck and got to land at G. in the1 Iustice dwelling near the place of his landing. said County of K. upon the 10. day of March last past (as I am credibly informed as well by the report of the said A. B. as also by the testimo|ny of divers of the Inhabitants of G. afore|said;) and for that the said A. B. hath not where|withall to relieve himself in his travel home|wards to T. in the County of S. where he saith he was born (or hath a dwelling, c.) These are therefore to pray you, and every of you, to whom these Presents shall come, not to molest or trouble the said A. B. in his travel to T. afore|said, where he is limited to be within 20 days next after the date hereof, but to desire you

rather to relieve him in his necessity, as to you shall seem meet; and withall you the Consta|bles and Borsholders of every Town where he shall come to help him with Lodging in con|venient time, so that he travel the direct way to T. aforesaid, not doing any thing contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. Gi|ven under my hand, c.
The like may serve (with alterations) for a poor Souldier, c.



Tiling.

A Deputation for Tile-searchers.
Kent ss. WE whose names are hereun|to17 Ed. 4. cap. 4. 2 Iustices. To pay the Searchers for every 1000 of Plain-tiles 1 d. Every 100 of Roof-tiles ob. and for every 100 of Corner or Gutter|tiles q. written, His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, do (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made in the seventeenth year of the Reign of the late King Edward the Fourth) ordain, assign and depute A. B. of C. and D. E. and either of them (during our wills and pleasures) to search and examine the digging, casting, turning and ordering of Earth for all Plain-tile, Roof-tile, Corner-tile, and Gutter-tile, to be made [within the Di|vision of the seven Hundreds] in the County aforesaid; and to search and examine all the Tiles aforesaid, that the same be good, reaso|nable,

and very sufficient, and thoroughly whited and anealed, and do contain such length, breadth, thickness and deepness as by the said Act is required; and generally to doe and perform all such other things as to the Office of Searchers do (by virtue of the said Act) appertain; and to receive and have such Fees and Salaries for their and either of their labour in the premisses as by the said Act is appointed. Given under our hands and seals at, c.



Trespass.

A Warrant upon Hedg-breaking, c. where the Party's not able.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it was this pre|sent43 Eliz. cap. 7. 1 Iustice where the Offence is committed, or the Par|ty appre|hended. Confession, or 1 Wit|ness. Iustice not to act here|in in his own case. day duly proved before me, That A. B. hath lately unlawfully (a) of C. D. at H. (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provi|ded.) And forasmuch as upon hearing and determining of the said matter, I have or|dered and appointed, That the said A. B. should forthwith give and pay unto the said C. D. c. of lawfull money of England, in and for recompence and satisfaction for his damages which he hath sustained by oc|casion of the Trespass aforesaid; And foras|much as the said A. B. is thought in my

discretion not able nor sufficient to make such recompence or satisfaction as aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do whip the said A. B. for the Offence aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Gi|ven under my hand and seal at, c.


A Warrant or Order to pay where he is able.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it was this pre|sent43 Eliz. cap. 7. 1 Iustice, as before. day duly proved before me, That A. B. hath lately unlawfully (a) of C. D. at H. (contrary to the form of the Statute made and provided:) Now upon hearing and determining of the said matter, I do order and appoint, That the said A. B. shall within ten days now next ensuing give and pay unto the said C. D. c. of lawfull money of England, in and for re|compence and satisfaction for his damages which he hath sustained by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



To whip where not paid accor|ding to Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hun|dred of K. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the 10. dayAs before. of Iune it was duly pro|ved before me, That A. B. had then lately unlawfully 
Cut or taken away
Corn or Grain of43 Eliz. cap. 7. A. B. growing at, c.


Robbed
Orchard,
Garden.


Break, Cut,
Hedge,
Pale,
Rale,
Fence.


Dig, pull up, take up,
Fruit-tree,
in Orchard,
Garden,
or elsewhere;
To the intent to take and carry the same away.


Cut, Spoile,
Woods, Standing.
Underwoods, Standing.
Poles, Standing.
Trees, Standing.

Not being Felony.
The Procurer or Receiver knowing the same. of C. D. at H. (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided:) And whereas upon hearing and determining of the said mat|ter, I did then order and appoint, That the said A. B. should within, c. then next ensuing, give and pay unto the said C. D. c. of lawfull money of England, in and for re|compence and satisfaction for his damage which he hath sustained by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid; And forasmuch as it doth now sufficiently appear unto me, that the said A. B. hath not hitherto given or paid unto the said D. the aforesaid, c. accor|ding to my said order and appointment: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) o command you, that you, some or one of you, do whip the said A. B. for the Of|fence aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your pe|rils. Given under my hand and seal at, c.



A Warrant from the Justices at a Quarter-sessions for apprehending one indicted for a Trespass.
To all Constables, Headboroughs, and all other His Majestie's Officers and Ministers within the County of K. and to every of them whom it may concern.
Kent ss. THese are to will and require you, and (in His Majestie's name) straightly to charge and command you forthwith upon receipt hereof, to bring

before us, and other His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of this County to the Sessions of Peace holden for the County of K. at A. in the said County, the Body of T. R. c. standing indicted for a Trespass (if the Court there be then sitting,) or if not, before some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the said County, then and there to answer the same, and all such mat|ters as on His Majestie's behalf shall be ob|jected against him; and if he cannot be taken during this present Sessions, that then so soon after as he shall be taken you bring, or cause to be brought before us, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of this County to find sufficient Sureties for his personal appearance at the next Sessions of Peace to be holden for the said County to answer as aforesaid, and farther to be dealt withall according to Justice. Hereof you are not to fail at your perils. Dated in open Sessions at A. aforesaid, the one and twentieth day of April, c. Annoque Dom. 1680.




Uagrants.

A Warrant for apprehending Beg|gars and other Idle persons.
To the Constable and Headboroughs, and others His Majestie's Officers of any the Parishes in the said County, and to all others whom this doth or may concern.
Mdd. ss. WHereas the Suburbs of Lon|don2 Iustices. and Places adjacent are now infected with many Rogues, Vaga|bonds and Sturdy Beggars, and other Idle persons that can give no good accompt of their life and conversation, to the danger of the Inhabitants, and contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) straightly to charge and command you, and every of you, That at all convenient times hereafter taking with you a convenient aid and assistance, you make diligent search in the several Places afore|said, and in all other suspected Places within any the Parishes in the said County for all such Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, and other suspected and Idle persons; And them to apprehend and bring before us, or one of us to be examined and dealt with according to Law. Hereof fail not, c. Given under our hands, c.



A Testimonial or Pass for him to the1 Iac. c. 7. 39 Eliz. cap. 4. 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. place of his Birth.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, middle sta|ture, aged about 30 years, was this present day taken Taken gging Va|nt, wan|dring, or misordering himself, pped naked from the middle upwards, and be open|ly whipped untill his  be oudy. at B. in the County aforesaid, and then and there by my appointment punished (according to the form of the Statute in that case provi|ded;) And he is to be conveyed from Pa|rish to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the next straightway to the Pa|rish of T. where (as he confesseth) he was born (there to put himself to labour as he ought to doe;) and he is limited to pass thither within, c. days now next ensuing, at his peril. Given under my hand and seal at, c.
This must be signed by the Iustice and Minister, Constable, c. or two of them.


The like where the Place of his Birth is not known.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, of low sta|ture, aged about 20 years, was this present day taken As ovesaid. at T. in the County aforesaid, and then and there by my appointment punished (according to the form of the Statute in that case provided;)

And for that the Parish where he was born is not known, (though it be demanded of him,) And for that also he did last dwell before the same punishment by the space of one whole year in the Parish of T. c. (as he confesseth:) He is therefore to be con|veyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the next straight way to the said Parish of T. there to put him|self to labour (as he ought to doe;) And he is limited to pass thither within, c. days now next ensuing, at his peril. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


The like where neither the Place of his Birth, nor last abode is known.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, of middle sta|ture, aged about 40 years, was this present day taken As abovesaid. at T. in the said County, and then and there by my ap|pointment punished (according to the form of the Statute in that case provided;) And for that neither the Parish where he was born, nor the Parish where he did last dwell before the said punishment by the space of one whole year, is known (though both were by me demanded of him:), He is therefore to be conveyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the next straight way to the Parish of B. in the, c. (through which he last passed without punishment, as he saith,) and he is to be from thence conveyed by the Officers of the said Parish (according to the form of the Statute in

that case made and provided,) and is limi|ted to pass thither within, c. days now next ensuing, at his peril. Given under my hand and seal at, c.


The like where the Vagrant is appre|hended in a general privy Search.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagabond, of small sta|ture, Iac. c. 4. 2 Iustices. aged about 20 years: was sound and apprehended at T. in the said County, in a general privy Search by our command made (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) and brought before us this present day at our Assembly at V. and by our appointment punished according to Law: And he is to be conveyed from Parish to Parish, c. [as be|fore in one of the three precedent Warrants, accor|ding to the Case.]


To pay two shillings for apprehen|ding a Vagrant.
To the, c. of A. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid.14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice.
Kent ss. WHereas A. B. did lately ap|prehend and bring unto me C. D. Rogue, Vagrant, or sturdy Beggar. which did pass through your

aforesaid, c. in the Parish aforesaid unap|prehended: These are therefore (in His Ma|jestie's name) to will and require you forth|with to pay to the aforesaid A. B. 2 s. for each. 2 s. for his said apprehension of the C. D. afore|said (according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made.) Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under our hand and seal at, c.


Upon not payment of the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the aforesaid County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas A. D. did lately ap|prehend14 Car. . cap. 12. 2 Iustices. The forfei|ture is by 1 Iac. c. . The power to levy it is by 39 Eliz. cap. 4. and bring unto T. H. one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, C. D. which did pass through the, c. in the Parish of T. in the County aforesaid, un-apprehended; of which said place of apprehension A. B. was then Bors|holder or Constable. And thereupon the aforesaid Ju|stice did (according to the form of the Sta|tute in that behalf made) require the said A. B. to pay to the aforesaid A. D. two shil|lings for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. Nevertheless the said A. B. hath ne|glected to pay the same: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. ten shil|lings by him forfeited and lost for not 

the aforesaid C. D. to be punished and con|victed (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made,) And that out of the moneys by you so levied, you do pay to the said A. D. the aforesaid 2 s. and, c. more which we think fit to allow unto him for loss of his time, and that you do imploy and dispose of the residue of the said 10 s. to the relief of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, c.


A Certificate of apprehending a Va|grant in the confines of ano|ther County.
To A. B. one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the said County of C.
Kent ss. THese are to certify you, That14 Car. 2. cap. 12.  Iustice. C. D. Rogue, Vagrant, or sturdy Beggar. having passed through the Parish of T. in the said Coun|ty of C. un-apprehended, was upon the se|cond day of Iune apprehended at T. in the said County of C. in the confines of the County aforesaid, by R. W. Given under my hand the, c.



To pay the two shillings thereupon.
To, c. of A. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas I have received a14 Car. . cap. 2. 1 Iustice. Certificate under the hands of A. B. one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the County of K. That C. D. Rogue, Vagrant, or sturdy Beg|gar. having passed through the Parish of T. in the said County of C. un-apprehended, was upon the second day of Iune apprehen|ded at T. in the said County of C. in the confines of the County aforesaid by R. W. which said Parish of T. was then in your Hun|dred or Bo|rough. 2 s. for each. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you forthwith to pay to the aforesaid R. W. 2 s. for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. (ac|cording to the form of the Statute in that case lately made.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.


Upon non-payment of the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas I lately received a14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. Certificate under the hand of A. D. one of His Majestie's Justices of

the Peace of the County of K. That C. D. having passed through the Parish of, c. in the said County of K. un-apprehended was apprehended at T. in the said County of K. in the confines of the County aforesaid, by R. W. of which said Parish A. B. of C. was then Con|stable or Borsholder. And whereas I did (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made) by warrant under my hand and seal require the said A. B. to pay the aforesaid R. W. two shillings for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. (according to the Sta|tute aforesaid) nevertheless the said A. B. hath neglected to pay the same: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. ten shillings by him forfeited and lost by not causing the aforesaid C. D. to be punished and conveyedThe forfei|ture and power to le|vy is by 39 Eliz. cap. 4. (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made) And that (out of the moneys you have so levied) you do pay to the said R. W. the aforesaid 2 s. and, c. more which we think fit to allow him for his expences and loss of time; and that you do imploy and dispose of the residue of the said 10 s. to the relief of the Poor of the said Parish of T. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.




Waggons and Carts.

An Affidavit to be made before a War|rant granted, for destreining for 40 s. forfeited for drawing with six Horses in length in a Team, Cart, or Waggon.
K. ss. G. R. of the Parish of, c. in the22 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. 1 Witness. County of, c. Upholster, ma|king Oath, That I. D. did upon the fourth day of this instant Febr. travel his Waggon through the common High-way in the said Parish of, c. drawn with six Horses at length, con|trary to an Act of Parliament made in the 22. year of His now Majestie's Reign, intituled, An additional Act for the better repairing of the High-ways and Bridges. And that the Wag|gon was not imployed in and about Husban|dry, and managing of Lands, nor in the car|rying of Hay, Straw, Corn unthrasht, Coal, Chalk, Timber for Shipping, Materials for building, Stones or such Ammunition or Ar|tillery as shall be for His Majestie's service.
G. R.
Iurat' 15 Feb. 1680.



A Warrant to destrain upon such as travel with a Waggon or Cart, drawn with six Horses at length.
To the Constables, Surveyors of the High-ways, and other the Officers of the Parish of K. whom these may concern.
Kent ss. WHereas G. R. of the Parish of, c. in the County of, c. Yeoman, hath this present tenth day of Feb. made Oath before me, one of His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, that M. D. of the said Parish of K. did upon the fourth day of this instant Feb. travel with his Waggon through the Parish of, c. in the said County, drawn with six Horses at length (contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided,) for which of|fence he hath forfeited the summ of 40 s. These are therefore to authorize, and (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, forthwith to levy the said summ of 40 s. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said M. D. rendring to him the over|plus, if any be, (reasonable Charges of De|straining first deducted.) And the same mo|nies so by you levied, you are to pay as fol|loweth, viz. one Third part to the Surveyors of the High-ways within your said Parish, to be imployed in the repairs of the said High|ways, one other Third part you are to pay to the Overseers of the Poor within your said

Parish, to be to the use of the Poor there; and the other Third part you are to pay to the said G. R. for discovering the same. Hereof fail not. Given under my hand and seal this, c.



Watch and Ward.

A Warrant to the High Constable for putting in Execution the Sta|tute of 13 Car. 2. (Renting the Statute,) and for keeping good Watches (upon His Majestie's go|ing to Oxford.)
To A. B. one of the High Constables of the Hun|dred of C. in the County of M.
M. ss. WHereas His Majesty having13 Car. 2. cap. 1. commanded us whose names are hereunder written, and others, His Ma|jestie's Justices of the Peace of the County of Middlesex, to attend him in Council the 25. day of February last past, did by Himself, and the Right Honourable the Lord President, ac|quaint us, That His Majesty was in a short time to remove His Court to Oxford, and did require and command us to use our utmost en|deavours, with care and industry, to preserve the Peace of this important County, during His Majestie's absence, and in particular to

put in Execution the Statute made in the 13. year of His now Majestie's Reign, For the pre|servation of His Majestie's Sacred Person, (whom God preserve with long life) in and by which said Statue it is enacted, That if any person or persons whatsoever during the natural Life of our most gracious Sovereign Lord the King that now is, shall within this Realm, or without, compass, imagine, invent, devise, or intend death or destruction, or any bodily harm tending to death or destruction, maim or wounding, impri|sonment or restraint of the Person of the same our Sovereign Lord the King, or to deprive or de|pose him from the Stile, Honour, or Kingly Name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or of any other His Majestie's Dominions or Countries, or to levy War against His Majesty within this Realm, or without, or to move or stir any Fo|reigner or Stranger with force to invade this Realm, or any other His Majestie's Dominions or Countries, being under His Majestie's Obeysance, and such compassings, imaginings, inventions, de|vices or intentions, or any of them shall express, utter, or declare, by any Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious and advised Speaking, Every such Person and Persons so as aforesaid offen|ding, shall be deemed, declared, and adjudged to be Traytors, and shall suffer pains of Death, and also lose and forfeit as in cases of High Treason. And that if any Person or Persons at any time, during His Majestie's Life, shall maliciously and advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretick, or a Papist, or that he endeavours to introduce Popery, or shall maliciously and advised|ly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other Speaking, express, publish, utter, or declare any words, sentences, or other thing or things, to in|cite or stir up the people to hatred or dislike of

the Person of His Majesty, or the established Go|vernment, Then every such person and persons, be|ing thereof Legally convicted, shall be disabled to have, enjoy, or exercise any Place, Office, or Pro|motion Ecclesiastical, or Civil, or Military, or any other Imployment in Church or State, and shall be likewise liable to such further and other punishments as by the Laws or Statutes of this Realm may be inflicted in such Cases. And we having taken into consideration His Majestie's most gracious Speech then made unto us, and his commands laid upon us, Do therefore hereby will and require, and strickly charge and com|mand, That you do forthwith issue forth your Warrants to the several petty Constables with|in your Division, thereby commanding them, that they do with their utmost diligence and endeavours, apprehend and secure all persons so as aforesaid offending against the said Sta|tute, and bring such person or persons before us the said Justices, at our petty Sessions to be held weekly on Tuesday in every week, at or in A. c. in the said County of Mid. by nine of the clock in the forenoon of the said days, to the intent they may be proceeded against according to Law and Justice. And we do hereby will and require you, that you do sur|vey the Watches that are kept by the petty Constables in your Division, and order them the said petty Constables, that they do within their respective limits for the future keep their Watches from nine a clock at night untill six in the morning, to the intent that the King's Peace may be the better secured. And we hereby further will and require you, that you do in your said Warrants command the said petty Constables, that they do for the future take an Account in writing of all the names of

those persons they Summon to be upon the Watch, and that they take particular notice of all and every person that shall after such Summons given make default, and not appear himself, or send some able and fit person to watch in his stead. And that they bring the said Account fairly written to us, who shall be assembled at the said petty Sessions, to the intent they may be proceeded against accord|ing to Law. And hereof you and the said petty Constables are not to fail at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the fourth day of March, in the year of our Lord, 1680. and in the 33. year of the Reign of our Sove|reign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, c.


Another Warrant upon the same Statute.
To all Constables and other His Majestie's Officers whom these may concern within the Parish of, c.
M. ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name)13 Car. 2. cap. 1. to will and require you to take notice of, and to apprehend and bring before us at our weekly Meetings, all manner of per|sons that shall maliciously and advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretick, or a Pa|pist, or that he endeavours to introduce Po|pery, or that shall maliciously and advisedly by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other Speaking, express, utter, or declare any words,

sentence, or other thing or things, to make or stirr up the People to hatred of the person of His Majesty, or the established Government, to be dealt with according to Law. And fur|ther from time to time to appoint and settle sufficient Watches, (to meet at nine at night, and not to depart till six in the morning, a|mongst whom a competent number of good House-keepers are alwaies to be present.) And you, and every of you, are to bring us the Names and Conditions of your respective Wat|ches at our said weekly Meetings, that the per|formance of your Duties herein may be the bet|ter known and taken notice of, His Majesty (in Council) having given us strict command herein. You are likewise to give us an Ac|count of all such as Arm themselves beyond their Qualities, and to use your utmost endea|vours, by all the ways imaginable, to preserve His Majestie's Peace during his absence from this City. Dated this eighth day of March, 1680.


A Warrant for Watch and Ward, and to apprehend idle persons.
To the High Constable of the Hundred of A. and the petty Constables, c. within the said Hun|dred.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as information hath2 Iustices. 13 Ed. 1. cap. 4. Watch and Ward to be kept in eve|ry Town, from Mi|chaelmas|day to As|cension|day. been given unto us, that very many suspicious idle persons do wander about the Country without Controlment or Question,

for the better prevention thereof for the fu|ture, and of Robberies, and other Misdemea|nours often occasioned thereby. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, to look to your Offices herein, and to see that you keep and cause Watches to be duly kept in all the Parishes and places within your said Hun|dred of A. by able and well-armed men every night, and Ward by day from Sun to Sun, and command them that they do apprehend all such Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandring and idle suspicious persons, as you shall apprehend by day or night, and con|ceive to be more than ordinary dangerous, and bring them before us or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the said County to be examined and dealt with according to Law. And all persons whatsoever are hereby com|manded to be aiding, assisting, and obedient to you herein. Hereof fail not. Given under our hands, c.


A Warrant by order of Quarter-Sessions to set Watch and Ward.
To the High Constable of the Hundred of A. and the petty Constables and Borsholders within the same Hundred.
K. ss. WHereas there hath been of late several Robberies, Felonies, and Burglaries committed within this County, it was ordered at the last general Quarter-Sessions

of the Peace holden for the said County at M. That for the prevention thereof for the future, you do from henceforth cause Watching and Warding to be continued, duly set, and kept in all and every usual place and places within your Hundred, by honest and able men within your several Precincts and Di|visions, and that you do therein apprehend all and every suspicious person and persons, and bring them before us, or some or one of us, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of, c. within the said County, to the end he, she, or they may be examined, as also proceeded against according to the Law. And you are further required to give in to us, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County, weekly an Account of your Service. And hereof you nor any of you are to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your perils. Given, c.




Weights and Measures.

A Warrant to warn in all Trades|men, and others, to have their Weights and Measures examined by the Standard.
To the Borsholder of the Burrough of F.
Kent ss. THese are to will and require you,2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum may (by Examina|tion or En|quiry) hear and deter|mine the faults of head Offi|cers in Ci|ties, Bur|roughs and Market-Towns, that do not twice yearly view and ex|amine Weights and Mea|sures, and Break and Burn the Defec|tive. As also the de|faults of Buyers and Sellers by false Weights and Measures, and may Break and Burn the Defective Weights and Measures, and Fine the Of|fenders at their discretion, and make process against them as if they were indicted of trespass against the Peace. 11 H. 7. c. 4.  12 H. 7. c. 5. and (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, that you warn all persons inhabiting within your said Bur|rough, which have or use any Weights or Mea|sures to be by me tried and examined by His Majestie's Standard, at the late Market place near H. in the County of K. on Thursday the 28. day of this instant Month of August, by eight of the clock in the forenoon of the same day. And that you also warn to be at the time and place aforesaid fifteen sufficient men of your said Burrough, that they, and every of them, personally appear before me to doe and perform such things as for His Majestie's ser|vice shall be then and there enjoyned them: And that you your self be there also personally present with this Precept, and have there the names of all Clothirs, Corn-Masters, Far|mers, Vintners, Inn-keepers, Alehouse-keepers, Millers, Bakers, Butchers, Chandlers, Mercers, Grocers, Weavers, Drapers, Tailors, Tanners, Land-measurers, Smiths, Glovers, Malsters,

and of all other Artificers, Tradesmen, and other persons whatsoever within your said Bur|rough, having or using any Weights or Mea|sures whatsoever. Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and the seal of the said Mannor the, c.


The Clerk of the Market's Warrant.
To all and every of the Constables of the Parish of A. c.
Kent ss. THese are in the King's Majestie'sA. B. Clerk of the Mar|ket. name, c. to will and require you, and every of you, upon sight hereof, to summon and cause the several Inhabitants with|in your respective Wards that buy and sell by Weight or Measure to have their respective Weights and Measures (as well Yards and Ells, as others used by them) to be tried and examined before me on Monday the first day of September next, by the hour of eight in the forenoon at the George Inn in A. and that at the said time and place you deliver unto me in writing the Christian-name and Sir-name of every such Inhabitant with their respective Callings. Whereof you and every of you are not to fail, c. Dated under my hand and seal the 23. day of August, Anno Dom. 1680. and in the 32 year of His now Majestie's Reign.




Witnesses.

A Warrant for Witnesses touching Felony.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. in the said County, and to every of them.
K.. ss WHereas I have received infor|mation, That A. B. was lately robbed at D. in the County aforesaid; And whereas I am informed that E. F. of, c. can give information (on His Majestie's be|half) touching proving the Robbery afore|said: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said E. F. forthwith to come before me, to give such information and evidence (as he knoweth) touching the said Robbery, to the end that I may farther proceed touching the same as to Justice doth appertain. Given under my hand and seal at H. in the County aforesaid, the first day of March 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Se|cundi 3.



For a Witness to appear and give Evidence at the Sessions.
To the Constable, c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of, c. Barber, is thought to be a fit and necessa|ry Witness to be examined on His Majesties behalf. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith warn him the said A. B. personally to appear before the Justices of the Peace at the next Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County at H. then and there to testifie his knowledge on the be|half of His said Majesty, to and upon such mat|ters as he shall be then and there examined of. Hereof fail not, c.




Wood.

A Warrant against one that stole Wood, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of T. c.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto me14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. by the confession of A. B. of your said Town of T. That he the said A. B. hath late|ly unlawfully cut down certain Sticks of Wood within your said Parish belonging to E. F. of your said Town, Gent. contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided. And whereas it further appeareth unto me upon Oath, that the said Sticks of Wood were worth to be sold five shillings. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and command you, and every of you, that in case the said A. B. do not forthwith pay unto the said E. F. the said summ of five shillings, that then you do immediately cause the said A. B. to be publickly whipped about the said Town of T. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under, c.



To make a general Warrant to search for stoln Wood, c.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it is observed in these15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. parts of the said County, That Woods, Underwoods, Poles, Young-trees, Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Rails, Hedge-wood, Broom, and Furze, are unlawfully cut, stoln, spoiled and taken away from the lawfull Owners of the same, (contrary to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Un|der-wood, and destroyers of young Timber-trees:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, that you do (with all convenient speed) enter into and search the Houses, Out-houses, Yards, Gardens, or other places belonging to the houses, (within the said Hundred,) of all and every person or persons which you shall suspect to have any kind of such Wood, Un|der-wood, Poles, or Young-trees, or Bark or Bast of any Trees; or any such Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze: And wheresoever you shall find any such, to apprehend or cause to be apprehended all and every person and persons suspected for the cutting or taking of the same, and them and every of them, in whose houses or other

places belonging to them, any such Wood, Under-wood, Poles, or young Trees, or Bark or Bast of any Trees; or any Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze shall be found, to bring before me or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the said County, to be proceeded against as by the said Act is directed. Hereof fail not, c.


A Warrant to search for stoln Wood, c. upon a particular Complaint.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been15 Car. 2. ca. 2. 1 Iustice. made unto me by A. B. That Wood Under|wood, Poles, Young|trees, Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge|wood, Broom, or Furze. were within five days now last past ta|ken out of his Lands in L. in the said County, and hath prayed such relief from me therein, as by an Act of Parliament in such cases lately made I am authorized to give. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and command you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do enter into and search the Houses, Out-houses, Yards, Gardens, or other places belonging to the houses within the said Hundred, of all and every person or persons which you shall suspect to have any of the said Wood Under|wood, Poles, Young|trees, Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge|wood, Broom, or Furze. And wheresoever you shall find any such, to apprehend or cause to be appre|hended, all and every person or persons sus|pected for the cutting and taking of the same; And them, and every of them, as also those

in whose houses or other places belonging to them, any such Wood Under|wood, Poles, Young|trees, Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge|wood, Broom, or Furze. shall be found, to bring before me or some other of His Majestie's Ju|stices of the Peace of the said County, to be proceeded against as by the said Act is directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. Person ap|prehen|ded by


An Order against a person apprehended with Bundles, c. of Wood, c. to make satisfaction, c. for the same to the Owner. The first Offence.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. was within five days last past appre|hended by Officer or Inbabi|tant, ha|ving or car|rying, or any ways conveying a Burthen or Bundle of having a Bundle of any kind of Wood, Un|der-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedge|wood, Broom or Furze. and this day brought before me to give ac|count how he came by the said any kind of Wood, Un|der-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedge|wood, Broom or Furze. by the consent of the Owner (according to an Act of Parllam t lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and de|stroying of young Timber-trees:) And for that he did not give such account thereof as did sa|tisfie me, nor produce the party of whom he bought the same, or any other credible Wit|ness to depose upon Oath such Sale thereof, whereby he is (according to the said Act) by me deemed and adjudged as convict of the Of|fence of cutting and spoiling of the said any kind of Wood, Un|der-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedge|wood, Broom or Furze. within the meaning of another Act of Parlia|ment, which was made in the third and fourth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, (intituled, An Act to avoid and prevent Misde|meanours in idle and lewd persons:) And foras|much as it appeareth unto me, That C. D. of, c. was lawfull Owner of the said any kind of Wood, Un|der-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedge|wood, Broom or Furze. I do

therefore (according to the said first before mentioned Act) order and appoint, That the said A. B. shall within six days now next en|suing, give the said C. D. of lawfull money of England for recompence and satisfaction for his damages, and that the said A. B. shall (over and above) pay down presently unto the Over|seers for the use of the Poor of the Parish of T. in the said County (whee the said Offence was committed) Any summ not exceeding 10 S. of lawfull money. Given un|der my hand and seal the, c.


For not obeying that Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders o the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to eery of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the Cou afore|said.
K. ss. WHereas A. B. of C. within eight15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. days last past, was apprehen|ded by (a) as before having a Bundle of (b) as before and lately brought before me to give account how he came by the said (b) as before by the consent of the Owner, (according to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and destroyers of young Timber|trees:) And for that he did not give such ac|count thereof as did satisfie me, nor did pro|duce the party of whom he bought the same, or any other credible Witness to depose upon Oath such Sale thereof, whereby he was then

(according to the said Act) by me deemed and adjudged as convict of the Offence of cut|ting and spoiling of the said (b) as before within the meaning of one other Act of Parlia|ment, which was made in the third and fourth year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliz. (in|tituled, An Act to avoid and prevent divers Mis|demeanours in idle and lewd persons:) And whereas it then appeared unto me, That C. D. of, c. was Owner of the said (b) as before and I did therefore (according to the said first before mentioned Act) order and appoint that the said A. B. should within six days then next ensuing, give the said C. D. c. o lawfull money of England, for recompence and satis|faction for his damages: And that the said A. B. should (over and above) pay down then presently to the Overseers for the use of the Poor of the Parish of T. in the said County, (where the said Offence was committed,)  . (c) as before of like money: And foras|much as the said A. B. did not (according to the said order and appointment) give or pay the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, forthwith to convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid House of Correction, and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper, o receive him into the said House, and him there detain by the space of Any time not exceeding a month. days next after such your receipt of him. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand ad seal the, c.
Note, The Iustice may (if he think fit) not send the Offender to the House of Correction, but

may make a Warrant to the Constable, c. to whip him, which may be made with the same recitals as in the last precedent War|rant, till you come to these words, These are therefore, c. And then say thus.
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you to whip the said A. B. for the said Offence. Hereof fail not, c.
Note, This is onely for the first Offence.
Now for the second Offence, thus.


A Mittimus to the House of Correc|tion for the second like Offence.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County aforesaid at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas, c. As in the former5 Car. 2. p. 2.  Iustice. Warrant, till you come to these words, And whereas it then appeared, c. In|stead of which you go on thus, And forasmuch as the said A. B. was once before convict of the said Offence, and was thereof so convicted as before: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, the said Constable and Borsholders, to convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding

also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there keep him one month to hard labour. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.


An Order against the Buyer of stoln Wood, c. to pay treble the va|lue thereof.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as upon examination15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. by me this day, (according to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and destroyers of young Timber-trees:) it appeared unto me, That A. B. of, c. did within six days last past buy Any Burthens of Wood, or any Poles, or sticks of Wood, Un|derwood, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze. of E. F. (being a per|son justly suspected to have unlawfully come by the same, and that the same was unlawfully come by, and unlawfully taken from C. D. of, c. and was of the value of, c. of law|full money of England:) I do therefore (ac|cording to the said Act) award that the said A. B. shall pay to the said C. D. c. of lawfull money of England, (being the treble value of the (a) aforesaid Given under my hand and seal the, c.



A Warrant to distrain for non-pay|ment of the Money according to the foregoing Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them.
K. ss. WHereas lately by examination by me taken (according to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull cutting, or15 Car. 2. cp. 2. 1 Iustice. stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and destroyers of young Timber-trees:) it appeareth unto me, That A. B. of, c. did (within, c. days last past) buy (a) as before of E. F. being a person justly suspected to have unlaw|fully come by the same, and that the same was unlawfully come by, and unlawfully taken from C. D. of, c. and was of the value of, c. of lawfull money of England: I did therefore (ac|cording to the said Act) award that the said A. B. should pay to the said C. D. c. of law|full money of England, (being the treble value of the (a) as aforesaid And forasmuch as the said A. B. hath not paid to the said C. D. the aforesaid, c. (according to my said award:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you to levy the aid, c. by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. (rendring to him the over-plus) and after you have so levied the said, c. forthwith to pay the same to the said C. D. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my had and seal the, c.



A Mittimus against the Buyer of stoln Wood, c. for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the County aforesaid at T. in the said County.
Kent ss. WHereas lately, c. (as in15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. the last before mentioned Warrant, till you come to the words [Hereof fail not, c.] then go on thus.) And forasmuch as you the said Constable have returned unto me, That in default of such Distress you cannot levy the aforesaid summ of, c. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Bor|sholders, and every of you, to attach the said A. B. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, at his own charge, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (toge|ther with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep one month without Bail. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, c.




Woollen.

A Certificate for burying in Woollen.

K. ss. A. B. of the Parish of C. in the30 Car. 2. County of D. Gent. maketh Oath, that E. F. of the Parish of G. in the County of H. Gent. lately deceased was not put in, wrapt or wound up, or buried in any Shirt, Shift, Sheet or Shroud made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or other then what is made of Sheeps Wool onely, nor in any Coffin lined or faced with any Cloath, Stuff, or any other thing whatso|ever made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or any other material but Sheeps Wool onely. Dated the 2. day of Iuly in the one and thirtieth year of the Reign o our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, c. Annoque Dom. 1679.
Sealed and subscribed by us who were pre|sentTwo Per|sons must witness the Certifier's swearing. and Witnesses to the swearing of the aforesaid Affidavit.
A. B. C. D.



I H. B. Esq (one of the King's Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the County of D.) do hereby certify, That the day and year abovesaid the said A. B. came before me, and made such Affidavit as is above specified, ac|cording to the late Act of Parliament, (inti|tuled An Act for burying in Woollen.) Wit|ness my hand the day and year first above written.
H. B.



Or this.
I P. S. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for this County) do hereby cer|tify, That A. B. came before me this present second day of Iune 1679. and made Oath, that C. D. deceased was not put in, wrapt or wound up, or buried in any Shift, Shirt, Sheet, or Shroud made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or other then what is made of Sheeps Wool onely, or in any Coffin lined or faced with any Cloath, Stuff, or any other thing whatsoever made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or any other material but Sheeps Wool onely.
P. S.

Sealed and signed by us Witnesses that were present, and did hear this Oath made.
A. B. C. D.




The Minister's Certificate for being buried in Woollen.
I A. B. Rectour of the Parish Church of C.30 Car. 2. in the County aforesaid, do hereby certi|fy, That the day and year abovesaid the said C. D. came before me and made such Affida|vit as is above specified, according to a late Act of Parliament, (intituled, An additional Act for burying in Woollen.) Witness my hand the day and year first above written.
A. B.


A Minister's Certificate of not bring|ing an Affidavit of a Corp's being buried in Woollen.
To the right Worshipfull R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace for the County of Kent,) the humble Certificate of me A. B. Rectour of the Parish Church of C. in the County aforesaid.
I Humbly certify, That C. D. was lately bu|ried13 Car. 2. in the Parish aforesaid, viz. on the
As by the Register Book kept for the same Parish doth appear; And further, That (according to the Act of Par|liam in this behalf) I did forthwith after the   the  C D. cause notice o be given  my hand to the Church|warden

of the said Parish to bring unto me the said A. B. an Affidavit concerning the bu|rial in Woollen of the said C. D. (according to the direction and appointment of the said Act) And I further certify, That by the space of eight days next after the said Interment of the said C. D. no Affidavit hath been brought to me the said Rectour concerning the bu|rial of the said C. D. in Woollen, as by the said Act is required. Witness my hand this 10. day of May in the year of our Lord. 181.


A Warrant for levying the 5 li. for not burying in Woollen according to the Act.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto me30 Car. 2. by the Certificate of A. B. Mini|ster, officiating in your said Parish, to you the Church-wardens and Overfeers of the Poor of the same Parish, That the Corps of the Per|son of C. D. deceased (but not of the Plague) was buried in Linnen (contrary to the Act hereafter mentioned) on Monday the second day of Iune, and that such an Affidavit and Certificate concerning the Parties being inter|red according to the direction of a late Act of Parliament (intituled, An Act for burying in Woollen) was not brought to him within the time limited by the said Act; And forasmuch as by reason thereof, the forfeiture and penalty of five pounds of lawfull money of England is incurred, and the Goods and Chattels of the deceased by the said Act made liable to the aforesaid forfeiture, to be levied by way of Di|stress and Sale thereof, by Warrant of the chief

Magistrate in any Town-corporate, or any Ju|stice of the Peace, or in default thereof, by like Distress and Sale o the Goods of the Person in whose house the said Party died, or of any that had a hand in putting such Person in any Shirt, Shift, Sheet, Shroud, or Coffin, contrary to the said Act, or did order or dispose the doing thereof; and in case such Person were a Ser|vant, and that he or she died in the family of his or her Master or Mistress, that the same be levied upon the Goods and Chattels of his or her said Master or Mistress; and if such Per|son died in the family of his or her Father or Mother, that then the same be levied upon the Goods and Chattels of his or her Father or Mo|ther, in manner and by Warrant as aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name, and by the Authority of the said Act of Parlia|ment) to will and require you, or some of you, to levy the said forfeiture by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said deceased, or in default thereof, of the Goods and Chattels of such other Parties as aforesaid, rendring the overplus thereof to the Parties whose Goods you shall so distrain, (all reasonable charges being deducted.) And for your so doing, this (by the Authority of the said Act) shall be your Warrant. Given under my hand and seal the 10. day of Iune in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, (by the grace of God) of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, c. Annoque Dom. 1679.
To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of, c.




Additional Presidents to the former.

The form of the Record that is re|turned of the Alehouses that are licensed.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo ter|tio die Februarii Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae Hiberniae Regis, Fidei De|fens. vicesimo septimo apud W. in Com. K. praed. R. K. G. P. Armig. duobus Iusticiariis dicti Domini Reg. ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assignat.  quilibetperson. infra nominat. Victuall. in person. praesent. tunc  ibidem per nos dict. Iu|sticiar. Licenc. ad vendend. panem  Cervisiam in Conditione infra scrip. recognoverunt se debere dicto Dom. Regi seperal. summas decem librar bonae  legalis monetae Angliae,  quilibet perso|narum infra nominat.  manucapt. pro praedict. person. licenc.  in person. praesent. tunc  ibidem recogn. se debere dicto Dom Regi summ. quinque librar.  pro praed. person. Licenc.  non in pers. praesent. in decem libr. consimilis monetae Angl. de Bonis  Catallis, Terris  Tenementis suis  cujuslibet eorum ad opus  usum dicti Dom. Re|gis haered.  successor. suorum fieri  levai si defecerint in conditione sequorum.



THE Condition of these Recognizances are such, That whereas the above and within named Justices have licensed and al|lowed all and every the Alehouse-keepers and Victuallers whose names are under and within written, to sell Ale and Beer in the Town and Houses where they now inhabit and dwell for the space of one whole year next ensuing the date hereof and no longer. If therefore they and every of them shall during their time of keeping Alehouses sell good wholsome Ale and Beer a full Ale-quart of their best for one Pen|ny, and of their smallest second sort two full Ale-quarts for a Penny, nor shall suffer any disorder or unlawfull Games to be used in or about their Houses or Grounds, nor lodge any Strangers above one day and one night without giving notice thereof to the Consta|ble or his Deputy, nor dress nor cause to be dressed in or about their Houses any manner of Flesh to be eaten or sould at any time pro|hibited by Law. Nor receive into their Hou|ses any manner of Persons suspected or defa|med of or for Theft, Murther, Drunkenness or Incontinency, nor shall buy nor take to pawn any stoln Goods, nor shall suffer any to be taken to pawn, nor shall suffer any Persons to be drinking in their Houses on the Lord's day nor Holy days during Divine Service, nor af|ter nine of the Clock at night, nor at any other time than the Statute doth permit. And if they the said Alehouse-keepers, and every of them, shall likewise keep good Rule and Order in their several Houses, and doe and perform all other things according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that case made and provided. Then these Recogni|zances

to be void and of none effect, or else to remain and be in full force and virtue.
Hundred de, c.
Hundred de H.
W. B. Victualler, debere in decem librar.
T. K. de R. 6. li.  I. de eadem manit. 6 li.
Write at the bottom of all, Capt.  Recogn. coram nobis.
R. K. W. P. E. H.
At the same time when the Licences are granted the Overseers Books are passed, and you write in their Books at the foot of the Accompt.
If money due to the old Overseers, you say, Due to be paid from the new to the old Overseers 10 00 c. 11 April 1670. seen and allowed by us
R. K. W. P.
If money due to the new Overseers, you say, Remaining in the old Overseers hands to be paid to the new ones 10 00 00 11 April seen and allowed by us
R. K. W. P.
At the bottom of every Overseers Warrant put what is due from the one to the other.



Overseer's Warrant.
WE whose names are hereunto subscri|bed Justices of the Peace for this County of K. do approve and appoint I. S. and T. D. of, c. to be new Overseers for the Poor of the said Parish for the space of one whole year next ensuing the date here|of, commanding them, together with the Church-wardens, to provide for the said Poor (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided.) Given under our hands and seals, c. Anno Regni Regis, c. Anno Domini 1670.
Remaining in the old Overseers hands to be paid to the new ones 10 00 00



The Return made by one Justice of Peace when he swears another.
A. M. miles infra script. praestitit seperalia infra mentionat. juramento quinto die Decembr. Anno Domini 1681. virtute brevis infra script. mihi direct. dat. Anno  die su|pradict.A Seal to the side.
R. K.



The Examination of a Felon himself.
The Examination of J. C. taken before R. K. Esquire, one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace for the said County of K. the 25. day of July Anno Domini 1678.  Regni Regis Caroli Secundi nunc Angl. c. XXX.
K. ss. THE said I. C. being charged by E. M. of the Parish of D. Vic|tualler, That he the said I. C. lately came into the Dwelling-house of him the said E. M. situate in the said Parish of D. and did then and there feloniously take and steale out of the said House one silver Cup of the Goods and Chattels of the said E. M. to the value of forty shillings. He the said I. C. upon his Examination before me the said 25. day of Iuly doth confess that he stole the said silver Cup from out the House of the said E. M. and sold it to one M. B. in the City of London, Goldsmith, for 24 s. and 6 pence.
And further saith not.
R. K.



The Information of the Witness when no Confession.
The Information of A. B. of the Parish of C. a|gainst D. E. taken upon Oath before me R. K. Esquire, one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace for the said County, the 25. day of May Anno Dom. 1677.  Regni Regis Caroli Se|cundi nunc Angl. c. xxix.
Kent ss. THE said A. B. being this day examined upon Oath before me, saith, That, c.
And further deposeth not.


A Mittimus for Whores.
To the Keeper, c.
K. ss. WHereas the Persons hereunder named are of Evil same, and are accused for resorting to Houses, reputed Houses of common Bawdery: These are there|fore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, That presently upon sight here|of you receive and take them into your Custo|dy, and them safe to keep untill they shall be thence discharged by due course of Law. Here|of fail you not. Given under my hand and seal this, c.




Law-Cases relating to the fore|going Subject.
IF the Warrant be to bring before him, orCo. Rep. 5. fol. 59. any other Justice, it is at the election of the Officer, to which Justice he will go.
A Warrant may be made to bring before aFoster's cas. Ibid. Cok. Rep. 9. fol. 119. b. In Lord Samhur's case. 2. Brown. 41. Legate's case. particular Justice.
Justices not imprison, but in the Common Gaol.
One Justice of the Peace connot commitIenkins 174. canother Justice for breach of the Peace.
Sessions of the Peace may.
If a Justice pursue not the Statute, thereIones 170. Cole's case. his Act is void: But if he pursue it, then nei|ther B. R. nor Justices of the Peace can dis|charge him.

Apprentice.
3. Bulstrode 164. Brown's ca. 1. Brownl. 67. Coven|try. Goldsbo|rough 161. March. 3. Noy 105.
Must be bound out by Indenture.
Master cannot send Apprentice beyond the Sea (except go with him:) But may send him to any place in England.
Action of account is not maintainable against an Apprentice.
By custom of London a man may turn over his Apprentice to any other within the City.
Action lies by Master for inticing an Ap|prentice

to depart from his Service, so if in|ticeRichmond. to take money, or play.


Bastard-child.
If the two next Justices make not provisionIones 330. for Bastard, the Sessions must settle it, as the two Justices ought to have done.
Sessions cannot originally make order toStyle 475. Denton. keep Bastard, but it ought to be made by the two next Justices to the place where the Child was born.
Maintenance of Bastard by Mother and re|putedIenkin. 47. pl. 90. Father is by these modern Laws of 18 Eliz. cap. 3. and 7 Iac. cap. 6. the former Laws were onely for punishment.
Not questioned for having one Bastard.2. Bulstrode 398. Then she had another, she is not to be pro|ceeded against by 7 Iac. (as for a second Offence.)
The two next Justices are not to commit2. Bulstrode 342. Thekins and Smith. 2. Bulstrode 393. Bowler's case. 2. Bulstrode 341. 2. Bulstrode 341. Twyning. Noy 79. Iermin. for not obeying their Order, but to take bond for their appearance at Sessions.
Neither Sessions nor Assizes can meddle touching Bastardy, but upon Appeal: (other|wise the two Justices must order.)
If two Justices make an Order, if Party re|fuse to perform, or enter into bond to appear at the next Sessions, they may commit him without Bail.
If (by practice and design) a Child be born in a Parish, the Parish where the practice was, shall keep the Child.
Bound to pay 20 d. per week for keeping a Bastard, Defendant cannot plead that there was no Order made.



Behaviour.
Justice cannot bind to Good behaviour up|onStyle 16. Bronker's case. Moore 606. numb. 837. 3. Croke 680. Dean's case. 3. Croke 78. Latch. 5. a general information, or commit him for not finding Sureties upon such information.
May break house upon warrant for the Good behaviour.
If Justice (for want of Sureties for Good behaviour) commit (without good cause) false imprisonment.
To say of a Major, he is a Fool, breach of Good behaviour.
So to threaten Witnesses.


Conventicles.
These are against the Statute of 16 Car. 2. Vide the Statute.


House of Correction.
If delivered of a Child in the House of Cor|rection,2. Bul|strode 358. the Child must be sent to the Parish, from which the Mother was sent.
A Rogue must not be sent to the House of2. Bul|strode 358. Correction, but whipped, and sent to the place where last setled (if known) else to the place of birth. But the House of Correction is for the Poor of the Parish that refuse to work.


Deer.
Heir shall have them in the Park, and notOwen 20. Greg. 2. Leonard 222. Executor.
Waste cannot be assigned for killing Deer, except he kill them all.



Drunkenness.
If twice drunk, and convicted, bound toIenkins 173. Godbold 514. Rolle 409. Tayler. Good behaviour.
Drunkard may be punished in Ecclesiastical Court, or by justice of Peace.
Being a Drunkard, cause to remove a Ma|gistrate.


Gaol.
Every County hath two Gaols, one for Debt,Latch. 16. which may be in any house where the Sheriff will. The other is for the Peace, and matters of the Crown, which is the County Gaol.
Gaoler shall be answerable for Escapes, andCok. Rep. 9. fol. 96. b. in Reynes. 3. Cr. 815. if not sufficient, respondet superior.
If Gaol broken by Thieves, Gaoler is char|geable, (otherwise if by Enemies.)


High-way.
1. Cr. 366. Sir Edw. Duncomb. 1. Crooke 266. Popham 142. Earl of Northum|berland's case.
If inclose part of the High-way, must main|tain it (though the Parish did it before.)
To stop one way (which was foul) and lay out another (without publick Authority) not justifiable.
Cannot lay Logs in the High-way, though there is sufficient room for Passengers be|side it.
Style 130. Moore 180. Cok. Rep. 9. fol. 33. a. William's case. Justice may upon his view present want of repair of High-way, and before the Fine can be taken off, the presented must certify the Amendment.
Action for stopping or incroaching upon High-way, not maintainable without particular damage, for the usual way is by Indictment.
If to repair the High-way, ratione tenurae, itKeilway 53 a. pl. 4. need not be prescribed, but ratione residentiae must.
Indictment in High-way ad nocumentum pro|pe inhabitantium (naught) it should have beenRolle 406. The King and Horn|sey. omnium ibidem transeuntium.


Huy and Cry.
Statutes of 13 Edw. 1. and 27 Eliz. are con|cerning it.
The Party robbed ought to give convenientNoy 155. notice so soon as he can.
Though know the Robber, yet shall haveMarch 10. pl. 18. Action against the Hundred, by 13 Edw. 1.
The Party robbed is not bound to lend his Horse to pursue the Thief, nor is he bound to goe and pursue the Thief presently.
Robbery after day-break, and before Sun|rising2. Crooke 106. (Hundred must answer,) so that after Sun-set, and before it is dark.
Oath of a Robbery before a Justice of the1. Crooke 211. County, though taken out of the County, good.


Poor.
Assessment for them ought to be made ac|cordingIenk. 327. pl. 49. to the visible Estates of the Inhabi|tants there (both real and personal.) But not for any Estate they have elsewhere. The Occupiers of the Lands (and not the Land|lords) are to be taxed.
The Grand-mother (being of ability) hadStyle 283. a poor Grand-child reliev'd by the Parish, who marrieth; her Husband is liable towards kee|ping the Child, for that his Wife was of abili|ty when he married her: otherwise if she had

not been of ability. And the Sessions must order what he shall contribute towards the charge.


Peace.
1000 li. bond may be required for theStyle 322. Peace, (as the case may stand) viz. if the Person be dangerous.
If he which is bound to the Peace break hisStyle 369. Recognizance, he may be indicted for it, for it is a new Offence.
Bound to the Peace upon malice, or forStyle 364. vexation, may be discharged by the King's Bench.
Justice may take money to lie in deposito for1. Croke 446. security of the Peace, and if break the Peace, the money to be forfeited to the King.
Two Justices (though neither of the Quo|rum)2. Leonard 184. pl. 223. may inquire of unlawfull Assemblies, though they cannot determine the same.


Rogue.
Is not to be sent to the House of Correction,2. Bul|strode 358. but to be whipped, and sent where last settled (if known,) otherwise to the place of his birth. But the House of Correction is pro|perly for those that will not work.
If Inhabitants of the County goe withIenkins 318. Wares to sell at Houses in that County, they are Rogues.


Riot.
Fine upon Riotors cannot be less than 10 li.Style 303. for the principal, and four marks a-piece for the rest.
Information against two Justices for not in|quiringStyle 245. of a Riot, found against one of them (good.)
Stage-players may be indicted for Riot, andRolle 109. unlawfull Assemblies.


Souldiers.
If Souldiers prest to serve the King, de|part2. Anderson 151. out of the service, it is Felony by 7 Hen. 7. 3 Hen. 8. and 2 Edw. 6.
The Captain is he who is to command,1. Croke 71. Hutton 134. and the Conducter is he who is hired to guide the Souldiers in the way to their Captain, and departing from him is Felony.
Justices of the Peace may try the Offence at their Sessions, and so may Justices of Oyer and Terminer.






THE TABLE.

Alehouses.
A Licence to keep an Alehouse Page. 1
Another Page. 2
A Licence to Brew, and keep an Alehouse Page. 3
A Recognizance thereupon, with Condition Page. ibid.
Another Recognizance for an Alehouse-keeper, and Condition Page. 4  5
A Warrant against an Inn-keeper, Alehouse|keeper, c. suffering to tipple Page. 5
to levy money for tippling Page. 6
A Mittimus (for an Alehouse-keeper suffering to tipple fo  of Distress Page. 7
For an unlicensed Alehouse Page. 9
The like upon the Statute 3 Car. the first Con|viction Page. 10
The like for the second Conviction Page. 11
for the third Conviction Page. 12
A Warrant for Witnesses against an unlicensed Alehouse-keeper. Page. 13
for suppression of an Alehouse for dis|order Page. 14
for renewing Licences of Alehouse|keepers Page. ibid.
against an Alehouse-keeper for selling less than measure Page. 15
A Mittimus for selling less than measure for want of Distress Page. 16
A Warrant for suppressing an Alehouse after suppression at the Quarter-sessions Page. 18
A Licence to keep an Alehouse, with Ar|ticles Page. 19
The form of a Record that is returned of the Alehouses that are licensed and condi|tioned, c. Page. 377


Apprentices.
A Warrant to put out poor Children Appren|tices Page. 22
An Indenture for an Apprentice so put out Page. 23
A Warrant against them which refuse to take Apprentices Page. 25
against a Master for abusing his Ap|prentice Page. 26
A Warrant against a disorderly Apprentice Page. ibid.
A Discharge of an Apprentice Page. 27
A Warrant against one that departeth out of Service before his time expired Page. ibid.
Law-Cases thereon Page. 383



Bail.
Recognizances for Bail Page. 28
A Condition to prefer a Bill and give Evi|dence Page. 29
A Condition to give Evidence Page. 30


Bastards.
A Warrant for the apprehending and convey|ing the Woman to the House of Cor|rection Page. 32
A Mittimus of the Mother of a Bastard-child to the House of Correction Page. 33
A Warrant against the Mother (for the se|cond Offence) to commit to the House of Correction, and find Sureties of Good be|haviour Page. 34
to convene the Mother and reputed Father Page. ibid.
against the reputed Father of a Bastard|child Page. 36
An Order for Relief of the Parish touching a Bastard-child, and for punishing the Mo|ther and reputed Father Page. 37
A Warrant to be written under the Order aforesaid for giving notice thereof to the Mother and reputed Father Page. 40
for the punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of a Bastard-child Page. ibid.
and Mittimus against the reputed Father for not obeying the Justices Order Page. 43
An Order for relief of the Parish in case of a

Bastard-child out of the Estate of the repu|ted Father Page. 45
A Warrant for punishment of the reputed Fa|ther of a Bastard-child for not keeping the Child and obeying the Order Page. 46
for sending a Bastard-child (found wan|dring) to the Place of its birth Page. 48
for apprehending a Woman on suspicion of having murthered her Bastard-child Page. 49
A Condition of a Recognizance for the ap|pearance of the reputed Father of a Bastard|child Page. 50
of a Recognizance of one charged to be the Father of a Bastard-child before its birth, to appear at Sessions Page. ibid.
to discharge Church-wardens and Pari|shioners of a Child born in the Parish Page. 51
Law-Cases thereon Page. 384


Good behaviour.
A Warrant and Mittimus for Good beha|viour Page. 52
Causes for Good behaviour Page. 53
Another Warrant for Good behaviour Page. 54
A Mittimus to the Gaol for one that refuses to find Sureties for his Good behaviour Page. 55
A Supersedeas for the Good behaviour Page. 56
A Recognizance thereupon Page. 57
A Condition of a Recognizance for the same Page. ibid.
Another Condition Page. 58
Condition Page. ibid.
Law-Cases thereon Page. 385



Bridges.
A Warrant to a Hundred for assessing a pro|portionable rate of a Tax (appointed by the Body of the County) towards repair of the County Bridges Page. 59
to make a Tax for County Bridges re|paired Page. 61
to collect a Tax for repairing County Bridges Page. 62
for not paying the same Page. 63

Burying see Title Woollen.

Carriages for the King.
A Warrant to provide Carriages Page. 64
Another Warrant for provision of Carriages for the King's use Page. 65
to levy the Penalty for not appearing with Carriages for the King upon notice Page. 66
A Mittimus for one that doth impress or take away any Cart or other thing from the Owner under pretence of power from the Green-cloath, for carriage of His Majestie's Provisions, without lawfull Authority Page. 67


Certificates.
A Certificate from the Minister and chief Inha|bitants of the Parish of a man's Honesty Page. 68
for continuing of an Alehouse-keeper Page. 69
for the time of the Birth of a Child Page. ibid.
for one that hath not been touched of the Evil Page. 70


Chimney-money.
A Mittimus for disturbing a Collector Page. ibid.


Church.
A Warrant for not coming to Church Page. 71
to levy the forfeiture for not coming to Church Page. 72
A Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church (for want of Distress) Page. 73
A Warrant to distrain for a Church-Tax Page. 74
a Minister for not reading Prayers, c. once in a month Page. 75
A Mittimus for Preaching whilst disabled Page. 76


Coals.
A Warrant upon complaint touching Coals Page. 77
for delivery a moity of such Coals as are sold contrary to the Statute to the Informer Page. ibid.
touching Prices of Coals Page. 78



Constables Charges.
A Warrant for making of Constables Page. 79
Another Page. ibid.
A Warrant for a Tax for the Constables Char|ges in the execution of his Office Page. 80
to appear and shew cause for their not paying the said Charges Page. 81
for refusing to appear to shew cause for not paying the said Charges Page. 82
to levy the Charges upon their refusing to pay the same Page. 83
The Condition of a Recognizance to appear and answer the not paying the same at next Sessions Page. 84
A Warrant for levying 3 s. 4 d. upon a Con|stable for neglect of his Duty in giving an account of Rogues and Vagabonds Page. ibid.
to sell the Goods of an Offender that refuseth to bear his own Charges to the Gaol Page. 85
to make a Tax for conveying a Felon to the Gaol Page. 87


Conventicles.
A Condition of a Recognizance in case of an Appeal made touching Conventicles Page. 87
A Record of a Conventicle Page. 89
concerning Conventicles where several Persons are convicted Page. 90
of the Conviction of certain Persons ta|ken at a Conventicle Page. 92
Memorial of a Record of a Conventicle Page. 95
A Mittimus thereupon upon the first Offence Page. 97
upon the second Offence Page. 98
upon the third Conviction Page. 99
A Record against one that suffereth a Conven|ticle, c. to be kept in his House Page. 101
A Mittimus thereupon upon the first Convic|tion Page. 102
thereupon upon the second Conviction Page. 103
thereupon upon the third Conviction Page. 104
A Warrant to levy the Penalty of the Statute upon the Teacher of a Conventicle Page. 105
Pro testes to prove the Conventicle Page. 106
to levy the money upon the Offenders Page. 108
to levy the money upon the Offenders Page. 109
to levy money upon a Gaoler, c. for suffering one committed (upon this Act) to goe at large Page. 114
The like for suffering one at large to joyn with the Offender in custody in the exercise of Religion Page. 115
A Warrant against a Peer of the Realm for be|ing at a Conventicle, the first Conviction Page. 116
upon the second Conviction Page. 117
against a Peer for suffering a Conventi|cle, c. to be kept in his House, c. the first Conviction Page. ibid.
upon the second Conviction Page. 118
A Mittimus for a Nonconformist, c. Page. 119
A Certificate to the Militia, c. for aid in case of a Conventicle Page. 120
made by a Justice where the Offenders live in a Corporation Page. 121
for the taking the Oath according to the said Act Page. 122
Law-Cases thereon Page. 385


Corporations.
A Certificate upon taking the Oaths and sub|scribing the Declarations mentioned in the
Act for regulating Corporations Page. 123


Court-Leet and Court-Baron.
A Precept directed to the Bayliff of the Man|nour by the Steward of the Court-Baron to warn the Court Page. 124
to warn a Jury for a Court-Leet Page. 125
for a Borsholder, or other Officer, to take upon him the said Office, and to re|paire to a Justice of Peace to take his Oath for his faithfull execution of the same Page. 126
to bring in a Scold to be tryed at a Court-Leet Page. 127
The manner of making up of Court-Rolls Page. 128
The manner of making up of Estreats Page. 136


Customs.
A Warrant against those who abuse an Officer of the Customs, in the due execution of his Office Page. 140
against carrying away Goods without paying Custom, c. Page. 141
A Mittimus upon the precedent Warrant for the first Offence Page. 142
upon the second like Offence Page. 143


Deer.
A Warrant for Deer-stealing Page. 144
to levy 20 li. for stealing Deer Page. 145
A Mittimus to the House of Correction for want of Distress Page. 146
Another Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Di|stress Page. 147
A Warrant for a Buck Page. 148
Law-Cases thereon Page. 385


Drunkenness.
A Warrant for Drunkenness the first Convic|tion Page. 148
the second Conviction Page. 149
Law-cases thereon Page. 386


Excise.
A Certificate upon taking the Oath about Excise Page. 151
A Warrant to summon those who refuse to pay the Excise Page. 152
for Distress on Alehouse-keepers for not paying Excise Page. 153
A Mittimus where not sufficient to pay Excise Page. 154
A Warrant to levy the forfeiture for not ma|king a due Entry Page. 155
to levy the double value of the Excise on a Brewer for not paying according to Entry made Page. 156
Loss of allowance for making false Entries Page. 157
A Warrant upon complaint of false Entry to appear Page. 158
not sufferage to gage the Vessels Page. ibid.
against one that procureth a false Return to be made in the Office of Excise Page. 160
A Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress Page. 161
A Warrant (against several Persons) to di|strain for the duties of Excise, c. Page. 162


Felony.
A Warrant to apprehend a Felon Page. 165
A Mittimus of a Felon Page. ibid.
Another Page. 166
A Warrant to search for a Felon on suspicion Page. 167
for apprehending of one that hath dange|rously hurt another Page. 168
A Liberate to deliver a Prisoner committed for Felony Page. 169
A Warrant to bind Persons to give in evidence against a Felon Page. 170
Another Page. ibid.
A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill and give evidence against Principals and Accessary in case of Felony Page. 171
of a Recognizance where two Felonies are committed to give evidence Page. 172
A Condition to give evidence for Felony Page. 173
of a Recognizance to appear upon Fe|lony Page. ibid.
to appear upon suspicion of Felony Page. 174
A Bond Page. ibid.
A Condition to save one harmless who was bound for the appearance of a Person sus|pected for Felony Page. 175
A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Fe|lony Page. 30
The Examination of a Felon himself Page. 381


Fire.
A Testimonial from Justices of the Peace for poor men that have had loss by fire Page. 176
A charitable Request made by certain Justices of the Peace to the Inhabitants of a Division for relief of F. S. who had been there lately ruined by fire Page. 178


Forceable Entry.
A Warrant to return a Jury to inquire of a Forceable Entry Page. 179
A Record of Forceable Entry Page. 180
A Warrant to the Sheriff for Restitution Page. 182
A Mittimus upon view of Forceable De|tainour Page. 183



Foreign Wares.
A Warrant to search for and seize Foreign Manufactures prohibited, c. Page. 184


Gaol.
Law-Cases Page. 386


High-ways.
A Warrant to levy 5 li. on the Inhabitants of a Parish for not choosing Surveyours of the High-ways Page. 185
to distrain for High-way Tax Page. 186
for not sending in Teams to work in the High-ways Page. 187
against those that refuse or neglect to work in the High-ways Page. 188
to impower the Surveyours to dig Gra|vel, c. upon Wasts or Commons out of the Parish Page. 189
to appoint what shall be paid by the Sur|veyours for digging Gravel, c. in any man's Ground Page. 190
against Surveyours for not accounting Page. 191
against Surveyours who have not paid the moneys in their hands to the next Sur|veyours Page. 192
Law-Cases thereon Page. 386



House of Correction.
A Warrant and Directions for general privy Search Page. 193
A Mittimus of a Rogue thither, taken in the general Search Page. 197
of an idle Person out of Service, c. Page. 198
to the House of Correction of an idle Person, that would run away, and will not work to maintain his Family Page. 199
A Liberate from thence Page. 200
Law-Cases thereon Page. 385


Huy and Cry.
The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way praying an Huy and Cry Page. 201
Another Page. 202
The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way by three Persons, one of which he knew Page. 203
A Huy and Cry upon the escape of a Prisoner from the Constable Page. 204
A Warrant for a Huy and Cry after a Felon Page. 205
to search for a Person (who hath com|mitted a Robbery) and for Goods stoln Page. 206
Law-Cases thereon Page. 387



Inns of Court.
A Warrant from one of the Judges, a Member of an Inns of Court, against one of that So|ciety, for refusing to observe the Order of the House Page. 208


Irish Cattel.
A Warrant to seize certain Cattel imported from foreign Parts into England Page. 210
to deliver to the Owners certain Cattel seised, as forfeited for being imported from foreign Parts, upon proof that they were not so imported Page. 211
to kill the said Cattel Page. 212
to levy 40 s. upon the seisour or Church|wardens that shall fail in killing or making distribution as aforesaid Page. 213


Lent.
A Warrant for observing of Lent Page. 214


Licences.
A Licence for a Badger of Corn Page. 215
A Licence for a petty Chapman Page. 216
A Licence or Pasport for a poor man to his Friends for relief Page. 217
Another Page. 218
A Licence to beg Page. ibid.
to travel by Water on the Lord's day Page. 219
Another Page. 220
A Licence to travel on the Lord's day Page. 221


Misdemeanours.
A general Warrant for the same retornable be|fore a particular Justice Page. 221
Another Page. 222
The like retornable before any Justice, and the Accuser to have notice Page. ibid.
A Condition of a Recognizance for misde|meanour Page. 223


Murther.
A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment to give evidence at the next general Gaol-delivery, alias Assizes, to both Juries in case of Murther Page. 224
of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill and give evidence at Assizes Page. 225
A Condition-recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment and to give evidence to both Juries at the next general Gaol-delivery, alias Assizes in case of an Abbettor in Mur|ther Page. ibid.


Nets, Dogs and Conies.
A Warrant to search for Nets and Setting|dogs upon the Statute of 7 Iacobi Page. 226
The like upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Caroli Secundi Page. 227
A Mittimus against Persons that refuse to enter into Recognizance to appear at Sessions for their keeping Ferrets and Nets to kill Co|nies Page. 229
A Warrant for one that hunts with Spaniels in Eared-corn Page. 230


Oaths.
The Oath which is usually ministred to a Ju|stice of the Peace in the several Counties of England Page. 231
The Oath of Supremacy Page. 232
The Oath of Allegiance Page. 233
A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of Alle|giance Page. 235
The Oath of Abjuration Page. ibid.
The Oath of an Excise man Page. 236
The Under-sheriffs Oath touching the impan|nelling of Juries Page. ibid.
The Oath of a Bailiff Page. 237
The Oath usually given to Church-wardens Page. 238
Another Page. ibid.
The Oath of Obedience Canonical Page. ibid.
The High-constables Oath Page. 239
The Oath taken by the Officers of the Mar|shals Court Page. 241
The Oath of a Constable Page. 242
of an Ale-caster Page. 243
of a Commissioner of Sewers Page. 244
of a Searcher in the Custom-house Page. 245
The Oath given to a Jury before Evidence gi|ven in against a Prisoner at the Bar Page. 245
given to a Bailiff or Serjeant that attendeth on any Jury or Inquest at an Assize Page. 246
of him that craves the Peace against ano|ther Page. ibid.
Another Page. 247
Another Oath to give a man upon examination or upon information Page. ibid.
The Oath of him who gives information Page. ibid.
Another Page. 248
The Oath to be given to any Jury by whom a Nisi prius is to be tryed Page. ibid.
to be given to such as are to give evidence between a Party and party at a Nisi prius Page. ibid.
of a great Inquest Page. 249
of those that give evidence upon Bills of Indictment Page. ibid.


Officers.
The nomination of Officers by Justices of the Peace Page. 250


Orchards.
A Warrant against Robbers of Orchards Page. 251
upon non-payment to be whipt Page. 252

Overseers see Title Poor.

Peace.
A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace Page. 253
to find Sureties for the Peace where an As|sault is made upon an Officer in discharge of his Office Page. 255
A Supersedeas of a Warrant for the Peace Page. 257
A Mittimus for breaking the Peace Page. 258
A Release of the Peace Page. ibid.
The Condition of a Recognizance to appear at Sessions and keep the Peace Page. 259
Law-Cases thereon Page. 388


Plague.
A Pass or Certificate in the time of Plague Page. 260


Poor.
A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to ac|count and name other fit Persons Page. 261
for the making new Overseers of the Poor Page. 262
to make Overseers of the Poor, impow|ring them and the Church-wardens to collect the Poors Tax, and upon non-payment to destrain Page. ibid.
A Confirmation of the Rates for the Poor Page. 263
A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish) from the former Overseers Account, by Distress Page. 264
against an Overseer of the Poor for not keeping of monthly Meetings Page. 265
to destrain for the Poors Tax Page. 266
A Mittimus where there is not sufficient to destrain Page. 267
A Warrant for removing one come to a Parish Page. 268
to send a Wife and Child to her Husband in the Parish from whence they came Page. 269
for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from whence he was removed Page. 270
against those who come to work and re|turn not at the end of their work Page. 271
A Mittimus to the House of Correction of one that refuseth to be removed after his work finished Page. 272
A Warrant and Mittimus for one who runs away, and leaves his Family upon the Parish Page. 273
A Mittimus on the foregoing Warrant Page. 274
A Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor to pay Arrears, and continue weekly relief to poor Persons Page. ibid.
to levy Relief for the Poor Page. 275
A Bond and Condition to the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor to save a Town harmless upon inhabiting there Page. 276
A Release (from the Overseers of the Poor) to one that paid five pounds to be freed from keeping a Bastard-child Page. 277
The manner of seling and making up the Overseers Accompts in their Books Page. 370
Overseers Warrant Page. 380
Law-Cases thereon Page. 387


Prisoner.
A Warrant to allow a poor Prisoner relief Page. 279
A Discharge of a Prisoner to a Gaoler Page. ibid.
Another Page. 280
A Warrant for a Prisoner to be bailed Page. ibid.
A Warrant from a Judge to bring a Prisoner from a Gaol to give evidence Page. 281


Quakers.
A Mittimus of Quakers Page. 282


Rape.
A Warrant concerning Rape Page. 283


Rates for Hay, Oats, c.
A Warrant to appoint Rates for Hay, Oats, c. upon His Majestie's passing through any Place Page. 284
for levying the Penalty forfeited for not observing the Rates aforesaid Page. 285


Recognizances.
Directions thereupon Page. 286
A Condition for the Peace Page. ibid.
The manner of entring the note of Recogni|zances in your book of Recognizances Page. 287
Directions for drawing Conditions of Recog|nizances Page. 288
A single Recognizance taken before Justices of the Peace Page. 289
Another single Recognizance Page. 290
A Recognizance to prefer an Indictment, or to prefer a Bill, and give evidence Page. ibid.
for two to give evidence Page. 291
to give in evidence against a Pri|soner Page. ibid.
for the Good behaviour Page. 292
Another Page. 293
A Recognizance to give in evidence against one that is suspected of Felony Page. ibid.
A Recognizance for keeping of a Tavern Page. 294
for one that is bayle for a Boy that lay under a Bed in the night Page. 295
for Bastardy where two are Manucap|ters for the man in custody Page. 296
for a married Woman upon rescue Page. ibid.
for one that hath hurt another, and on the Warrant of Behaviour Page. 297
for the Peace Page. 298
for Felony Page. 299
A Release of a Recognizance written under the Recognizance thus, by the same Iustice or by some other, c. Page. ibid.
The Parties Release of the Peace Page. 300


Riot.
A Precept to the Sheriffs to return a Jury to enquire upon a Riot, Rout or unlawfull As|sembly Page. 301
The like Precept in Latine Page. 302
A Warrant for certain riotous Persons Page. 303
Law-Cases thereon Page. 399



Rogues.
A Warrant for apprehending and committing a dangerous Rogue Page. 304
A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue Page. 305
Law-Cases thereon Page. 388


Sacrament.
A Certificate for receiving the Sacrament and Oath Page. 306
for receiving the Sacrament according to the Act Page. 307
A Testimonial upon the receiving the Sacra|ment according to the Act Page. 308
A Declaration to be subscribed according to the Act Page. ibid.


Scavengers.
A Warrant for Scavengers to distrain Page. 309


Search.
A Warrant to search for stoln Goods Page. 310
to make general search for Rogues, Vagabonds, c Page. 311



Servants.
A Warrant for sending a Servant to his Service to serve the time agreed to prevent charge on the Parish Page. 311
A Mittimus against one that returneth into a Parish after he was removed Page. 312
A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the Master for putting away his Servant before the end of his Term Page. 313
for not paying wages Page. 314
for relief of a Man-servant that is out of service Page. 315
A Warrant against one that departeth out of service before his time expired Page. 316
to fetch back a Servant Page. ibid.
A Discharge of a Servant from his service within the time agreed, upon his absenting himself Page. 317
A Testimonial for the discharge of a Ser|vant Page. 318


Silk-Throsters.
An Order for the payment of moneys to a Silk-Throster by his Workman who im|bezils his Silk Page. 319
A Warrant against an Offender for not per|forming the Order beforementioned Page. 320


Souldiers.
A Warrant to warn in a Muster at a cer|tain day Page. 321
A Certificate for a Trained-souldier Page. 322
A Warrant to order an Allowance to a poor Souldier out of the Stock for maimed Souldiers Page. ibid.
The like for Allowance to Wife or Orphan Page. 323
Law-cases thereon Page. 389


Swearing.
A Warrant to pay 1 s. for swearing in the presence of a Justice of the Peace Page. 324
to levy moneys for prophane swearing Page. 325
A Certificate of Conviction for swearing Page. 326


Tax.
A Warrant to the Assessors to make a Tax upon an Act of Parliament for Royal Aid Page. 326
The Preamble of the Tax-book Page. 328
A Warrant to the Collectors of the Tax upon the Royal Aid Page. 329
A Warrant to levy 5 li. upon the Collectors for neglecting to collect their Assessment Page. 332


Testimonials.
A Testimonial for conveying a Rogue who hath been punished Page. 333
A Testimonial for one that hath suffered ship|wreck Page. 334



Tiling.
A Deputation for Tile-searchers Page. 335


Trespass.
A Warrant upon Hedge-breaking, c. where the Party's not able Page. 336
A Warrant or Order to pay where he is able Page. 337
to whip where not paid according to Order Page. 338
from the Justices at a Quarter-sessions for apprehending one indicted for a Tres|pass Page. 339


Uagrants.
A Warrant for apprehending Beggers and other idle Persons Page. 341
A Testimonial or Pass for him to the Place of his birth Page. 342
The like where the Place of his birth is not known Page. ibid.
The like where neither the Place of his birth nor last abode is known Page. 343
The like where the Vagrant is apprehended in a general privy search Page. 344
A Warrant to pay 2 s. for apprehending a Va|grant Page. ibid.
Upon non-payment of the same Page. 345
A Certificate of apprehending a Vagrant in the Confines of another County Page. 346
A Warrant to pay two shillings thereupon Page. 347
upon non-payment of the same Page. ibid.


Waggons and Carts.
An Affidavit to be made before a Warrant granted for destreining for 40 s. forfeited for drawing with six Horses in length in a Team, Cart or Waggon Page. 349
A Warrant to destrain upon such as travel with a Waggon or Cart drawn with six Horses at length Page. 350


Watch and Ward.
A Warrant to the High-constable for putting in Execution the Statute of 13 Car. 2. (reciting the Statute) and for keeping good Watches (upon His Majestie's going to Oxford) Page. 351
Another Warrant upon the same Statute Page. 354
A Warrant for Watch and Ward, and to ap|prehend idle Persons Page. 355
by order of Quarter-sessions to set Watch and Ward Page. 356


Weights and Measures.
A Warrant to warn in all Tradesmen and others to have their Weights and Measures examined by the Standard Page. 358
The Clerk of the Markets Warrant there|upon Page. 359



Whores.
A Mittimus for Whores Page. 382


Witnesses.
A Warrant for Witnesses touching Felony Page. 360
for a Witness to appear and give evidence at the Sessions Page. 361
The Information of a Witness when no Con|fession Page. 382


Wood.
A Warrant against one that stole Wood Page. 362
A general Warrant to search for stoln Wood Page. 363
A Warrant to search for stoln Wood, c. upon a particular complaint Page. 364
An Order against a Person apprehended with Bundles of Wood, c. to make satisfaction for the same to the Owner the first Offence Page. 365
A Warrant for not obeying that Order Page. 366
A Mittimus to the House of Correction for the second like Offence Page. 368
An Order against the buyer of stoln Wood, c. to pay treble the value thereof Page. 369
A Warrant to distrain for non-payment of the money according to the foregoing Order Page. 370
A Mittimus against the buyer of stoln Wood, c. for want of Distress Page. 371



Woollen.
A Certificate for burying in Woollen Page. 372
Another Page. 373
The Minister's Certificate for burying in Wollen Page. 374
A Minister's Certificate of not bringing an Af|fidavit of a Corp's being buried in Wollen Page. ibid.
A Warrant to levy 5 li. for not burying in Wollen according to the Act Page. 375
The Return made by one Justice of Peace when he swears another Page. 380

THE END.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The Parson's Monitor, consisting of such Cases and Matters as principally concern the Clergy. Collected from the Statute and Common Laws; as also the Constitutions and Ca|nons Ecclesiastical: Confirmed 1^o Jac. An|no Dom. 1603. Together with the Articles of Religion, Authority of the Convocation, Pri|vilege of Churches and Church-yards, Pay|ment of First-fruits and Tenths: In whose Name and Style Ecclesiastical Courts are to be kept, and the Process issuing out of the same are to run in, and with what Seal to be sealed. With several other Matters (never before Extant) very material and necessary to be known by the Cler|gy in general, and all persons concerned either as Patron o Incumbent. By G. Meriton, Gent.
Newly printed for R. Tonson. 1681.







