




NEVV
PROPOSITIONS
PROPOUNDED
At the Kings Royall Court at Holmby,
Betwixt the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and Mr. Marshall and Mr. Caryll. CONCERNING
The Presbyteriall Government, the Booke of
Common-Prayer, and the Directory. ALSO,
His Majesties severall Reasons, concer|ning
Episcopacy, and Mr. Marshalls Reply for the clee|ring
his Majesties Objections. Together with divers remarkable passa|ges
of the Commissioners of the Kingdome of Scot|land,
propounded to His Majesty for his Royall assent
to the Propositions, and signing the Covenant. WITH
Another Message from His Majesty at
Holmby, to both Houses of Parliament.
Published by order of Parliament.
London, Printed for F. F. Feb. 26. 1647.






NEW
PROPOSITIONS,
PROPOUNDED
At the Kings Royall Court at Holm|by,
betwixt the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Caryll.
THe Parliament of Scotland have sate
very close, about the disposall of His
Majesties Royall Person, and his fu|ture
Reigne and Government of himselfe
and his Royall Posterity, which indeed is a
thing of high concernment and very much
desired, by his Majesties Subjects within the
Kingdome of England: their hearts relen|ting,
untill the time of expitation, of the
great businesse now in dispence, betweene

the Soveraigne and the Subject; their eyes
being fully fixed upon this State-Object,
longing to see that happy day of the joyfull
returne of their Gracious Soveraigne, to his
Tribunall Throne at London.
For, the accomplishing of these their long-wished
desires, His Majesties loyall Subjects, (the Parlia|ments
of both Kingdomes) doe likewise endeavour
to bring to a speedy period, and instant of time; if so
be, his gracious Majesty would be pleased, to hear|ken
to the faithfull advice of His two great Coun|cels,
by signing the Propositions, and taking the
Covenant, that so the distractions of the Church of
England, may be fully composed, and the purity of
Religion firmely established, within His Majesties
Realmes and Dominions.
And to this end, the Estates of Scotland, do freely
and unanimously concurre with the Parliament of
England, for the humble advising of his Majesty to
condiscend to these their Propositions, viz.
1. That his Majesty would be plea|sed
(no longer to continue in this adverse
way) but to unite himselfe with them,
and to give his Royall assent for the sig|ning
of the Propositions; that so, all dif|ferences
may be composed within his Ma|jesties

Realmes of England and Scot|land.
2. That his Majestie would be gra|ciously
pleased to unite his Royall heart
with his Subjects of both Kingdomes, by
taking that blessed Covenant, first drawn
up, by the divine will and pleasure of the
great Iehovah, in the highest Throne,
and here confirmed upon Earth, (by his
omnipotent power) for the finishing of his
great Worke; that so the purity and light
of his Gospell, might spring and grow up,
both in the hearts of Prince and People,
and shine in all lustre, throughout the
Realmes of England and Scotland.
3. That his Majesty would be plea|sed
to embrace these their humble and
loyall Desires, by signing the Propositions
and taking the Covenant, His Subjects
of Scotland do declare, that his gracious

Majesty and his Royall Posterity, should
not suffer in the least, c.
And for the further effecting of this gallant worke,
no meanes and waies is unsought by the Commissio|ners
of both Kingdomes for the retarding of it, but
doth daily use their utmost endeavours for the attai|ning
of the same, which God grant may be speedily
bought to a period.
For, how would his Majesties Loyall Subjects re|joyce,
to heare that tryumphant sound, and melodi|ous
Eccho, of his Majesties concurrence with his
great Councells, by setting his Royall hand to signe
the Propositions, and bending his gracious heart to
receive this faithfull Covenant.

A Message from his Majesty to both Houses of Parliament.
Carolus Rex.
SIne I have never dissembled, nor hid my Consci|ence:
And that I am not yet satisfied with the
alteration in Religion, to which ye desire my con|sent.
I will not loose time in giving reasons (which are
too obvious to every body) why it is fit for me to be
attended by some of my Chaplaines, whose opini|ons,
as Clergy-men, I esteeme and reverence. Not

onely for the exercise of my Conscience, but also for
the cleering of my judgement, concerning the pre|sent
differences in Religion; as I have at full decla|red
to Mr. Marshall, and his Fellow-Minister: ha|ving
shewed them that is the best and likeliest means
of giving me satisfaction (which without it I can|not
have) in these things, whereby the distractions of
the Church may be the better seled.
Wherefore I desire, that at least two of these re|verend
Divines, whose names I have here set downe,
may have free liberty to wait upon mee, for the dis|charging
of their nuties to mee, according to their
Fuection.
From Holmby this present Moneth
of February, 1646.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers,
pro tempore, to bee communicated to
the two Houses of Parliament at West|minster
assembled.
Charles Rex. 

The Bishop of London.
The Bishop of Salisbury.
The Bishop of Peterborough.
Dr. Shelden, Cler of my Closet.
Dr. May, Deane of Yorke.
Dr. Sanderson.
Dr. Bayley.
D. Heywood.
Dr. Beale.
Dr. Fuller.
Dr. Hammond.
Dr. Tayler.



The Kings Majesty is verb desirous to come neere

London, but yet expresseth himselfe very gallantly
at Holmby, and is very familiar with the Commissio|ners
of both Kingdomes, and hath had severall Con|ferences
with the English Divines, about Religion
and the Government of the Church of England, ha|ving
propounded severall Reasons unto them, why
he will not give his Royall assent for the confirming
of the Presbyteriall way, and setling of the Directo|ry:
Desiring likewise to have a Conference with
twelve Learned Divines of the Episcopall Govern|ment,
that so he may be cleered of some points, which
as yet seemeth very strange unto him.
But as Mr. Marshall and M. Caroll doth use their ut|most
endeavours for the convincing of his Majesty,
and to cleer some scruples about the Directory, which
his Majesty objects against: But within few dayes
wee hope to heare of the happy tydings of his Ma|jesties
Royall assent, to the desire and humble suppli|cation
of his great Councell the Parliaments of both
Kingdomes.
FINIS.





