




PERSECVTION
Inconsistant
With Christianity, Humane Society,
and the Honour of
PRINCES.
FROM
The Testimonies of Themselves, and approved
Authors, and Martyrs, herein impartially
Collected.
Whereto is added certain solid Reasons why no outward
Force, nor Imposition ought to be used in matters of
Faith, c. By those faithfull Witnesses who died under
Suffering for the Testimony of Iesus: viz.

Richard Hubberthorn.
Sumuel Fisher.
Francis Howgill.

This being the third Edition of the said Reasons.
Now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for
if this Counsel, or this Work be of men, it will come to nought; but
if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found
fighters against God.Acts 5. 38, 39.
Printed in the Year, 1670.



The CONTENTS

1. King Charles the Second, his Promises and Declaration
for the Liberty of tender Consciences.
2. Some Remarkable Collections out of Doctor Tayer, Chap|lain
in ordinary to his late Majesty (so stiled) his Book, En|tituled
, A Discourse
of the Liberty of Prophesying shewing the unreasonableness
of prescribing to other Mens Faith; and the Iniquity of
persecuting different Opinions.
3. Instances out of divers Authors, treating on the same sub|ject;
by William Caton deceased.
4. Several Reasons rendred, why no outward Force nor im|position
ought to be used in matters of Faith and Religion,
by R. H. S. F. and F. H.
5. Several Saying collected from the Speeches and Writings
of King James, and King Charles the first.






Persecution inconsistant with Christianity,
Humane Society, and the Honour
of Princes.

SECT. I.
King Charles the second, his Promises and Decla|rations
for the Liberty of tender Consciences.
IN the Kings Letter from Bredah, that was sent to the House
of Peers, and read in the House, May the 1st. 1660. and
which Letter was ordered by the Lords in Parliament assem|bled,
that it should be forthwith printed and published for
the service of the House, and satisfaction of the Kingdoms;
it is said in the Book of Collections of the Kings Speeches, Page
8, and 9. And because the passion and uncharitableness of the times
have produced several Opinions in Religion, by which men are engaged
in Parties and Animosities against each other; which when they shall
hereafter unite in a freedom of Conversation, will be composed, or better
understood. We do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and that no
man shall be disquieted or called in question for differences in Opinion in
matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom;
and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as
upon Mature deliberation, shall be offered to us for the full granting
that Indulgence.
And in the Kings Declaration, concering Ecclesiastical Af|fairs,
which was dated October the 25th, 1160. it is said,
In a word we do again renew what we have formerly said, in our Declara|tion
from Bredah, for the liberty of tender Consciences, That no

man shall be disquieted, or called in question for differences of O|pinion
in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the
Kingdom; and if any have been disturbed in that kind, since our
arival here, it hath not proceeded from any direction of ours. And
it is said, We do in the first place declare, Our Purpose and Resolu|tion
is, and shall be, to promote the Power of Godlines, and to
encourage the Exercise of Religion, both in publique and private.
And in the same Declaration it is said, our present Considera|tion
and work is, To gratifie the private Consciences of those who are
grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and dis|pensing
with the omitting these Ceremonies.
In the Kings Speech to both houses of Parliament, the 8th of
July, 1661. It is to put my self in mind, as well as you, That I
so often (I think so often as I come to you) mention to you my Decla|ration
from Bredah; And let me put you in mind of another Decla|ration,
published by your selves about the same time, and which I am
perswaded made mine the more effectual; An Honest, Generous, and
Christian Declaration, signed by the most eminent Persons, who had
been the most eminent Sufferers; in which you renounced all former
Animosities, and memory of former Vnkindnesses. And my Lords
and Gentlemen, let it be in no mans power to chargeme, or you, with the
breach of our Words or Promises, which can never be a good Ingredi|ent
to our future security.
And in the Chancellors Speech to both Houses, May the 8th,
1661. It is said, He told you, but now (meaning the King) that
he vallued himself much, upon keeping his word, upon performing all
that he promiseth to his People.
And also in the Kings discourse with Richard Hubberthorn,
soon after he arrived in England, he said, Well, of this you may
be assured, That you shall none of you suffer for your Opinions or Re|ligion,
so long as you live peaceably, and you have the Word of a
King for it; and I also have given forth a Declaration to the same pur|pose,
That none shall Wrong you, or Abuse you.
And further in the Kings Declaration, dated Decem. 26. 1662.
wherein he declares, first, his wonderful Restoration without the
least blood-shed by the Military Sword.
And he expresseth his Clemency, or the Clemency of his
Nature.

And he vindicates himself from divers suggestions, of dis|affected
Persons, particularly from that, of intending to sub|ject
Persons and Estates to revenge or spoil, c. and from
intending to introduce a Miliary or Arbitrary way of Go|vernment.
Also he expresseth these words, as a malicious Scandal (viz.)
That having made use of such solemn Promises from Bredah,
and in several Declarations since, of ease and liberty to tender
Consciences, instead of performing any part of them, we
have added streighter Fetters then ever.
And further adds, viz. We find it as artificially, as maliciously
divulged throughout the whole Kingdom, that at the same
time we deny a fitting Liberty to those other Sects of our
Subjects, whose Consciences will not allow them to conform
to the Religion ectablished; We are highly indulgent to
Papists, even to such a degree of countenance as may even
endanger the Protestant Religion.
These, and such like, in the said Declaration are related as
venemous Insinuations, most false and malicious Scandals,
wicked and malicious Suggestions, and the Fomenters of them,
as the most dangerous Enemies of his Crown and of the Peace
and Happiness of the Nation.
And these words are further added, (viz.) It having been
alwayes a constant profession of ours, That we do, and shall
ever think our royal dignity and greatness much more hap|pily
and securely founded on our own Clemency, and our
Subjects Loves, then in their Fears and our Power.
To give our People a Testimony of our founding all our
security, rather in their affections, then in any Military Pow|er;
the sole strength and security, we shall ever confide in,
shall be the hearts and affections of our Subjects indeared and
confirmed to us by our Gratious and Steady manner of Govern|ment,
according to the antient known Laws of the Land, there
being not any one of our Subjects, who doth more from his
heart abhor (then we our selves) all sorts of Military and
Arbitrary Rule.
As concerning the non performance of our Promises; we
remember well the very words of those from Bredah, (viz.)

We do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and that no
man shall be disquieted, or called in question for diffe|rences
of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; and that we shall be
ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon
Mature deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full grant|ing
that Indulgence. We remember well the Confirma|tions,
we have made of them since upon several occasions in
Parliament; and as all these things are still fresh in our me|mory,
so are we still firm in the Resolution of performing
them to the full.
We do conceive our selves so far engaged, both in ho|nour,
and in what we owe to the Peace of our Dominions,
which we profess we can never think secure, whilst there
shall be a colour left to the disaffected, to inflame the
minds of so many Multitudes, upon the scores of Consci|ences,
with dispair of ever obtaining any effect of our Pro|mises
for their ease.
Such an Act, as in pursuance of our Promises the wisdom
of our Parliament shall think fit to offer unto us for the ease
of tender Consciences.
We profess it would be grievous unto us to consent,
to the putting any of our Subjects to death for their Opi|nions
in matter of Religion only.
Our expressing according to Christian Charity, Our dislike
of Blood-shed for Religion only.
Our Parliament is an Assembly so eminent in their Loyalty
and their Zeal, for the Peace and Prosperity of our King|domes
can no wayes be doubted in the performance of all
our Promises, and to the effecting all those gracious inten|tions,
which God knows our heart is full of, for the
PLENTY, PROSPERITY, and UNIVERSAL
SATISFACTION of the NATION.
We think to give them the most important Marks of our
care: First, In punishing by severe Laws that Licentiousness
and Impiety, which we find to our great grief, hath overspread
the Nation.

And lastly so to improve the good consequenceto the ad|vancement
of trade, that all our Subject finding the advan|tage
in that prime foundation of plenty, they may all, with
minds happily composed by our clemency and indulgence
(instead of taking up thoughts of deserting their profes|sions)
apply themselves comfortably, and with redoubled
industry to their several vocations, c.
Also in the Votes and Advice of the House of Commons,
Febr. 5. 1662. Upon reading the Kings Declaration and
Speech, are these words, (viz.) And our hearts are further
enlarged in these returns of Thanks-giving when we consider
your Majesties most Princely, and Heroick professions of rely|ing
upon the affections of your People, AND ABHOR|ING
ALL SORTS OF MILITARY AND
ARBITRARY RULE, c.



SECT. II.
Here follows some remarkable Observations, col|lected
out of a Book, entituled, ,
A Discourse of the Liberty of
Prophesying; shewing the unreasonableness of
prescribing to other mens Faith, and the Ini|quity
of persecuting different Opinions; by
Ier. Tayler D. D. (so stiled) Chaplin in Or|dinary
to his late Majesty.
IN his Epistle Dedicatory are these words: viz. As con|trary
as Cruelty is to Mercy, as Tyranny to Charity; so is
War and Bloodshed to the Meekness and Gentleness of Christian
Religion.
And further speaks, to dispute men into Mercies, Compli|ances
and Tollerations mutual; and further adds.
I designed a Discourse to this purpose, with as much gree|diness,
as if I had thought it possible with my Arguments
to have perswaded the rough and hard handed Souldiers to
have disbanded presently; for I had often thought of the
Prophesie, that in the Gospel, our Swords should be turned
into Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning-hooks.I thought it my duty to plead for Peace and Charity, and
Forgiveness, and Permissions mutual.
Although we must contend earnestly for the Faith, yet this
contention must be with Arms fit for the Christian Warfare,
the Sword of the Spirit, the Shield of Faith, c. but not with
other Arms; for a Church-man must not be a Striker, for the
Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual.
I being most of all troubled, that men should be persecuted,
and afflicted, for disagreeing in such opinions, which they

cannot with sufficient grounds obtrude upon others necessarily,
because they cannot propound them infallibly.
Considerations (are to be had) to the Persons of men, and
to the Laws of Charity more then to the trimmphing in any
Opinion, c.
If the Persons be Christians in their life, and Christians in
their profession; if they acknowledge the Eternal Son of
God for their Master, and the Lord, and live in all relations
as becomes Persons making such professions, why then
should I hate such Persons whom God loves, and who love
God, who are partakers of Christ, and Christ hath a Ti|tle
to them, who dwell in Christ, and Christ in them, because
their understandings have not been brought up like mine,
have not had the same Masters, they have not met with the
same Bookshave not the same Opinions that I have, and
do not determine their School Questions to the same sence of
my Sect or Interest?
And whatsoever is against the Foundation of Faith or con|trary
to good Lifeor distructive to humane societyis
out of the limits of my Question, and doth not pretend to
compliance or tolleration.
The fault I find and seek to remedy is, That men are so dog|matical
and resolute in their Opinions, and impatient of others
disagreeing in those things wherein is no sufficient means of
Union and Determination, but that men should let Opinions
and Problems not be obtruded as Actions, nor Questions in
the vast collection of the Systeme of divinity be adopted into
the Family of Faith.
3. Its hard to say, that he who would not have men put to
death or punished corporally for such things, for which no
humane authority is sufficient for Cognizance, or Deter|mination,
or competent for infliction; that he perswades to
an indifferency when he refers to another Judicatory, which
is competent, sufficient, infallable, just, and highly severefor
God alone must be Judge of these matters, who alone is
Master of our Souls, and hath the Dominion over humane
understandingGod alone is Judge of erring Persons.

I earnestly contend, that another mans Opinion shall be
no Rule to mine, and that my Opinion shall be no Snare and
Prejudice to my self; that men use one another so charitably,
that no error or violence tempt men to Hypocrisie, this very
thing being one of the Arguments I used to perswade Permis|sions,
lest Compulsion introduce Hypocrisie, and make Since|rity
troublesom, c.
From the Dictates of holy Scripture, it is observable, that
this, with its appendant degrees, I mean, restraint of Prophe|sying,
imposing upon other mens understandings, being Ma|sters
of their Consciences, and lording it over their Faith,
came in with the retinue and train of Antichrist, as other abu|ses
and corruptions of the Church did, by reason of the ini|quity
of the times, and the cooling of the first heats of
Christianity, and the encrease of interest, and the abatements
of Christian simplicity, when the Churches fortune grew bet|ter,
and her Sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers worst
of all: For in the first three hundred Years there was no sign
of persecuting any man for his Opinion, though at that time
there were very horrid Opinions commencedand they who
used all meansChristian and Spiritual, for their disim|provement
and convition, thought not of using corporal force
and therefore I  not only urge their not doing it, as an
Argument of the unlawfulness of such proceeding, but their
defying it, and speaking against such practises as unreasonable,
and destructive to Christianity, for so Tertullian is express,
Humani juris  naturalis potestatis uni cuique quod putaverit colere,
sed nec religionis est cogere religionem quae suscipi debet sponte non vi:
its of humane right and natural power for every one to wor|ship
what he thinks; but neither is it the part of Religion to
compel Religion, which ought to be undertaken of its own
accord.
The same is the Doctrine of Cyprian, Lactantius, Hillary,
Minutius, Faelix, Sulpitius, Severus, Chrisostom, Hierom,
Austin, Damascen, Theophilact, Socrates Scholasticus, and
Bernard.
All wise Princes till they were over-born with Faction, and

solicited by peevish persons, gave Tolleration to differ|ing
SectsBut at first there were some heretical persons,
that were so impatient, they were the men that first in|treated
the Emperor to persecute the Catholicks: but till
four hundred years after Christ, no Catholick persons, or
very few, did provoke the secular Arm, or implore its aid
against the Hereticks; save only that Arrius behaved himself
so seditiously and tumultuarily, that the Nicene Fathers pro|cured
a temporary Decree for his relegation; but it was soon
taken off, and God left to be his Judge.
But as the Ages grew worse, so men grew more cruel and
unchristian; and in the Greek Church Atticus and Nestorius
of Constantinople, Theodocius of Synoda, and some few others,
who had forgotten the mercies of their great Master, and their
own duty, grew implacable, and furious, and impatient of con|tradiction.
It was a bold and arrogant Speech which Nestorius made in
his Sermon before Theodotius the younger; Da mihi, O Empe|rator,
terram ab Haereticis repugnatum  ego tibi vicissim calum
dabo; disperde mecum Haereticos,  ego tecum disperdam Perss;
which is in English, O Emperor, give to me the Land purg|ed
from Hereticks; and I, instead thereof, will give thee Hea|ven:
destroy me the Hereticks, and I will destroy with thee
the Persians: It was as groundless, as unwarrantable, as it
was bloody and inhumane. And we see the contrary events
prove truer; for Theodosius and Valentinian were prosperous
Princes, and have the reputation of great piety; but they
were so far from doing what Nestorius had suggested, that they
restrained him from his violence and immanity; and Theo|dosius
did highly commend B. Proclus, for his sweetness of
deportment towards erring persons, far above the cruelty of
his Predecessor Atticus.
And the experience which Christendom hath had in this last age,
is Argument enough That Tolleration of differing Opinions
is so far from disturbing the publick peace, or destroying the
Interest of Princes, and Common-wealths, that it doth ad|vantge
the Publick, it secures the Peace, because there is not

so much as the Pretence of Religion left to such persons to
contend for, it being already indulged to them.
When France fought against the Hugonots, the spilling of
their own Blood was Argument enough of the imprudence of
that way of promoting Religion; but since she hath given
permission to them, c.
The great instance is in the differing Temper, Govern|ment,
and Success which Margaret of Parma, and the Duke
of Alva had; the clemency of the first had almost distinguished
the Flame; but when she was removed, D. Alva succeeded, and
mannaged the matter of Religion with Fire and Sword, he
made the Flame so great, that his Religion, and his Prince
too, had both been almost turned out of the Countrey; Pellie
medio sapientiam quoties vi res agitur, said Ennius, [Wisdom is dri|ven
out, when the matter is acted by force.]
[And therefore the best of men, and most glorious of Prin|ces,
were alwayes ready to give Tolleration.]
Esebeus in his second Book of the life of Constantine, reports
these words of the Emperor, Parem cum fidelibus ij qui errant
pacis,  quiet is fruitionem gaudentes accipiant: ipsa si quidem com|municationis
 societatis restitutio ad rectam etiam veritatis viam
perducere potest; nemo cuiquam molestis sit, quisque quod animo de|stinat
hoc etiam faciat; Let them which err with joy receive the like
fruition of Peace and quietness with the faithfull, sith the restoring
of communication and society may bring them into the right Way of
Truth: Let none give molestation to any; let every one do as he de|termines
in his mind.
And indeed there is great reason for Princes to give Tol|leration
to disagreeing persons, whose Opinions cannot by
fair means be altered; for if the persons be confident, they
will serve God according to their perswasions; and if they be
publickly prohibited, they will privately convene, and then
all those inconveniences, and mischiefs, which are Argu|ments
against the permission of Conventicles, are Arguments
for the publick permissions of differing Religions, c.they
being restrained, and made miserable, indears the dis|contented

persons mutuall, and makes more hearty and
dangerous confederations.
King Iames in his Letters to the States of the Vnited-Pro|vinces,
dated Mar. 6. 1613. thus wrotIta ut prohibeatis Mi|nistros
vestros ne eas disputationes in suggestum aut ad plebem ferans,
ac districte imperetis ut pacem colant se in vicem tolerando in ista opini|onum
ac sententiarum discrepantiaSo that you may sorbid your
Ministers, that they bring not those Disputations into the Pulpit, or
to the People, and strickly command, that they embrace peace among
themselves, by Tollerating in that difference of Opinions, and Iudg|ments.
The Counsel like in the divisions of Germany, at the first Re|formation,
was thought reasonable by the Emperor Ferdi|nand,
and his excellent Son Maximilian; for they had ob|served,
That Violence did exasperate, was unblest, unsucces|full,
and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of
Tolleration.
And the Duke of Savoy repenting of his War, undertaken
for Religion against the Peidmontans, promised them Tolera|tion;
and was as good as his wordAs much is done by
the nobility of Polonia: so that the best Princes and the best
Bishops gave Toleration and Impunities (but it is known,
that the first Persecution of disagreeing Persons was by the
Arrians, by Circumcellians, and Donatists, and from them they
of the Church took Example, c.) And among the Greeks
it became a publick and authorized practise, till the question of
Images grew hot and high; for then the Worshippers of Ima|ges,
having taken their example from the Empress Irene, who put
her sons eyes out for making an Edict against Images, began
to be as cruel, as they were deceived, especially, being encou|raged
by the Pope of Rome, who then blew the Coales to some
purpose.
I may upon this occasion give account of this affair in the
Church of Rome. It is remarkable that till the time of Iusti|nian
the Emperor, A. D. 525. the Catholicks and Novatians
had Churches indifferently permitted even in Rome it self, but
the Bishops of Rome, whose interest was much concerned in it,

spoke much against it, and laboured the eradication of the No|vatians;
and at last when they got power into their hands
they served them accordingly; but it is observed by So|crates
that when the first persecution was made against them
at Rome by Pope Innocent the first, at the same instant the
Goths invaded Itally, and became Lords of all, it being just
in God, c.
And I have heard it observed as a blessing upon S. Austin (who
was so merciful to erring Persons) as the greatest part of his
lifeto tolerate them, and never to indure that they should
be given over to the secular power to be killed) that the very
night the Vandals set down before his City of Hippo, to besiege it,
he died, and went to God; being taken from the miseries to
come.
But in the Church of Rome, the Popes were the first Preach|ers
of Force and Violence in matters of Opinion, and that so
zealously that Pope Vigilius suffered himself to be imprisoned,
and handled roughly by the Emperor Iustinian, rather then he
would consent to the restitution and peace of certain disa|greeing
persons, c.
The first that preached that Doctrine was Dominick, the
Founder of the begging Order of Friars: The Friars Prea|chers,
in memory of which the Inquisition is intrusted only
to the Fryars of his order; and if there be any force in
Dreams, or truth in Legends, c.This very thing might
be signified by his mothers Dream, who the night before Do|minick
was born, dreamed she was brought to bed of a huge
Dog, with a Fire-brand in his mouth; sure enough however
his Disciples expound the Dream, it was a better sign that
he should prove a Rabid, furious incendiary then any thing
else, what ever he might be in the other parts of his life;
in this Doctrine he was not much better, as appears in his de|portment
towards the Abligences, against whom he so preached
Adeo quidem ut centum hereticorum millia ab octo millibus ca|tholicorum
fusa  interfecta fuisse probiantur, saith one of him,
and of those who were taken one hundred and eighty were
burned to death, because they would not abjure their Do|ctrine;

this was the the first Example of putting erring Per|sons
to death, that I find in the Romish Church.
By this time I hope it will not be thought unreasonable to say,
He that teaches mercy to erring Persons teaches indifferency
in Religion, unless so many Fathers, and so many Churches,
and the best of Emperors, and all the World (till they were
abused by Tyranny, Popery and faction) did teach indiffe|rency:
For
I have shewn that Christianity doth not punih corporally
persons erring Spiritually, but indeed Popery doth.
The Donatists, and Circumcelians, and Arrians, and Itaciani,
they of old did in the middle Ages; the Patrons of Images did,
and the Papists at this day do, and have done ever since they
were taught it by their St Dominick.
Let all Errors be as much, and as zealously supprest as may
be, but let it be done by such means as are proper instruments of
their suppression, by Preaching and Disputation, by Charity
and Sweetness, by Holiness of Life, Assiduity of Exhortation,
by the Word of God, and Prayer.
For these wayes are most natural, most prudent, most peace|able
and effectual, only let not men be hasty, in calling every
disliked Opinion by the name of Heresie; and when they
have resolved that they will call it so, let them use the erring
person like a Brother, not beat him like a Dog, or convince
him with a Gibbit, or vex him out of his understanding or
perswasion.
Thus far Ier. Taylor; these Passages being truly collected out of
his Epistle, where are many more to the same purpose; to
which the Reader is referred for further satisfaction, if he de|sire
it: And further in his Sixteenth Section, for the lawfulness
of Princes giving Tolleration to several Religions, he hath
these Passages.
For it may be safe in diversity of perswasions; and it is al|so
a part of Christian Religion, that the Liberty of mens
Consciences should be preserved in all things, where God hath
not set a limit

That the Soul of man should be free, and acknowledge no
Master but Jesus Christ.
That matters Spiritual should not be restrained by punish|ments
corporal.
That the same meekness and Charity should be preserved in
the promotion of Christianity, that gave it foundation, and
increment, and firmness in its first publication.
And that Persons should not more certainly be condemned
then their Opinions confuted.
And lastly, That the Infirmities of men, and difficulties of
things, should be both put in ballance, to make abatement in the
diffinitive sentence against mens persons.
As Christian Princes must look to the interest of their Go|vernment;
so especially must they consider the interests of
Christianity, and not call every redargution, or modesty, dis|covery
of an established Error, by the name of the disturbance
of the Peace; For,
It is very likely that the peevishness, and impatience of con|tradiction
in the Governors may break the peace.
Let them but remember the Gentleness of Christianity;
the Liberty of Consciences which ought to be preserved; and
let them do justice to the persons, whoever they are that are
peevish; provided no mans person be over-born with preju|dice:
For
If it be necessary for all men to subscribe to the present esta|blished
Religion; by the same reason, at another time, a man
may be bound to subscribe to the contradictory, and so to all
Religions in the World. Uncharitableness is much prevented
when no person is on either side engaged upon revenge, or
troubled with disgrace, or vexed with punishments, by any de|cretory
sentence against him: It was the saying of a wise
States-man, (I mean Thuanus) Haeretici qui pace data factionibus
scinduntur, persecutione uniuntur contra. Remp.If you persecute
Hereticks, or Discrepants, they unite themselves as to a common de|fence
if you permit them, they divide themselves upon private interest,
and the rather, if this interest was an ingredient of the Opinion.



SECT. III.
Instances out of divers Authors treating on
the same Subject, by William Caton, de|ceased.
CHrisostomus said, It is not the manner of the Children
of God to persecute others to death about their Reli|gion;
but it hath been, and is their condition to be put to
death themselves for the Testimony of of the Truth. Moreover,
(said he) the shedding of Blood about Religion, is an evi|dent
token of Antichrist, Relig. Vris. pag. 192.
Haywardus said, That the best Writers of that time did
agree in one opinion, and with Tertulliano, Lactantio, Cas|sidoro,
and Iosephus, c. That People must inform men to im|brace
Religion with Reason, and not compel them by vio|lence.I have for long season determined, said one of the
Kings of France, to reform the Church, which without
Peace (said he) I cannot do, and it is impossible to re|form,
or convert people by violence.I am King, as a Shepherd, (said he) and will not shed
the Blood of my Sheep; but will gather them through the
mildness and goodness of a King, and not through the
power of Tyranny: And I will give them that are of the
reformed Religion right Liberty to live and dwell free,
without being examined, perplexed, molested, or compelled
to any thing contrary to their Consciences; for they shall
have the free exercise of their Religion, c. vide Chron.
Vande Vnderg 2. deel. pag. 1514.
Luther said, That the Hypocrites Church was to be known
by its Manners, whose Image and Sign was Esau, yet she
boasted of God, and would be accounted his Church, but

lived wholly according to the World. Further, (said he)
the true Church is not defended by a Fleshly Arm, which
wicked Bishops especially use, and cry unto. Thesau. pag.
622.
Calvin said, That the Apostle gave to understand, That
to exercise authority over ones Faith, was in no wise just,
nor tollerable: (yea said he) It is Tyanny in the Church;
for FAITH ought to be free from all Subjection of
men.
When several of the Priests in the low Countries requested
of the Prince and States, that they would introduce Ordinances
and Discipline, according to their Opinions; but the Prince, and
the States, rejected their requests, esteeming them prejudicial
both to Religion and Pollicy; when they observed the diverse
Opinions that were among the People, concluding, It was the
best way to preserve unity among the People, to give Liberty to all,
and to Compel none, Anno 1608. Edict. Fol. 27.
Areneus affirmed, That all forcing of Conscience, though it
was but a forbiding of the Exercise, which is esteemed by
one or another, to be necessary to Salvation, is in no
wise right nor fitting: He also affirmed, That through di|versities
of Religions the Kingdom should not be brought in|to
any disturbance.
The Antient Reformed Protestants termed that forcing of
Conscience, when they were constrained to leave off the exercise
of their Religion, saying, Car nous privant de nostre Religion on
nous tiendroit en une continuele mors corporelle  spirituelle (that is)
For to deprive us of our Religion, is to keep us in a perpetual
corporal and spiritual death; adding thereunto, How that
they would rather be put to death then be bereaved of the exer|cise
of their Religion, c. And also they testified, how that
the Religion which was defended with Cruelty, was not ground|ed
upon the Word of God.
Lactantius said, If you will with blood, with evil, and
with torments, defend the Worship, it shall not thereby be de|fended
but polluted, Lib. 5. Chap. 20.
Constantius the Emperor said, That it was enough that he

preserved the unity of the FAITH, that he might be ex|cusable
before the Judgment Seat of God; and that he would
leave every one to his own understanding, according to the
account he will give before the Judgment Seat of Christ: Here|to
may we stir up People (said he) not compel them, beseech
them to come into the unity of the Christians; but to do VI|OLENCE
to them, we will not in no wise. Sabast. Frank.
Cron. Fol. 127.
Augustinus Said, Some disturbed the Peace of the Church
while they went about to root out the TARES before the
time; and through this Error of Blindness (said he) are they
themselves separated, so much the more from being united
unto Christ.
Retnaldus testified, That he who with Imprisoning and
Persecuting seeketh to spread the Gospel, and greaseth his
Hands with Blood, shall much rather be looked upon for a
wild Hunter, then a Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian
Religion.
The State of Holland testified, Dat waer vervolginghen Zijn
datter daer al in roere is, maer waer geen en sijn al sijdor verscheijden
Religion dat dare alle saelren stilder sijn so oelr in onse ijden is bevon
den: that is, Where there was Persecution, there was all in dis|straction,
but where there was none (though there were se|veral
Religions) there all things were the quieter, as hath been
evident in our dayes, said they, Vide Vrede Handel Van. Col.
Fol. 53.
Calvin Said, That those that are set over us must be obeyed,
if that the Command of God be not thereby disobeyed; but
if they lead us from obedience to God, and presumptiously
strive against the Lord, then must they not be regarded, said he,
to the end that God with his Authority may retain the pre|heminence.

A Book written in French, by N. M. Anno 1576. hath
this Sentence in it
Those Princes that have ruled by Gentleness and Clemency,

added to justice; and have exercised Moderation and Meekness
towards their Subjects, alwayes greatly Prospered, and
Reigned long.
But on the contrary, those Princes that have been Cruel,
Vnjust, Perfidious, and Oppressors of their Subjects, have soon
fallen, they and their Estate into danger, or total ruin.
Veritus said, Seeing Christ is a LAMB, whom you pro|fess
to be your Head and Captain, then it behoveth you to
be Sheep, and to use the same WEAPONS, which he
made use of; for he will not be a Shepherd of Wolves, and wild
Beasts, but onely of SHEEP; wherefore if you lose the
Nature of Sheep (said he) and be changed into Wolves, and
wild Beasts, and use fleshly Weapons, then will you exclude
your selves out of his Calling; and forsake his Banner, and
then will he not be your Captain.
Stephanus King of Poland said, It belongeth not to me to re|form
the Conscience, I have alwayes gladly given that over to
God, which belongeth to him, and so shall I do now; and al|so
for the future, I will suffer the WEEDS to grow until
the time of Harvest; for I know that the number of Believers are
but small, therefore, said he, when some were proceeding in
persecution, Ego sum Rex Populorum non Conscientiarum, that is,
I am the King of the People, not of their Consciences: he al|so
affirmed, That Religion was not to be planted with FIRE
and SWORD, Chron. Van. de Rel. Vrijh. 2. deel.
Tindal said, The New Testament of Christ suffered no
Law of Compelling, but alone of Perswading, and Exhorting, Fox. Acts and Mon. page 1338.
The Prince of Orange testified, Anno 1579. That it was
impossible that the Land should be kept in Peace ex|cept
there was a free Tolleration in the Exercise of Reli|gion.
Where hast thou ever read in thy dayes (said Menno) in
the Writing of the Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever
cryed out to the Magistrates, for their Power, against them
that would not hear their Doctrine, nor obey their Words?
I know certainly, said he, that where the Magistrate shall Ba|nish

with the SWORD, there is not the right Knowledge,
spiritual Word, nor Church of Christ, it is Invocare Brachi|um
Seculare.
It is not Christian like, but Tyrannical, said D. Philipson,
to Banish and Persecute People about FAITH and Religion,
and they that so do are certainly of the Pharisaical Generati|on,
who resisted the Holy Ghost.
Ersmus sad, That though they take our Moneys and Goods,
they cannot therefore hurt our Salvation; they afflict us much
with Prisons, but they do not thereby separate us from God, In de Krijdges wrede, Fol. 63.
Lucernus said, He that comandeth any thing, wherewith he
bindeth the Conscience, this is an Antichrist, Inde Benuse
disp. Fol. 71.
It was Luther's Opinion, That those that stirred up the
Princes to persecute abut Religion, they raised the Uproar,
Thesaur. pag. 679.





REASONS
FOR
Liberty of Conscience.

SECT. IV.
Several Reasons rendred, why no outward
Force, nor Imposition, ought to be used in
Matters of Faith and Religion, by R. H. S. F.
and F. H.
LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE ought to be al|lowed
in the dayes of the Gospel, in the free Exer|cise
of it to God-ward (without Compulsion) in all
things relating to His Worship, for these REASONS
following.
1. Because the General and Universal Royal-Law of Christ
commands it, Matth. 7. 12. All things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and
ProphetsThat which every man would have,
and receive from another, he ought by Christs RVLE to
give and allow it to another. But every man is willing to have
the LIBERTY of his OWN CONSCIENCE, there|fore
ought to ALLOW it to another.

2. Because no man can perswade the Conscience of another,
either what God is, or how he should be worshipped, but by
the Spirit, which God hath given to instruct man in the Ways
of Truth.
3. Because, all Obedience or Service that is obtained by
force, is for fear of Wrath, and not from Love, nor for Con|science
sake; and therefore will but continue so long as that
fear or force abides upon them.
4. Because, that by forcing, no man can make a Hypocrite
to be a true Believer; but on the contrary, many may be made
Hypocrites.
5. Because, that in all forced Impositions upon mens Con|sciences,
there is something of the wrath of man exercised, which
works not the Righteousness of God, but rather begets enmity
in the heart one towards another.
6. Because, that by forcing any thing upon mens Consci|ences,
as to matters of Faith and Worship, many are hardened
in their hearts against the things imposed; when as otherwise,
through Love and gentle Instructions their hearts might be
perswaded to willing obedience.
7. Because, that Persecution for Conscience contradicteth
Christs Charge, Matth. 13. who bids that the Tares (or false
Worshippers) be suffered to grow together in the Field (or
World) till the Harvest (or End of the World.)
8. Because, Force is contrary to the end for which it is
pretended to be used (viz.) The preservation and safety of
the Wheat, which End is not answered by Persecution, be|cause
the Wheat is in danger to be plucked up thereby, as
Christ saith.
9. Because to Force is inconsistant with the belief of the
Jews Conversion (and other false Worshippers) which is pray|ed
for by the publick Teachers, and cannot be attained, if Per|secution
for Conscience be prosecuted.
10. Because they that impose upon mens Consciences, exer|cise
Dominion over mens Faith, which the Apostles denied, say|ing,
They had not Dominion over any mans Faith.
11. Because, Imposition upon mens Consciences necessitates

them to sin, in yielding a Conformity contrary to their own
Faith; for whatsoever is not of a mans own Faith, is sin.
12. Because, that Imposition and Force wrestles with flesh
and blood, and carnal Weapons, which are contrary to the A|postles
Doctrine, who said, Our Weapons are not Carnal, but Spi|ritual,
and Mighty through God; and we wrestle not with Flesh, and
Blood.
13. Because, there is but One Iudge, Law-giver, and King in
and over the Conscience, as the Saints have testified in the
Scriptures of Truth; and whosoever would intrude, so as to
be Judge and Law-giver over the Conscience, intrencheth up|on
the Perogative of Christ, Isa. 33. 22. Iames 4. 12.
14. Because, it is prophesied in Isa. 11, The Woolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and there
shall be no Destroyer in all the Holy Mountain: And therefore no
Imposition upon mens Consciences.
15. Because, to impose upon mens Consciences for differences
in Faith, is contrary to the Advice of the Apostle, who directs
People to wait upon God to be satisfied, and not to the Magistrates,
or others, to be forced; who saith, Whereunto we have attained,
let us walk; and wherein any man is otherwise minded, God shall re|veal,
even that unto him.
16. Because, to force mens Consciences, and to lay Yoaks
upon them, is to make void the Blood-shed and Sufferings
of Christ, who sits upon the Throne of the Conscience, and
gives liberty there; and commands us to stand fast in that liber|ty,
and not to be entangled through the Impositions of men, or
Yoak of bondage, Gal. 5. 6.
17. Because, in all Nations the different Professions and
Perswasions of Religion, are either Friends or Enemies to
the Governors; if Friends then obliged by that bond; if
Enemies then Christ's Command is to take place, who saith, Love
your Enemies, which if observed, Persecution for Conscience
will be avoided.
18. Because Toleration of different Perswasions in Religion
was allowed in the Iewish State, as not inconsistant with their

Safety, and that in things contrary each to other, as the Saddu|ces,
Pharisees, Esaeans, Herodians, with others.
19. Because, the true Religion cannot be preached up by force
of ARMES, and the primitive Christians detested that Form
of Proceedings.
20. Because, no man hath such power (by outward com|pulsion)
over the Souls and Consciences of other men, as to
lay a necessity on them to believe that which they do not believe,
or not to believe what they do believe; true Faith being the
Gift of God.
21. Because, If the Magistrate imposeth upon the Con|science,
he must either do it as a Magistrate, or as a Chri|stian.
Not as a Magistrate, for then Heathens (being Ma|gistrates)
have the same power to impose; and so, by Revo|lutions,
and Conquests, may come to give Laws to Christians,
and compel them to Idolatry. 2. Not as Christians, for that
contradicts Christ's saying, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, but it shall not be so among you, for all ye are
Brethren.
22. Because by the same Rule and Reason that the Magi|strates
of one Nation ought to impose upon, and persecute for
Conscience, the Magistrates in all other Nations ought to do
the same, and so the greatest part of Mankind may come to be
destroyed, there being more that Dissent, than are at Unity in
Matters of Faith and Religion.
23. Because the strength of Truth, and its Conquest over
Falsity and Deceit is best discovered by letting both have their
Liberty, from outward Compulsion; For no doubt, had out|ward
Force been less used, the prevalency of Truth had been
more manifest, and that wise Saying, truly experienced in the
World, viz. That which is of God will stand, and that which is not,
will come to nothing.
24. Because, the Disciples of Christ are rebuked by him for
desiring the Destruction of those that were contrary to him,
and would not receive Him; which zeal is sharply reproved in
his Saying, They knew not what Spirit they were of.
25. Because, to impose upon mens Consciences, and to de|stroy

their Persons for difference in Religion, is contrary to the
end of Christ's coming, who saith, He came not to Destroy mens
Lives but to save them.
26. Because People of divers Religions in one Nation, if not
tollerated, must some of them be destroyed or removed, by ba|nishment?
If destroyed, the Constancy and Patience of the
Sufferers for their Faith, moving Pitty and Commiseration, makes
men more ready to own, then to reject their Faith; and so rather
multiplies, than lessens the number of its Professors; if banish|ed,
this renders the Banished as so many Enemies abroad, rea|dy
upon all occasions to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of
their own native Country. There is therefore in order to the
outward welfare of all Nations, a kind of necessity for a Tolle|ration
in them of all Religions.
27. Because, to impose upon mens Consciences begets a hatred
against the Imposers in those who are imposed upon, and forced
thereby to violate their Consciences towards God, in matters
of Worship.
28. Because, men are commanded to be subject to the Pow|ers
that are, for Conscience sake, and therefore such Powers
ought not to persecute men for Conscience sake, being that is pre|scribed
for the Rule of Obedience, the Scriptures saying, Be ye
subject not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake.



SECT. 5.
Several Sayings collected from the Speeches,
and Writings of King Iames, and King Charles
the First.
WE find it asserted by King Iames in his Speech to the
Parliament, in the year 1609. who said, That it is
a pure Rule in Divinity, That God never loves to plant his
Church with VIOLENCE and BLOOD; and further|more
said, It was usually the condition of Christians to be
PERSECUTED, but not to PERSECUTE.
And we find the same things in substance asserted again, by
his Son Charles the First, in his Book known by the Name of
, Printed for R. Roston, as fol|loweth.
Pag. 67. In his Prayer to God, he said, Thou seest how
much Cruelty among Christians is acted, under the colour of
Religion; as if we could not be Christians, unless we cruci|fie
one another.
Pag. 28. Make them at length seriously to consider, that no|thing
violent and injurious can be religious.
Pag. 70. Nor is it so proper to hew out religious Reforma|tions
by the Sword, as to pollish them by fair and equal Disputa|tions,
among those that are most concerned in the Differences,
whom, not Force, but Reason ought to convince.Sure in Matters of Religion, those Truths gain most
upon mens Judgements and Consciences, which are least ur|ged
with Secular Violence, which weakens Truth with Pre|judices.
Pag. 115. It being an Office, not only of Humanity, rather

to use Reason then Force, but also of Christianity to seek Peace,
and ensue it.
Pag. 91, 92. In point of true conscientious tenderness, I
have often declared, how little I desire my Laws and Scepter
should intrench on Gods Soveraignty, which is the only King of
mens Consciences.
Pag. 123. Nor do I desire any man should be further sub|juect
unto me, then all of us may be subject unto God.

Concerning Oaths.
Pag. 76. The injoyning of Oaths, upon People, must
needs in things doubtfull be Dangerous, as in things unlaw|full
Damnable.


Some words of Advice from CHARLES the First, to
the then Prince of Wales, now King of England, c.
Page 165. My Counsel and Charge to you is, That you
seriously consider the former real or objected Miscariages,
which might occasion my Troubles, that you may avoid
them, c.
Beware of Exasperating any Factions, by the Crosness and As|perity
of some mens Passions, Humors, and private Opinions, im|ployed
by you, grounded only upon differences in lesser mat|ters,
which are but the Skirts and Suburbs of Religion,
wherein a Charitable Connivance, and Christian Tolleration,
often Dissipates their strength, when rougher Opposition For|tifies,
and puts the despised and oppressed party into such
Combinations, as may most enable them to get a full revenge
on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly as|sisted
by that vulgar commisseration, which attends all that
are said to suffer under the notion of Religion.
Pag. 166. Take heed that outward Circumstances and For|malities
of Religion devour not all.

Pag. 164. Your Prerogative is best shewed and exercised
in remitting, rather then exacting the rigor of the Laws, there
being nothing worse then Legal Tyranny.


To these Sayings we add more, as Collected out of the same
Book in duodecimo.
IN his Prayer, page 1. O never suffer me for any reason of
State to go against the Reason of Conscience, which is
highly to fight against thee, the God of Reason, and Judge of
our Consciences.
P. 121. Break in sunder, Oh Lord, all violent Confederati|ons
to do wickedly and injuriously.
Page 136. Thou, Oh Lord, shalt destroy them that speak
Lyes; the Lord will abhor both the Blood-thirsty and Deceit|ful
men.
Page 164. Church Affairs should be mannaged neither
with Tyranny, Parity, nor Popularityneither people
oppressed.
Page 168. He declares his willingness for fair satis|faction
unto all, and against Covetousness, and Supersti|tion.
Page 171. Oh thou that art the God of Reason and Peace,
soften our heartsand perswade us to accept of Peace
with thy self, and both to secure and preserve Peace among our
selves, as men and ChristiansCondemn us not to our
passions, which are destructive both of our selves and others;
Clear up our Understandings to see thy Truth, both in Reason
as men, and in Religion as Christians.
Page 180. Stir up all Parties Pious Ambitions to over|come
each other with Reason, Moderation, and such Self-deni|al
as becomes, c.
Page 200. O thou Soveraign of our Souls, the only Com|mander
of our Consciences.



And further, in his Advice to the Prince of Wales
now KING, c.
Page 234. The best Government and highest Soveraigni|ty
you can attain unto, is, To be subject to God, that
the Scepter of his Word, and Spirit may rule in your
heart.
Page 239. He pleads for better Arguments for Convincement,
then Tumults, Armies, and Prisons.
Pag. 241. Alwayes keep up sollid Piety, and those Fun|damental
Truths, which mend both hearts and lives of men
with impartial Favour and Justice.
Pag. 242. My Charge and Counsel to you is, that as you
need no palliations for any design, so that you studdy really
to exceed in true and constant Demonstrations of Goodness,
Piety and Vertue (towards the people) even all these men that
make the greatest noise and ostentations of Religion, so you
shall neither fear any detection, (as they do who have but the
Mask of Goodness) nor shall you frustrate the just Expectati|ons
of your people.
Pag. 243. Use all Princely Arts and Clemency to heal the
Wounds, that the Smart of the Cure may not equal the An|guish
of the hurt.
Pag. 244 As your quality sets you beyond any Duel with
any Subject, so the nobleness of your mind must raise you
above the meditating any revenge, or executing your Anger
upon the many.
Pag. 248. Keep you to true Principles of Piety, Vertue, and
Honour; you shall never want a Kingdom.
In his Meditations on Death; pag. 346 It is indeed a sad fate
for any man to have his Enemies to be Accuser, Parties and
Judge.







Some few Errors and Defects having escaped the Press, the
Reader may Correct.
Page 9. Line 26. for Actions, read Axioms. p. 11. l. 19. for
repugnatum, read repurgatam. l. 20. for Persus, read Persas. p. 12.
l. 9. for distinguished, read extinguished. p. 13. l. 12. for counsel like,
read like counsel.
THE END.




