




A
COLLECTION
OF
SERMONS
UPON
Several Occasions.
By THOMAS PIERCE D. D.
Praesident of St. Marie Magdalen College in Oxford.
OXFORD,
Printed by W. Hall, for Ric: Royston, and
Ric: Davis, MDCLXXI.




THE
CONTENTS of this VOLUME,
ARE
SERMONS PREACHED

I.
BEfore the Lord Major, Court of Alder|men,
and Common Council of the City
of London, at St. Pauls Church, upon
the first Sunday after his Majesties Re|stauration,
1660.


II.
Before the Honourable the House of Com|mons
in Parliament Assembled, at St. Mar|garets
Church Westminster, upon the 29. day
of May, being the Anniversary Day of the
King and Kingdoms Restauration, 1661.


III.
Before the Right Honourable the House of
Lords, at the Abby Church of Westminster,
upon a Solemn day of Humiliation, occa|sioned
by the Great Rain in Iune and Iuly,
1661.


IV.
Before the King at Whitehall, upon the Wednes|day-Monthly
Fast, when the Pestilence de|creased,
but yet continued, As did also the
War with the French and Dutch, 1665.



V.
Before the Clergy of England in Convocation
Assembled, at S. Pauls Church, touching
the Power of the Church in a National
Synod, 1661.


VI.
Before the University, at St. Maries Church
in Oxford, concerning the Rights of the Civil
Magistrate, and especially of the Supreme;
upon the opening of the Term, 1664.


VII.
Before the King at Whitehall, upon Candlemas
Day, 1661.


VIII.
Before the University, upon Act-Sunday-Morning,
at St. Maries Church in Oxford,
touching the Usefulness  Necessity of Hu|man
Learning, c. 1664.


IX.
Before the King at White-Hall, in Vindication
of our Church against the Novelties of
Rome. 1662. To which is added, in this Edition,


X.
A Paraenesis to the Reader touching the Sermon
going before, and the Discourse which fol|lows
after of Romes pretended Infallibility.


XI.
Before a Rural Congregation, at the Funeral of
Edward Peyto of Chesterton in Warwick-shire
Esquire, 1659.








Englands Season
FOR
REFORMATION OF LIFE.
A
SERMON
DELIVERED IN
St. PAUL'S Church, LONDON:
ON THE
SUNDAY
Next following His
Sacred Maiesties
RESTAVRATION.
M.DC.LX.




Christian Reader,
THat what I committed the other day to the
ears of Many, I now so suddainly expose
to the eyes of All, as I dare not pretend to
deserve thy Thanks, so I conceive I cannot justly
incurr thy censure. For it is not in complyance
with my peculiar inclinations, (which of
themselves are well known to be sufficiently
averse, from any farther publication of single
Sermons,) but partly to testify my Obedience to
the commands of some Learned and pious Friends,
partly to frustrate the ill-meant whispers of some
unlearned and peevish Enemies. How farr
I was from a design either to please or to provoke
either this or that part of the Congregation, And
how probably desirous to profit both, I leave them
both to passe a Iudgement, not by any one
part, but by alltogether. It would no doubt have
been greivous to me, to suffer the contumlies of
Men for preaching Loyalty, and Love, and Re|formation
of Life, a tender care of weak Bre|thren,
and a Christian Forbearance of one a|nother,Act. 5. 41.
if I had not thought it an happy lot, to
suffer ought for His sake,Heb. 12. 3. who indur'd (for mine)

such contradiction of sinners against himselfe;
some affirming, he was a good Man, and others
saying, Nay, but he deceiveth the People.
If some are yet so devotedly the Servants of
Sin,John 7. 12. as to hate me for bringing them (unawares)
into the light,John 8 34. because the Light hath reproved
their evill deeds, it cannot be from any hurtful|ness
either in Me,John 3. 20. or in the light, but from their
own sore eyes, that their eyes are hurt. When Men
are exasperated with Lenitives, and throw them|selves
into Paroxysmes, after all our Pacifick and
most Anodynous applications, we ought not sure
to think the worse, but rather the better of our
Praescriptions. That Christ Himselfe could do no
miracles amongst the Men of his own Country,
was only the Fault of their prejudice, and nbeleif.
That the heat harden's clay, is from the unto|wardness
of the clay; For if it were wax, the heat
would melt it. Nor is the fault in the Sun, but in
the Dunghill, if the more he shine's on it, he worse
it smell's.
I know that those Lovers of publick Discord
(whom my endeavours to reconcile have made out|ragious)
as they are few in point of Number, so
in point of Quality they are of smallest Considerati|on.
And I know there are many most worthy persons,

whom the Virulence of mine enemies hatb made
my Friends. So that if I were studious to promote
mine own Interest, and did not very much preferr
the consideration of their Amendment, I should not
indure (as now I shall) to sue for peace whilst I
am injur'd. But still remembring what it is, to
which as Christians we are appointed,. 1 Thes. 3. 3. That no man should be moved by these afflicti|ons; for your selves know that we are appointed thereunto. or as Soul|diers
markt out, and that we are bound to follow
our leader, (even the Captain of our salvation
who was perfected through sufferings,) I shall
cheerfully strive to approve my self as a minister
of God, by honour and dishonour, by evill re|port,
and good report,Heb. 2. 10. as a deceiver,2 Cor. 6. 4.  8. and yet
true; I will blesse, being calumniated, And being
wrong'd above measure,1 Cor. 4. 13. . I will intreat. The more
it seems to be impossible, to win the inventors of
evill things to reconcileableness of Spirit,Diod. Sicul. the more
will I labour for its Attainment.Rom, 1, 30, For I will never
cease to pray, that by that powerfull convincing
controuling Spirit, which stilleth the raging of the
sea,1 Cor, 1, 10, and the madness of the People, we may be
knit together in one mind,Eph, 4. 31, and in one judgment;
That the present time of our prosperity may prove
the Season for our Amendment, and change of life;
that all bitternesse, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evill speaking, may be put away

from us with all malice; and that as members of
one Body, whereof Christ Iesus is the Head, we
may each of us indeavour (in our several stations)
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.
That this was really the intent of the Following
Sermon, the later part of the Sermon, will make
apparent. For what was spoken in reflection upon the
darknesse of the night, was only premised as a Foyl
to commend the Day. And as a thing without which
I could not make an impartial parallel between the
Text and the Time. Besides that in the method of
healing wounds, (which a flatterer may palliate,
but cannot cure,) there is as charitable an use both
of the Probe and the Abstersive, as there can possi|bly
be of the Oyl and Balsam. The Decollati|on
of Gods Anointed, (which was so farr a Dei|cide,Psal. 82. 6.
as he was one of those Gods who shall dye
like men,)Exo. 22. 28 had been declared by the Parliament
(before I made my strictures on it) to haue been a
most horrid and hideous Murder. And if my cen|sors
did not think they had once offended, they would
not be candidates (as they are) for a Royal Pardon.
It being so naturall for a pardon to include and
connotate an offence, that unlesse we were conscious
of having sinn'd, we could not sincerely ask God

forgivenesse. I am not able to ask any, for what I
have said in the following Sermon, tending to Loy|alty
and Union, and the establishment of both
upon the only sure Basis of impartiall Repentance
and self-revenge,2 Cor. 7. 11. untill I am able to be convinced
of Unsincerity in my ayme at so good an End, or
of unlawfullnesse in the means which I have us'd
for its attainment. And therefore that which I
begg from the Christian Reader, is not the favour
of a partiall, but the Justice of an unpassionate
and unbyassed perusall of all that follows.






ENGLAND'S SEASON
FOR
REFORMATION
of LIFE.

ROM. XIII. xii.
The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us
therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let
us put on the armour of light.

TO make you see how the Text is exact|ly
suitable to the Time, (as well to the
Time when 'twas written, as to the
Time wherein 'tis read,) It will be needful
to entertain you with two such Praeliminary
Observables, as without which it is impossi|ble
to come at the meaning of the words. And
yet the true meaning must be attain'd, as
well in their Rational, and Historical, as in
their Literal Importance, before I can handle
them as I ought, without injustice to the Apo|stle,
or Apply them as I desire, without de|frauding
the Congregation.
First then, yee are to take an especial notice,
That in the space of fourty years after the
Crucifying of Iesus, there was to happen

amongst the Iews a famous day of Discrimi|nation,
whereinMatth. 24. 40. one was to be taken, and ano|ther
left. The cruel and the incredulous were
to be utterly destroy'd, But the persecuted Be|lievers
to be remarkably preserved from that
Destruction. Preserved, not only from that
deluge of Judgments, likeMatth. 24. 38. Noah in the Ark, but
from the mischievous designs of the Mosaical Ze|lots,
by whom they could never be forgiven their
having been Loyal unto their Lord. Which fa|mous
day of Discrimination, as the Scriptures
have expressed in those sublimer sorts of Peri|phrasis,
[The Kingdome of Heaven, the coming of
Christ, the end of all things, and the conclusion of
the Age;] so in respect of one part, that of de|liverance
unto the Faithful, we find it expressed
in other places, by , The Redemp|tion
drawing neer, , The Season, ,See Doctor Hmmond (of blessed memory) upon the place, and the Texts by him re|ferred to. The
Day, , The Deliverance,] which Delive|rance
being nearer at the writing of this Epistle,
than when they had first embraced the Chri|stian
Faith, is therefore the rather introduced
with [an ,] a consideration of the time;
and that as an Argument, or Allective, whereby
to win them to the duties of this whole Chapter;
which Duties, that they concern us as we are

men of these Times, and relating in particular
to our now happy revolution, I foresee an oc|casion
to shew anon.
As this is the first Praecognition, so it natu|rally
affords me an easie passage unto the se|cond.
For our Apostle having observed cer|tain
spots in the Christians which dwelt at Rome,
theie being invelloped at once with a double
darkness, as well of their doings, as of their suf|ferings,
no les asleep in sin, than benighted with
Persecution, comes early to them in this Epistle;
and here endeavours to awake them, not onely
with a Call, but a Reason for it. Because the
night do's now begin to be less and less dark, he
tells them it is fit they be less and less drowzie.
In the next words before my Text, we have an
Apostolical , (the very thing that in
English we use to call the Cock-crow,) whereby
he tells the guilty sleepers, 'tis more than time
that they awake. And the Reason which he
gives them is very cogent; , for now
is our salvation nearer than when we believed.
That is to say in plainer terms, our delive|rance
at present is more approaching, than when
we were newly Christianiz'd. It is better with
us now, than when we were Neophytes in the

Church. But to acquaint them the more di|stinctly
how late it is that he awakes them;
The Night (saith he) is far spent, and the Day is
at hand; (that is) the time of Persecution is now
well over, and the day of Deliverance begins to
dawn. At the Tyrant Tiberius, our Sun was
set; At the other Tyrant Nero, 'tis more than
midnight: Do but wait for Vespasian, and you
will find it break of Day.
Nor does the vigilant Apostle meerly awake
them out of sleep, but also desires that they will
rise, and instructs them in the method how to
make themselves ready. They are to leave off
their chamber-Robes, and make them fit to go
abroad; to cast away their Bed-cloaths, as only
suitable to the Night; and to appear in such
habits, as are agreeable to the Day.
Let us therefore cast off the works of Darkness,
and let us put on the Armour of Light.
For a man to Preach on this Text, no more
is needful than to explain it. The Text it self
being a Sermon, as full, and pithy, as it is short.
[The Night is far spent, and the Day is at hand;]
There is , the double Doctrine. [Let us
therefore cast off, and let us therefore put on;]
There is , the double Use.
The words, apparelling the matter, have both
number, and measure; and the matter it self is as
full of weight. From both together it is obvious
to observe three things in this mighty Preacher;
His Logick, his Rhetorick, and his Divinity.
We have his Logick in the Illative [Therefore]
which is a note of Argumentation, giving the
force of an Enthymem, though not the form. And
yet the form is implyed with more advantage
than if exprest. The Night is far spent; There|fore
night-works and darkness must go away.
The Day is at hand; Therefore Light must be
welcome to us.
We have his Rhetorick in the Figures, of
which the whole is made up. For besides the
Isocla, and Homioteleuta of the Text, (that is)
the evenness of the Members, and Musical
Cadence of every Clause; we see the Metaphors
in the Period are just as many as the Members.
The first is borrowed from Darkness, the se|cond
from the Day; and both in Allusion to two
things more which are very distant, to wit our
Armour, and our Apparel. And yet the whole is
an Allegory, most artificially carryed on. For
as he begins his holy Trope with the night of trou|ble
and persecution, so he shuts it up too with the

light of Peace.In Allegori tenendum est hoc, ut quo in gene|re incipias, eodem desi|nas, aliter consequen|tia sit tur|pissima. Quintilian. Nay, besides all these, the Text
affords us three figures more. Three (I say in kind,
but six in number. Here is a single Anaphora, a
double Epanodos, and no less than a threefold An|tithesis,
by which the terms of the last clauses
(and there are three Terms in each) are thus op|pos'd
to one another; Darkness, to Light; Works,
to Armour; and casting off, to putting on.
After the Logick, and the Rhetorick, observe
the Divinity of the Apostle; to which his Art
is but the Handmaid, and made to serve. Here
is a seasonable Advertisment, and a most useful
Inference. And each of these is twofold, exactly
looking one on another, even as face answers face in
a perfect Mirroir. Observe how the later is
strongly inforc'd out of the former. Since the
night of our sufferings is now far spent, what have
we to do with the night of sin? And since the
day of our deliverance is hard at hand, what
should we do butVers. 13. walk honestly as in the day?
The night of Errour and Disorder is now well
over; Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness.
The day of Mercy and Restauration begins to
dawn; Let us therefore put on the armour of light.
Let usEph. 5. 8. walk in the light, as becomes children of
the light. Let our light so shine before God and

men, that Men may see our good works, and
God reward them. That men may see our good
works, and glorify God in this present world;
that God may see our good works, and glorify
Us in the world to come. Thus we see S. Pauls
Divinity, and way of Teaching.
It is indeed a whole Body of his practical Divi|nity,
however summ'd up in so small a System.
For the whole Duty of a Christian do's consist in
two things; first (by way of privation) in casting
off the works of Darkness, in denying ungodliness,
and worldly lusts; next (by way of Acquisition)
in putting on the armour of light; living soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. Tit. 2.
12. For so the Apostle explains himself in the
two verses after my Text, Let us walk honestly,
as in the Day. And how must that be? first he
tells us in the Negative, Not in rioting and drun|kenness,
not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying, not in any of those things
which were yesterday forbid by his Majesties
excellent Proclamation; (for these are some of
the works of darkness, the very worst use that men
can make of a Deliverance,) next he tells us in
the Affirmative, It must be by putting on the Lord
Iesus Christ; By sticking close to his Precepts,

and taking a copy from his example; by having
a fellowship with his death, and a conformity to his
sufferings; For this is here meant by the Armour
of Light.
And each of these is improved by three main
circumstances. First by the union of the one
with the other; they are not set with a disjun|ctive,
that we may take which we please, [Let
us cast off, Or let us put on] as if the one would
serve turn without the other; But tied together
with a copulative [Let us cast off, And let us
put on,] neither of them must go alone. We
stand obliged to do them both by indispensable
necessity; nor must we vainly flatter our selves
that Salvation is to be had upon easier terms.
Secondly by the inforcement of both together,
from the seasonable conjuncture of our affairs.
For Because the Night is far spent, we must di|vest
our selves of darkness; And Because the
Day is at hand, we must apparel our selves with
light. Thirdly by the order in which these duties
are to be done. We must not put on the Ar|mour,
Before we cast off the Works; But cease
from dishonesty in the first place, and talk of god|liness
in the second. For a godly Knave is a con|tradiction
in Adjecto. The  hath the Pre|cedency,

we must begin with casting off what|ever
is contrary to virtue; And then comes in
the , we must proceed to the putting on
whatever is opposite to vice. We must not hope
to serve two Masters,Matth. 6. 24. (which our Saviour tells
us is impossible, and which yet hath been the
project of some years past,) erecting a Church
for the one, and also a Chappel for the other;
But first of all we must abhor, and forsake our
Mammon, that so we may rationally endeavour
to cleave with stedfastness unto God.
Thus ye see how the Text is ravell'd out
into Particulars. And were I not really some|what
afraid to spend too much of my time in
a meer Division, I would presently wind up all
into three great Bottoms. Whereof the first
would provide against Hypocrisie, the second
against Indifferency, the third against fainting, as
also against Procrastination. And when Provi|sion
shall have been made for these four things,
not only Zeal, and Sincerity, but also dispatch
in our amendment, and perseverance unto the end;
I know not what can be wanting either to sa|tisfie
the Text, or to Edifie the Souls of a
Congregation.
But before I come to handle the useful In|ference

of the Apostle, (which to do, will be
the business of more than one or two Sermons)
the time does prompt me to make Advantage of
his most seasonable Advertisment, out of which
he does fitly deduce his Inference. So opportune
is the Advertisment, as well to these, as those
Times, that I may say in the very language
(though not in the very sense) of our Blesed
Saviour,Luke 4. 21. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in our
Ears. For,
We have had both our Iews, and our Gno|sticks
too; and are in the highest degree of hope,
to be rid of Both. Not (I hope) by their de|struction,
(like that alluded to in my Text) but
by their happy conversion, and union with us.
For mutual love, as well as loyalty, is the thing
that this Chapter does chiefly aim at. It presseth
earnestly for loyalty, from the first verse unto
the eighth. And as earnestly for love, from the
eighth verse unto the end. By unavoidable im|plication,
it presseth for love throughout the
whole, but most expresly, and on purpose, in no
less than four verses, to wit, the eight, the ninth,
the tenth, and the thirteenth. We must not In|sult
over our Enemies, though we ought to give
thanks for their disappointment. The noblest

benefit of a Conquest, is the opportunity to oblige.
Rejoyce not (saith Solomon) when thine enemy fal|leth,
nor let thine heart be glad when he stumbleth,
lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he
turn away his wrath from him, Prov. 24. 17. From
whence it is obvious to collect, That to Insult
over our Enemies, may do Them good; but all
that We can get by it, is God's displeasure. The
greatest care is to be taken in the present daw|ning
of our day, that it be not overcast with an
utter darkness. We have already had a long and
a tedious night; (though not so long as the Apostles
by twenty years,) a Night of sorrow, and oppres|sion;
a Night of disorder, and confusion; a Night
of ignorance, and errour; a Night of errour in
judgment, and practice too; To summe up all,
we have been seiz'd with a night of suffering,
which we had drawn over our selves by a night
of sin.
It is so far from my purpose, to make or widen
the wounds of any, that you will see, (before
we part) I do intend nothing but Healing. But
I must make an application, as well of the Night,
as of the Day; or else the parallel expected will
be imperfect. And as 'tis reckon'd the greatest
happiness, to be able to say, we have been miser|able;

(yea, St. Gregory boldly call'd it an happy
sin, which gave occasion to such a Remedy as the
coming of Christ into the world:) so 'twill be use|full
to reflect upon the darkness of the night,
which (by the blessing of God) is so very far
spent, the better to relish the injoyment of the
glorious day which is now at hand.Haec olim meminisse juvabit. To recount
what we have suffer'd, is no more than to con|sider
how much we are able to forgive; and for
how manifold a deliverance it now concerns us
to be thankful.
VVhen we were dull, and in the dark, and
knew not the Happiness we injoy'd, whilst we
injoy'd it; when we could not comport with so
hard a lesson, as the1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. submitting our selves for the
Lords sake, whether to the King, as Supream, or un|to
Governours, as sent by him, and whether those
that were sent, were Ecclesiastical, or Civil;
when it seemed to us a Paradox,Cappado|ces, (inquit Strabo)  Strab. l. 12. p. 540. cap. that 'tis the li|berty
of the Subject to live in subjection unto the
Law, and therefore in loyalty unto him, whom to
obey for Conscience sake, is the happiest free|dom;
I say when this Lesson would not other|wise
be learnt, God sent us to School to a Civil
War; the severest Praeceptor, by which poor
Scholars could be instructed. So it was call'd by

Thucyd. lib. 3. p. 227. , c. Thucydides, [, A violent Schoole|master]
and such we found it by sad experience.
For it rigidly taught us through the mouth of the
angry Cannon, and gave us terrible admonitions
upon the point of the sword. A lying spirit went
forth into the mouth of the Prophets, Inspiring the
Isa. 14. 23. . Polyb. l. 6. p. 458. meanest of the people to affect Dominion over
the mightiest; and never ceasing to blow the
coals, which they had kindled within the Bram|ble,
until they saw it had devoured the lofty
Cedar. A Church forsooth was to be swept,
(but with the Beesom of destruction,) though the
best Reformed in all the world; and because the
very Beesom was the uncleanest thing in it, it
could not choose but be the fouler for being
swept. Nay, all the foundations of the earth did
presently grow out of course. In the whole body of
the Kingdome, there was little to be seen but
wounds and bruises. For our Politick Chirurgions
did so follow the Letter (in opposition to the
Sense) of the Poets Rule, as to have taken off
most of the soundest members, which wereImmedi|cabile vulnus ense reci|dendum. incu|rable
indeed, by being faultless. Before the
murdering of the King, who was the Head of
our Common Mother, they garbl'd both the
Universities, which were the Eyes. This was

the wit of their Impiety, first to pluck out her
eyes, that so she might not see them cut off her
head. They did not only (like Alcides) cruelly
bite their Mothers Breast, But (like Nero) rip
up her Bowels. Not only (like Tarquinius) sum|ma
papavera amputare, lopp off the chieftains
of the Nation, but (like Procrustes) cut off the
feet too. The publick calamities were exten|ded,
from him that sate upon the Throne, to him
that laboured at the Plough. And, if we extend
our consideration to the preparedness of their
minds, had all that were faithful in the land had
no more than one Neck, those Caligula's I allude
to had cut it off at one Blow. Nay, in one sense
at least, I may say they did it. For the Head of
the Parliament is declared by Law to be the
King; and the Parliament (we know) is a kind
of  whole Nation Epitomiz'd. And so to cut off
the King, was to behead the Parliament; which,
what was it in effect, but to cut the very throat
of the English Nation? Now if we consider
the Revolution, by which we all are transported
with joy, and wonder, and do compare it with
every part of that Politick. Polyb. Megalop. l. 6. p. 456, 457, 458. wheel, (that ,
as Polyhius calls it,) with which this dis|graced
and glorious Kingdome hath been both

tortured, and turned round; we cannot but hope
that many thousands have found so good an ef|fect
of their late Collyrium, that they are not
only quicker, but singler sighted than heretofore;
and do make such severe expostulations with
themselves, as not to need any other Censors.
With how vast an expense of blood, and con|science,
and as well of the publick, as private
Treasure, did we buy the sad Priviledge of pay|ing
Assesments, and Excise? How much pains
we were at, to purchase the means of our being
Miserable? VVhat a do did we keep, to find
out a way to our undoing? we felt an eminent
Decay, of Publick Honour, as well as Trade; a
Decay of Religion, because of Unity; a Decay
of what not, unless of that that decay'd us on e|very
side? Nay, the more our sinews were
shrunk up, and by how much the weaker our
shoulders grew, by so much the more were we
laden with heavy Burdens. There was inflicted
on many thousands, a Tast of scarceness; and a
sight of the Plague, though not of Pestilence. For

when did we see a new year, which did not bring
along with it a new Disease too? 'Tis true in|deed
that many of us had great injoyments; But
how many others had right to greater, who yet
were reduced to none at all? And all we had be|ing
precarious, at the lustful disposal of fellow
subjects, we knew not how soon we might be
drown'd in the deepest want, how much soever
(for a Time] we might swim in plenty. Nay,
even Then we were to count it our real misery,
that we could see, and deplore, but could not
Remedy other mens.
Such was the Darkness of the Night, which
now does serve to commend the Day. The Day
by whose light we can see to read, [what was
hid from our eyes when we sate in Darkness,
when the great Lamps of the Church were
cruelly hid under a Bushel, and even He was ta|ken
from us, who was the light of our Eyes, as
well as the Breath of our Nostrils,] I say, by this
light we can see to read, That our Liberty does
consist in a faithful Discharge of our Allegiance.
That 'tis the Interest of the Subject, Not to be
able to Rebel. That the Prerogative of the King,
is the peoples priviledge. That to lessen his Power,
is to betray their Rights. For unless he be able

to crush, and injure, he is not able to defend, and
protect his Subjects. Any Tyranny will be bet|ter,
than that of a prosperous Rebellion, by how
much One is less grievous than Many Tyrants;
And a Temporary Mischief, that a perpetual In|convenience.
Blessed be God that we can say, (at least as
far as our Apostle,) that our Dark state of mi|sery
is fairly vanish'd, and that the Light does
begin to shew it self in our Horizon. But so far
are we yet from our full Meridian, that it will
never be Day with us, (I mean, not a glorious
uncloudy Day,) till Magna Charta shines forth in
its native Lustre. And it appears bySalvae sint Episcopis omnes Li|bertates suae. Mag. Chart. cap. 1.  ult. Magna
Charta, that all the Rights of the Church are the
chiefest Liberties of the Subject. To be but ca|pable
of the Honour,1 Tim. 5. 17. the double Honour of the
Clergy, (to wit, the Reverence, and the Revenue)
is an eminent part of the Layman's Birthright. I
pray be pleased to consider, what is not every
day observ'd, That all the Dignities, and En|dowments,
which do belong unto the Church,
(at once by the Statutes of God and Man,) are so
many Rights which appertain to your childrens
children. I must not here be thought to forsake
my Text; For it ye compare it with the Con|text,

(especially from the first, to the eighth verse
of this Chapter,) ye will see the great fitness of all
I say, and that my Text cannot be satisfied,
unless I say it. For he that saith in this place by
the Spirit of God,Rom. 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, does also say by the same Spirit,
Obey them that have the Rule over you,Heb. 13. 7, 17 who have
spoken to you the word of God, and who do watch
for your souls, as those that must render an Accompt.
And the Interest of the former, is so entwisted
with the later, That till our Bishops receive their
Right, though we are glad to have our King, we
may rationally fear we shall not hold him. For
ask (I beseech you) of the days that are past,Deut. 4. 32. and
ask from the one side of heaven to the other, if ever
there were any such thing as This, that a King could
be happy without a Bishop? Lord! What an
Epocha will it make in our future Kalendars,
when men shall reckon from this Year, as from
the Year of Restitution? But then (like that
which Saint Peter mentions, Acts 3. 21.) The
Restitution is to be general, as well to God, as to
the People. And ye will find in Magna Charta,
(which does deserve to be imprinted in all your
memories,) That all the Rights of the Church
were entirely granted unto God; They were

granted unto God, and that for ever. Now of
so sacred a force is the word [For ever,] That
if a Statute shall be made against the Liberties of
the Church, The Law of the Land hath provided
against that Statute;See the first and last Chapter of the 42. of Edward the third. And by an Anticipation,
declares it Null. Shall I guess at the cause of so
great a Caution? It seems to be, as for other
Reasons, so in particular for This; Because to
alter that Government, was as well against the Kings
Oath, as against the Oathes of both Houses, which
swore the Right of his Supremacy, as well in all
Ecclesiastical, as Civil causes. Besides that in
the Judgment of the most eminent in the world
(for depth of knowledge in holy things) The
order of Bishops is by Divine Institution. And if
'tis so in good earnest, it will be dangerous to deal
with the Laws of Christ, as we readCum ad|versus Rem|publicam La|cedaemonio|rum conspi|rationem ortam noctu comperisser, Leges Lycurgi continuo abrogavit, quae de In|demnatis sup|plicium sumi vetabant. Vol. Max. lib. 7. c. 2. p. 208. Agesilaus
once dealt with those of Lacedaemon, which he
pretended onely to abrogate, that he might not
break them. But whether so, or not so, a thing
in Being and Debate is to pass for good, until the
Dispute shall be fairly ended. And if an Errour
must be adventur'd on either hand, Religion
tells us, it ought to be upon the Right.
Would any know why I insist on such a sub|ject
in such a place? my Reasons for it are plain|ly
These.
First, I insist on such a subject, because my
Text (as I said) does exact it of me; And be|cause
'tis my duty, at least to wish, That the
day breaking forth may be full and lasting; That
the Repentance of the Nation may be impartial;
and so to our SOVERAIGNS RETURN,
there may be added his Continuance in Peace and
Safety. I say in Safety, not more to his Person,
than his Posterity. Nor in Safety for a season,
so long as men are well humour'd, but so long as
the Sun or the Moon endures. And then for you
of this Place, who are an honourable part of
the English Nation, That which I take to be
your Duty, I think is your Interest to indeavour.
The most I am pressing on you is this, That
ye will labour for the means of your being
happy. If ye think ye cannot be happy, with the
establishment of the Prelacy, I shall pray you
may be happy, at least without it; and also wish
I may be able to pray with Faith too. Only as
often as I reflect on King IAMES his Motto,
[No Bishop, no King,] and withal do consider
its having been verified once, and before our eyes,
I think it my duty to desire, it may not be veri|fied
any more: But that it may rather be here
applyed, what was spoken heretofore of the

Spartan Laws, [ut semper esse possent, aliquando non
fuerunt.] They only ceased for a Time, to the end
they might continue to all eternity. These are sin|cerely
the very Reasons for which I insist upon
such a Subject.
Secondly I do it in such a place, because I
look on This Assembly, as on the Head and the
Heart of the Royal City. I look on the City, as
on a Sea, into which the main stream of the Na|tion
runs. Even the Parliament it self hath such
a respect unto the City, that if ye plead for Gods
Spouse, as ye have done for his Anointed (for
which your names will be pretious with late
posterity,) if ye shall supplicate for a Discipline
which is as old in this land as Christianity it self,
and stands established in Law by thirty two Acts
of Parliament, and without which ye cannot
live, unless by living under the Breach of your
greatest Charter, they will not onely be apt to
grant, but to thank you also for your Petition.
Having gone thus far in prosecution of the
Advertisment, That the Night of our Suffering
is fairly spent, and that the Day of our Injoy|ment
begins to dawn; And having directed unto
the means, (with submission be it spoken to all
Superiours.) by which our Day is to be length|ned,

not only into a year, but an Age of Iubilee;
into a kind of perpetual Sabbath, a Day of Rest
from those works, which either wanted Light,
or were asham'd of it; which either borrow'd
Darkness for their Cover, or else which own'd it
for their Cause; I humbly leave what I have
said to His acceptance and disposal, in the Hand
of whose Counsel are all your Hearts. Tis more
than time that I proceed to the general Use of
this Advertisment; to which I am prompted
by the word [Therefore,] as 'tis a word of con|nexion
betwixt the Duty, and the Deliverance.
Our Apostle does not thus argue; Because
the Night of Oppression is now far spent, and
the Day of Deliverance is hard at hand, Let us
therefore inioy the good things that are present, let
us stretch our selves upon  bed of Ivory, let us
Crown our selves with Rose-buds, let us drink Wine
in bowles, and let us dance to the sound of the Viol,
let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every street,
let none of us go without his share of Voluptuousness,
for this is our portion, our lot is this: I say he does
not thus reason, (like the swaggerers and Hectors
in the second Chapter of Wisdom, and in the sixt of
the Prophet Amos,) but on the contrary, That
the serious consideration of an approaching deli|verance,

should be a double enforcement to
change of life, for such is evidently the force of
the particle , as that looks back on the .
Because the Night is far spent, and because the
Day is at hand, , let us therefore cast off
those works of darkness, and let us therefore put
on the Armour of light. Which is as if he
should have said, At this very Time, and for
this very Reason, let us live better lives than we
did before; let us buckle up close to our Chri|stian
duties; The Reformation of our manners
will be the properest Answer to such a Blessing.
Such also was the Reasoning which Moses us'd
to the People Israel. Did ever people hear the
voice of God, as thou hast heard and live? (Deut.
4. 33.) Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, that
it may go well with thee (v. 40.) so again Deut. 8.
6, 7. The Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good
Land, Therefore thou shalt keep the Commandments
of the Lord. Such was the Reasoning also of
Zacharie,Luke 1. 71.74, 75. in his Divine Benedictus, That the
use we are to make of being saved from our ene|mies,
and from the hand of all that hate us, is to
serve the Authour of our deliverance, in holi|ness,
and righteousness, all the dayes of our life.
What now remains, but that we go, and do

likewise? Not arguing thus from our late great
changes; Because the Night of our Sufferings is
well nigh spent, and the Day of Restitution is
hard at hand, let us therefore put from us the
evil day,Amos 6. 3. and cause the seat of violence to come neer,
for now it comes to our Turn to oppress the
poor, and to crush the helpless, and to call our
strength the Law of Iustice, let us never so much
as think of the afflictions of Ioseph;Verse 6. Let our Joy
run out into Debaucherie, and surfet into the
braveries of vanity, and the Injoyments of our
lust; or at the best let us express it, by the
making of Bonfires, and Ringing of Bells, by
solemn drinking of Healths, and casting Hats into
the Air, whereby to make the World see,
that we are glad, rather than thankful; But let
us manifest on the contrary, (and let us do it
by demonstration,) that we are piously thank|ful,
as well as glad. Because the Day of good
things breaks in upon us, Let us Therefore offer
to God thanksgiving, and pay our vowes unto the
Lord.Psal. 50. 14. Our Vowes of Allegiance and Supremacy;
Our Vows to assert and maintain our Charters;
Our Vows to live according to Law, and obey
the Canons of the Church. But above all, let us
pay him our Vow in Baptism, by forsaking the

VVorld before we leave it, by subduing the
Flesh unto the Spirit,James 4. 7. by resisting the Devil un|till
he flyes. That whilst God is making all
new without us, we may not suffer our Hearts
within us to be the only things remaining old;
But rather (on the contrary) that we may
prove we are in Christ, by that demonstrative
argument of our becoming new creatures; which
until we do become, we cannot possibly be in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Do the two Twin Blessings
of Peace and Plenty, which have been (for many
years) at so low an ebb, begin to flow in upon us
from every quarter? Then let not our Souls
be carried away, with the pleasant violence of
the Tide. Let not any Man seekgreat things for
himself, but rather study to deserve, then to injoy
them. Make no provision for the Flesh, whereby to
fulfil the lusts thereof: but put ye on the Lord Ie|sus
Christ, and Adorn his Doctrine, by a confor|mity
to his Life. Put on his Modesty, and his
Temperance, in a perfect opposition to Rioting
and Drunkenness; put on his Chastity, and his
Pureness, in opposition to Chambering, and Wan|tonness;
put on his Bowels, and his Mercy, in
opposition to Strife, and Envy.
Ye know  I told you in the beginning,

that Loyalty and Love are the two grand duties
at which this Chapter does chiefly drive. And
having been instant for the first, in the former
part of my discourse, I think it a duty incum|bent
on me, to be as urgent for the second. For
Love is part of that Armour my Text comman|deth
us to put on. Nay, considering that Love
is the fulfilling of the Law, (in the next verse but
one before my Text,) the armour of Light may
be said, to be the armour of Love too. Love must
needs be ,Eph. 6. 13. the whole armour of God, in as
much as it comprehendeth the fulfilling of the
Law.Gal. 5. 14. As one Scripture tells us, that God is
Light,1 Joh. 1. 5. so another also tells us, that God is Love;
and therefore the children of light,1 Joh. 4. 8. must be chil|dren
of love too.
Then let the same mind be in us, which was in
Christ Iesus;1 Pet. 2. 23. who when he suffered, threatned not,
but committed his cause to God who judgeth righ|teously.
And let us prove this mind is in us, by
our forbearing one another, forgiving one another,
Even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven us.Eph. 4. 32.
As we are stones of that Temple, in which the
Head of the Corner is Christ himself, He meant
his Blood should be the Cement, to fasten every
one of us to one another, and altogether unto him|self.

And since we see that Disloyalty is taking
its leave throughout the Land, lets rather shut
the Door after it, by (Love and Unity,) then
(by Breaches and Divisions) open way for its
Return. Let us effectually make it appear, by
the modest use of our Injoyments, Pacem Bello
quaesitam esse, That we fought onely for Peace,
and contended only for Union; that the end of our
strife, was our Agreement; that we aim'd at
Truth, rather than Victory; or rather at the Vi|ctory
of Truth and Righteousness. Let our
generous deportment become an evidence, that
as the greatest of our Calamities could not bow
down our heads, so the greatest of our Injoy|ments
cannot trip up our heels; That as our
Crosses could not deprive us of Hope and
Comfort, so the Tide of our Prosperity shall
but Illustrate our Moderation.
But above all let us distinguish, betwixt our
weak, aud our wilful Brethren. Of some (Saint
Iude saith) we must have compassion,Jude 22. 23. making a
difference. But others (he saith) we must save
with fear, pulling them out of the fire. That is,
we must save them,2 Cor. 5. 11. even by making them afraid.
Must shew them the Terrors of the Lord, and
fright them out of the way to Hell. We must

in any wise rebuke them,Lev. 19. 17. and must not suffer sinne
upon them. It is a Rule amongst Musicians, that
if a string be but True, 'tis to be cherisht, though
never so gsly out of Tune; but to be broken,
if it be false, because incapable of amendment.
Some are so scandalous, that we must not receive
them into our Houses,2 Joh. 10. 11. nor bid them God speed:
For to bid them God speed, is to partake of their
Evil deeds. (2 Joh. 10. 11.) But there is nothing
more Barbarous, than not to hold from the break|ing
a bruised reed,Isa. 42. 3. or from the quenching a smoak|ing
flax.Mat. 12. 20. Nothing but Pardon belongs to Peni|tents,
although they may have sin'd against us,
no less than seventy times seven.Mat. 18. 22. It is an excel|lent
passage in Herodotus, that whilst Croesus was
brewing Vengeance against the Murderer of his
Son, Adrastes being the man that had kill'd the
Son, threw himself down at the Fathers feet;
and in the bitterness of his Soul pass'd such a
sentence upon himself, as even melted the very
bowels of an inraged King, who straight brake
forth into this expression,Herodotus lib. 1. pag. 17. .
Friend (saith he) I am re|veng'd;
thy severity to thy self hath made me
kind. And I think it fit that thou shouldest live,
for thinking it fit that thou shouldest dye. If

we have failed heretofore in so great a duty, let
us learn from that Heathen, to love our enemies
for the future. And since it is dangerous not to
love them,Heb. 12. 29. in as much as our God is a consu|ming
fire, let us love them at least in our own de|fence.
Have they persecuted us, when it was
in Their power? Let us the rather not hurt
them, when 'tis in Ours. For to Imitate their
courses, is to Approve them. But , (as
Arrian speaks,) not to be like them in what is
evil, is the most generous kind of revenge, and
conquest.Eccles. 12. 13 Now then (if you please) hear the sum
of the whole matter. We must demonstrate to
our enemies, by the most practical way of ar|guing,
That the night of sin is far spent, and that
the day of our Amendment begins to dawn;2 Pet. 1. 19. that
the Day-star (in St. Peter) is arising in our hearts;
that we are followers of Christ,Joh. 13. 15. and resolv'd to do
sincerely as he hath given an Example. Which
was not to call down Fire from Heaven,Luk. 9. 54. much
less to conjure it up from Hell,Mat. 26. 50. but to call Iudas
Friend, whilst he was Executing his Treason,
as well as Devil, whilst he design'd it; nay to
lay down his Life, even for them that took it
away. Now since He is (what he calls himself)
the light of the World, and as well our armour, as

our apparel, St. Paul did fitly explain his Pre|cept
for putting on the armour of Light, by that
of putting on the Lord Iesus Christ. This is the
use we are to make of the Nights going away, and
the dayes approach, if I may not rather say, its
presence with us. This is our practical, and vital,
(not verbal) Oratory, which (next to the plea|ding
of the Spirit,Rom. 8. 26. who helpeth our infirmities, and
maketh intercession for us with groans which cannot
be uttered,) is the only Oratory with God, that
will be powerful to perswade him to pass our
Hopes into Fruitions, to Crown our Fruitions
with an Increase, to bless that Increase with a
long Continuance, and so to Sanctifie unto us our
Temporal things, as that we may not fall short
of the things Aeternal.
This is the rational importance of the word
Therefore in my Text, as 'tis a particle of con|nexion
betwixt our Duty, and our Deliverance.
Now that the Duty of keeping close to the
Commandments of Christ, (by casting off All
our works of Darkness, and by putting on the
whole armour of light,) should be inforced upon
our Souls from the consideration of the Time,
[a Time of Peace, and Prosperity, succeeding a
Time of Persecution; a very bright Day, after

a very Dark Night;] I shall the rather proceed
to prove by the several Reasons of the thing;
because the Reasons making for it, will be also
the Motives inducing to it. They will not only
clear the Truth, but advance the practice of my
Assertion.
The first Reason is, Because it is generous,
and noble, to amend our lives, with our conditi|ons;
and rather out of gratitude, than fordid
fear. It will be ever the greatest glory of Titus
Vespasian, (above the rest of the Roman Empe|rours)
that he was moulded by his Empire from
the worse to the better; from having been a very
cruel, and a very proud person, to be as emi|nently
mild, and humble too, as if he had listen'd
to the Precept in Ecclesiasticus,Eccl. 3. 18. and made his
Practice an Answer to it, [My Son, the greater
thou art, humble thy self so much the more.] Happy
is the Man that can say with David, It is good
for me that I have been in trouble.Psal. 119. 71. But He is the
Man of a rarer happiness, who is inwardly the
better for having prosper'd. 'Tis very much
worthier of a Christian, to be led by Gods fa|vour,
then to be driven into duty by his severity.
A well natur'd people, upon the receiving of a
blessing, will be apt to bethink themselves, (with

David) by what expressions of their gratitude
they may signifie their sense of their Obligation.
Quid retribuemus? Philo  pag. 552. what shall we render unto the
Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon us, (Psal.
116. 12.) which of his greatest enemies shall we
make a sacrifice to his wrath? what monstrous
sin shall we mortifie? what darling lust shall we
subdue? how shall we honour him with our
lives, and give him thanks by our Reformation?
shall we despise the Riches of his forbearance, be|cause
he is willing that his forbearance should
allure us to Repentance, and not that his Iudg|ments
should fright us to it? shall we presume
to be evil, because he is good? And offend the
more boldly, because his Grace does so much
abound? No, we will not (for shame) abuse his
Love, and corrupt our selves with his Indulgence.
Nor will we (in pity to our Souls) pollute our
selves with his gifts, or sin away his graces and
mercies to us, by making them serve to incense
his Iustice. But by how much the greater his
Mercies are, by so much the more will we
tremble to provoke the eyes of his glory. Because
we find by so late experience, He is a God ready
to pardon, swift to shew mercy, and slow to wrath;
we will indeavour to let him see, we are a peo|ple

ready to serve him; swift to ask him for|giveness,
but slow to sin. Thus ye have the first
Reason of the word Therefore in my Text, as
'tis a particle of connexion betwixt the Duty,
and the Deliverance.
The second Reason is, because he will other|wise
Repent of his favours to us, and will punish
us the more, for sinning against such Obligati|ons.
We ought to look upon our priviledge,
with Fear and Trembling: for that which
heightens our dignity, whilst we attend to Gods
service, does also aggravate our doom, whilst we
neglect it. The very things which make us
capable of greater happiness than others, may ac|cidentally
fit us for greater ruin. Remember
those words of our blessed Saviour, [Luk. 10. 15.]
And thou Capernaum which art lifted up to Heaven,
shalt be cast down to Hell. Whereby 'tis intima|ted
unto us, that God will punish Malefactors,
as well in respect of the mercies they have re|ceiv'd,
as in respect of the sins they have com|mitted.2. Cor. 5. 10.
When we shall all appear before the
judgment seat of God, to answer for the things
which are done in the body, we then must render
a strict accompt, what Use we have made of
our Grand deliverance, and how much we are

the Better, for all that good that is done unto
us.
The third Reason is, because our dangers
are greater in time of Peace and Prosperity, than
in time of Distress and Persecution; and so we
have need of the greater Caution. Agur pray'd
against Poverty,Prov. 30. 8, 9. for fear of Stealth; but he
pray'd against Riches, for fear of Atheism. If
Iesurun wax fat, he falls a kicking, and quite
forgets the God that made him. [Deut. 32. 15.] If
Nabal is drunk with the prosperity of sheering
the Innocent and harmless Sheep, it is no time to
tell him, that either David, or God is Angry.
Nay David himself, in his prosperity, began
to boast he should never be moved, [Psal. 30. 6.]
From fulness of Bread, ariseth Idleness. and
Pride; and those (we know) were the sins of
Sodom. When God rain'd Manna upon his peo|ple,
and gave them all that they desir'd, Then
[saith the Text] they were not estranged from
their lusts.Psal. 78. 24. 25. But when he slew them, they sought
him, and inquired early after God. If ever any
mortal was , (that is) the White
boy of Fortune, and special favorite of the Fates,
(as the Heathens phras'd it) the Youth of Ma|cedon
was sure the Man. But though he could

not be overcome by the strength of all Asia, he
was by the weakness, and softness of it. 'Twas
this made Cato cry out in Livy,Ne illae magis res nos cepe|rint, quam nos illas. Liv. lib. 34. pag. 849. Quo magis impe|rium
crescit, eo plus horreo. The more our Ter|ritories
increase, the more I tremble; for fear
the Kingdoms which we have taken, do prove in|deed
to have taken Us. He knew that where
the Soul is not commensurate with the success,
the Pride arising from the Victory, does so de|file
the glory of it, that the prize may be said
to lead the Triumph into Captivity. It is so na|tural
for a man to be transported with prospe|rity,
that it extorted from Moses an extraordi|nary
caveat, before he could safely admit his
people to the delights of Canaan. When the Lord
thy God shall have brought thee into the Land,Deut. 6. 10, 11, 12. to
give thee great and goodly Cities, and houses full of
all good things,See Deut. 8. 10. to 18. Then beware that thou forget not the
Lord, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
[Deut. 6. 10. 12.] and so again in the 8 Chapter,
When thou hast eaten, and art full, and hast built
goodly houses, and dwelt therein, Then beware least
thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy
God, who brought thee out of the house of Bondage.
'Tis a dangerous thing, to be imparadis'd on
Earth, because in every such paradise there lurks
a Serpent.
The fourth Reason is, Because it is better to
have a conquering, then an untempted Innocence.
To live exactly in despight of sollicitations to the
contrary, is more thank-worthy, and more re|wardable,
than only to want the Importunity, or
Opportunity to offend. A man may easily be
submissive, whilst he is under a Persecution; and
study compliance, when he is worsted. But 'tis
as laudable, as it is difficult, if we who sought
even for Victory, whilst we were trodden under
foot, shall sue for Peace in our Prosperity. That
which makes us most high, (in the sight of God)
is our Humility; for which there is hardly any
place in our Humiliation. But the Taller any
man is, by so much the lower he hath to stoop;
and so 'tis the Benefit of success, to be Remarkable
for Modesty, and Moderation. That especially is
the season, wherein our Armour of light is of most
honourable Employment, when the Prince of
darkness hath most auxiliaries within, and our
Lusts are made ablest to War against us.
The fift Reason is, because there is no other
way whereby to prevail with God Almighty,
both to complete that happiness he hath begun,
and to continue it when compleated. I say to com|pleat
it being begun, because the night is far

spent, but not quite over; The day is dawning,
or at hand, but not arriv'd at its Meridian.
God's Anointed is setled, but not his Spouse.
Many are sorry for their Sacriledge, but do not
earnestly Repent; Or they Repent a fair way,
(as far as Ahab,) but not (with Zachae the
Publican) as far as a four-fold Restitution.
Many who sinned out of Ignorance in a very
high manner, do stifly argue their being Inno|cent,
from their not apprehending that they were
guilty. But (seeing Repentance is better for
them, than a meer Temporal Impunity,) they
should be intreated to consider, and put it a
little to the question, whether their Ignorance
was not caus'd by the Previous Dominion of
some great Prejudice, which had also its Rise
from some Reigning sin. Alas! The Jews were
too guilty of killing Christ, although they knew
not what they did; for had they known him,
they would not have crucified to themselves the
Lord of Glory. But yet I say they were guil|ty,
because their Ignorance was not invincible.
It was their guilt that they were Ignorant;
they might have known what they did, had
they not stood in their own Light. If men will
either wink hard, or fling dust into their eyes,

It is not only their Infirmity, but their fault that
they are blind. Saul the Pharisee was excused
indeed a Tanto, for having blasphem'd against
God, and also Persecuted the Church, because he
did it in Ignorance, and Unbelief. But however
it did alleviate, it did not nullifie his sins; For
to become the Apostle Paul, he stood in need
of a Conversion. Now if we do not only earnestly,
but also rationally desire to see a sutable end (or
rather no end at all) of these fair Beginnings;
that the Temple of Ianus may so be shut by our
Augustus,Sueton. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 66. as never more to be open'd by any
Caesar;Florus lib. 4. c. 12. p. 136. and that this Day of our Deliverance
may never more be overcast with a cloud of
darkness, but happily lost into Eternity; we
cannot better give Thanks to God for the pre|sent
breaking in of our glorious day, than by an
Annual day of Fasting for the clamorous sins of
our tedious Night. I mean the Profanation of
Holy Places; the sacrilegious perversion of
Holy Things; the monstrous Harmony of Oathes,
which some have fancied to arise from the grea|test
discord; the effusion of innocent, and (not
only so, but of) Royal Blood; with all the Pre|paratives
and Attendants of that unspeakable Pro|vocation,
which of it self does deserve (and that

for ever) a Monthly day of Humiliation. It was
the Policy of Balaam (saith Philo the Iew,.) to
make the Moabitish Women sell the Use of their
flesh to the Hebrew Men;Philo p. 501. confer. cum Num. 25.  Num. 31. 16. and that for no o|ther
price, than their Sacrificing to Idols. As
knowing that the Hebrews were not otherwise
to be worsted, than by their own breaches of
Gods Commandments. And we know not how
soon our dawning Day may grow dark, if we
do not cast off the works of Darkness. Which
implies a good reason for the word Therefore in
the Text, as 'tis a particle of connexion be|twixt
the Duty, and the Deliverance.
Now unto the King Eternal,1 Tim. 1. 17. Immortal, Invisible,
the only Wise God, be Honour and Glory for
ever and ever.
FINIS.







Die Iovis, 30. Maii. A. 13. Car.
Regis Secundi.
ORdered, that the Thanks of this House
be returned to Dr. Pierce, for the Ser|mon
he Preached yesterday, and that he be
desired to Print his Sermon.
And Sir Heneage Finch, Mr. Coventrie, and
Mr. Pryn, or any one of them, are desired to
give him the Thanks of this House.
Will. Goldesbrough
Cler. Dom. Com.



A
SERMON
PREACHED
At St. MARGARETS WESTMINSTER
by the Order of the Honourable the House
OF
COMMONS
IN
PARLIAMENT Assembled,
Upon the 29^t^h Day of MAY, being the Anniver|sary
Day of the
KING'S and KINGDOM'S
RESTAURATION.
MD.DC.LXI.
Legum Conditores Festos dies instituerunt, ut ad hilaritatem ho|mines
public cogerentur, tanquam necessarium laboribus inter|ponentes
Temperamentum. Senec. de Tranquil. Ani. c. ult.







DEUT. 6. 12.
Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, who brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt.

WHen I look back upon the Church in
all her motions out of the East, ob|serving
how Monarchy and Learning
have been at once the two Shoulders to bear her
up, and withal the two Legs to bring her hither;
And when again I do reflect upon our Twenty
years sins, which were the complicated Cause
of our Twelve years sufferings; I mean our
Drunkenness and Luxury, which were deser|vedly
prescribed so long a Fast; the rashnesse
and vanity of our Oaths, which gave us a mi|serable
option betwixt a perjury, and an undoing;
our profanation of the Quire, which turn'd us
out of the Cathedral; our gross neglect of Gods
Service, which helpt to vote down our publick

Liturgie; our general idleness and sloth, which
often cast us out of our Houses, and as it were
set us to eat our Bread, in the sweat of our brows,
or of our brains; our unprofitable walking under
all God's methods and means of Grace, which
left us nothing but his Iudgments (for many sad
years) to work upon us; And yet again when
I consider,Psal. 126. 4. How God hath turn'd our Captivity as
the Rivers of the South, and cast the Locusts out
of our Vineyards, that we may sit under our Vines;
injoying our Iudges as at the first,Isa. 1. 26. and our Coun|sellors
as at the Beginning; And that the use we
are to make of so miraculous a Recovery, is to
be fedulous in providing against the Danger of
a Relaps; To sin no more after pardon, for fear
a worse thing happen unto us;Joh. 5. 14. I think I cannot
be transported with a more Innocent Ambition,
because I cannot be ambitious of a more profitable
Attempt, than that of bringing down the Heads
of certain Hearers into their Hearts; that what
is now no more than Light, may by that means
become Fire; That we may All (in this sense)
be like the Baptist,Joh. 5. 35. not only shining, but burning
Lamps; not only beautified with the knowledge
of Christian duties; but zealous too in the dis|charge;
as unaffectedly punctual in all our car|riage,

as the greatest Enemies of Godliness are
hypocritically precise. And (though Heresies are
to be hated, as things which lead unto destru|ction,
yet) that Vice may be reckon'd the worst
of Heresies, by how much the Errour of a mans
Practice is worse than That of his bare Opinion.
Last of all, when I consider, That though
Peace is a Blessing, and the greatest in its kind,
yet many consequences of Peace are but glittering
Snares, and that the things which are given us
as helps to memory, are apt to make usIsa. 5. 12. forgetful
of Him that gave them;Hab. 1. 13. 16. I cannot think of a fit|ter
Text for the giving advantage to my design,Amos 6. 1. 3.
than this Remarkable Caveat against Forgetful|ness
ad Ingratitude,Hos. 13. 6. amidst the pleasant Effects
of a Restauration.
When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee
into the Land, to give thee great and goodly Cities,
and houses full of all good things, when thou shalt
have eaten, and art full; THEN beware that
thou forget not the Lord, who brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt.
AT the very first view of which holy Caveat,
there are five particulars of Remarque
which presently meet my observation. As first,

the Downfal of a Nation: Secondly, the De|liverance:
Thirdly, the Author of that Deli|verance:
Fourthly, the Duty by him injoyn'd:
And lastly, the Iuncture of Affairs wherein this
Duty is most in Season.
And of all these Particulars each is the grea|test
in its kind too. For,
 First behold the greatest Curse, that any poor
Nation can struggle under. A Yoke of Bondage
and Captivity, impos'd by the hardest and worst
of men. A Yoke so insupportable to some mens
Necks, that I remember Hegesistratus (a captive
Souldier in Herodotus) would rather cut off his
legs,Herodot. in Calliope. then indure his Fetters; that by the loss of
his Feet, he might be enabled to run away. So
insufferable a thing is the State of Thraldome,
very significantly imply'd in the Land of Egypt,
and exegetically express'd by the house of Bondage.
 But yet the Curse is so set, (like Shadows in
a Picture, or Foyles with Diamonds) as to com|mend
and illustrate the greatest Blessing. A De|liverance
brought about by such a miraculous
complication, that nothing but the experience
that so it is, can extenuate the wonder that so it
should be. A People groaning under the pres|sures
of several Centuries of years, and so ac|custom'd

unto the Yoke, as to have made it a kind
of acquired Nature, (, as Galen calls it)
De Terra Aegypti eductus est, is now at last
brought out of the Land Egypt.And yet the
wonder begins to cease; Because
The Author of this Deliverance is so much 
the greatest to be imagin'd, that he is Dominus,
the Lord;Isa. 40. 22. the Lord that stretcheth out the Hea|vens;Psal. 104. 5.
the Lord that layeth the foundations of the
Earth;Zech. 12. 1. the Lord that formeth the spirit of Man
within him. The Lord in whose Hand are the
hearts of all men; who turneth man to Destru|ction,Psal. 90. 3.
and again who saith, Come again ye children
of Men In a word, It is the Lord, to whom
Miracles are natural, and by whom Impossibilities
are done with ease. 'Tis He that brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt. And therefore,
The Duty in proportion must be superlative|ly 
great too, however hid in this place by a little
Meiosis of expression. Beware that thou forget not
the Lord thy God; that is, Remember what he
hath done, and thank him for it by thy obedience;
Let thy gratitude be seen in thy conversation. Be
sure toDeut. 10. 12. love him, and to serve him, 'with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul. Forget him if thou
canst, unless thou canst forget thou wertDeut. 6. 20, 21. Pha|raob's

Bondman. Nay forget him if thou dar'st,
unless thou art so stout that thou dar'st be damn'd.
And yet beware lest thou forget him, whilst
thou art swimming in prosperity, the stream of
which may either drown thee, or make thee
drunk, if thou are not fore-Armed with circum|spection.
And therefore Beware that thou for|get
not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt.
And that thou mayest not forget him, write the
Favours which he hath don thee,Deut. 6. 7, 8, 9. upon the posts of
thine house; and place them as Frontlets between
thine eyes; tell them out unto thy children, as thou
walkest by the way, both at thy lying down, and
thy rising up; Let them be as a Signet upon thine
Arme, and as a Seal upon thine heart. That the
pleasures of thy Deliverance may not make thee
forgetful of thy Deliverer, (forgetful of theDeut. 32. 15. 18.
Rock out of which thou wert hewn, and kicking
(likeDeut. 32. 15, 18. Iesurun) at him that made thee,) keep an
Exod. 13. 3, 4, 10, c. Anniversary Feast, (a standing Passeover in
May,) whereby to fix him in thy Remembrance.
 Lastly, a Duty so indispensable, should be in|forc'd
upon the Soul by the present season. A
season of Peace and Prosperity, succeeding a
season of Persecution. The greatest Incitement
to the Duty, should be the manifold Injoyment

of this Deliverance. For so 'tis obvious to infer
from the particle THEN, (so strongly im|plyed
in the Hebrew, that in the English 'tis well
express'd,) upon which there seems to lie the
chiefest emphasis of the Text, if we observe how
it stands in a double Relation to the Context.
[When the Lord thy God shall have brought
thee into the Land, to give thee great and good|ly
Cities, and houses full of all good things;
when thou shalt have eaten and be full, THEN
beware that thou forget not the Lord that
brought thee out of Egypt.]
The Text is so fruitful of particulars, and
each particular is so apt to administer matter of
Discourse, that it hath been my hardest Que|stion,
whereabouts I should begin, and how I
should end my meditations. And after too much
time lost in stating the Question within my
self, I have thought it at once the fittest and the
most useful to be resolv'd, (as most immediate|ly
complying with the solemnity of the Time,)
not to yield to the temptation of comparing
our Land with the Land of Egypt, for fear of
seeming to have a pique at the Act of Indemnity
and Oblivion; (otherwise 'twere easie to make
a Parallel; because, however our Native Coun|try,

yet, for twelve years together, it was a very
strange Land;) But, not advancing one step be|yond
the Threshold, to bestow my whole time
upon the little word THEN; as being a par|ticle
of connexion betwixt our Duty, and our De|liverace;
betwixt the Business of the Time,
and the Time it self; betwixt the Occasion, and
the End of our present meeting: looking like
Homer's wise man, , with a visible
prospect on all that follows, and with as visible
a retrospect upon the words going before.
When Prosperity breaks in like a mighty
stream,Amos 5. 24. (in so much that I may say with our
blessed Saviour,Luk. 4. 21. This day is this Scripture ful|filled
in your ears,) Then beware that ye forget
not the Lord that brought you out of Egypt.
Beware ye forget him not at any time, but
especially at This. For the particle Then is an
Important monosyllable; and that especially in
three respects.
First because of the Difficulty of having God
in our Remembrance, much more Then, than
at other times. Next for the Dignity of the Duty,
rather Then, than before or after. Lastly by
reason of the Danger of not performing the
Duty Then, when it becomes incumbent on

us by many unspeakable obligations.
These especially are the Reasons of the par|ticle
Then in this place, on which alone I shall
insist in this Mornings Service. For should I
adventure upon the rest, not only the hour, but
(for ought I can conjecture) the day would
fail me.
AND first of all let us beware, amidst the 
Effects of our Deliverance, that we forget
not the Author of it; because it is difficulter
THEN, than at other times. For the Flattery
and Dalliance of the world, hath perpetually
been the Mother of so much Wantonness, or
Pride, that Adam found it dangerous to be in
Paradise, yea and Lucifer to be in Heaven. Do
but look upon Solomon in the Book of Kings, and
again look upon him in his Ecclesiastes. How was
he there lited up by his Prosperity? and how
does he here Preach it down? I know not whe|ther,
as a Prince, he more inioy'd his Pleasures;
or, as a Prophet, more condemn'd them. Whe|ther
the luxury of his Table made him a Wanton,
or whether the vastness of his Wisdom made
him a Fool; 'Twas That betray'd him to his
Concubines, and This permitted him to his Idols.

Since then a prosperous condition hath such a
secret poyson in it, as against which no Medi|cine
hath been sufficiently Alexipharmacal; and
from the force of whose contagion, there is no
sort of men that hath been priviledg'd, no not
Adam the Innocent, nor Solomon the Wise, nor
even Lucifer the beatified; who were so hugely
swell'd up with this Venom, and so quickly burst;
(not the first in a state of sinlesness, nor the
next in a state of grace, nor yet the third in a
state of glory;) since there is no other man than
the man Christ Iesus, that hath been ever temp|tation
proof: Lord, how wretched a thing is hap|piness
on this side Heaven! and how dangerously
treacherous are our Injoyments! I suppose we are
taught by our late experience, how easie it is
to be over-joy'd, and how equally hard to be
truly thankful, for all those wonders of salva|tion
which God hath wrought and is working
for us; the grateful commemorating of which,
is religiously the end of our present meeting.
Sweet-meats indeed are pleasant, but then they
commonly turn to choler. 'Tis sure the state of
Humiliation, which though we can worst feed
upon, we are notwithstanding best nourisht with:
we are such barren pieces of clay, that our

fruits will be wither'd with too much laughter,
if Grace does not water them sometimes with
tears. It should be matter of real gladness to a
considering Christian, that in the midst of his
prosperity he can see himself sorrowful; that as
he was destitute, with comfort, so he abounds,
with moderation; and that he does not live re|joycingly,
is many times a chief reason for
which he ought. It was David's resolution (at
such a time as this is) to serve the Lord with
fear, and (by a pious Oxymoron) toPsal. 2. 11. rejoyce
unto him with trembling. And if we reflect on
the abuses which many have made of a Restau|ration,
we may charitably pray, that God will
give them some tears to drink;Psal. 102. 9. 80. 5. and, having given
them some tears, will also put them into hisPsal. 56. 8. Bot|tle,
that they may serve for this end, to blot
their merriments out of hisIbid. which compare with Mal. 3. 16. Book.
That the pleasant effects of a Deliverance
(which are peace, and plenty, living securely, and
at ease,) are apt to make us turn Atheists, pro|voking
the Author of our Deliverance to correct
us once more in the house of Bondage; appears,
as by many other reasons, so particularly by
this; that it is hard for us to prosper, and not
to lye snoring in our prosperities. For 'tis the

 of a prosperous man, (as our Sa|viour
iplies by way of Parable,) Soul take
thie ease, eat, drink, and be merry, for thou hast
much goods laid up for many years, (Luk. 12. 19.)
And therefore Agur's wisdome was never more
seen, than in his Prayer; Give me not Riches,
lest I be full, and deny thee, lest I say, who is the
Lord? (Prov. 30. 8, 9.) He knew by manifold
experience, thatJam. 4. 4. the friendship of the world is
perfect Enmity with God, and tends immediately
to practical, if not to speculative Atheism. He
did not therefore pray thus, Give me not Riches,
lest I be liberal to my Coffers; or, Give me not
Riches, lest I be bountiful to my Lusts; but (for
fear of a greater mischief) give me not Riches, lest I
be full, and deny thee, lest I say in my heart, who is
the Lord? that is, for fear I turn Atheist, and only
sacrifice to my flesh. So also Solomon, when he
was wisest, that is to say, when he repentd, and
of a very vicious Prince became a Preacher of
Repentance, concluded all under the Sun to be
but vanity of vanities; as having found by all
his trials (who sure had made more trials than
ever any man did,) that Peace and Plenty, with
their two Daughters, which are Idleness, and
Ease, are exceedingly great, though glorious
dangers.
But we need not go farther for an instance,
than to the People in my Text; whom though
God might have called a very wild Tam'risk,
he was pleased to stile his Beloved Vine. Lord!
how carefull was it manur'd, with Rain, and
Sun-shine? with Quailes, and Manna, and wa|ter
squeez'd out of a Rock? with the Dew of
Heaven, and with the Fatness of the Earth? and
yet when all was don that could be, they either
brought forth no Grapes; or if they did, they
were commonly wild ones. And when some|times
they yielded good, 'twas rather for fear
of cutting down, than for the fertility of their
soil, or for the manifold helps of their cultivation.
'Twas their frequently being prun'd, which
more especially made them fruitful. 'Tis true,
that God did not evermore punish, although
That people was still offending. For as he
own'd his being, as well their Father, as their
God; so he was pleas'd to make use of either
Method for their Amendment; I mean Incou|agement,
as well as Terror. God dealt with
Them, as with Us of this Nation. As he pre|scrib'd
them a Law, so he promis'd them a Ca|naan.
As he led them into Egypt, so he deliver'd
them out of Egypt. As he thundred from on a

Cloud, so he whisper'd out of a Bush. As he
pincht them with scarceness, so he feasted them
with plenty. And if the one was even to famin,
the other was even to satiety. But if we compare
them with our selves in another instance, by con|sidering
how ingrateful, and how unmalleable
they were; how repining under their Yoke, and
how mutinous in their Liberty; How (like some
amongst us in this very day of our Deliverance,)
they fell a hungring after the Garlick, and the
Flesh-pots of Egypt, quite forgetting the Bondage,
and tale of Brick; how they murmur'd at their
Moses, as if he were worse than a Pharaoh to
them; like some repining at their King, as if he
were worse than a Protector, (For That, ye
know, was the Euphemismus, whereby to ex|press
the most Bloody Tyrant;) How like so
many untam'd Heighfers, they were exceedingly
hard to be brought to hand; or like a Stable of
unbackt and unbridled Colts, how apt to kick at
their Rider who gave them Food: How God
Almighty was forc'd to discipline this stiff-neckt
Rabble, first of all by committing them to the
hardships of Egypt, and then by sending them to
wrestle with the difficulties of the Wilderness;
And how when all this was don, they were fain

to miss of their Canaan, whilst they were taking
it into possession; (for of so very great a multi|tude
to whom the Promise of it was made, no
more than aNum. 13. 30 Hab. 3. Caleb and a Ioshua had a Capa|city
to inherit it,) we must conclude they were
a People who deserv'd to be whipt with a Rod
of Iron; not so easily reducible by theDeut. c. 27.  28. 17, 18, 19. allure|ments
of Mount Gerizzim, as by the Curses
and the Threats to be thundred out from Mount
Ebal. So far were They from considering, what
they suffer'd a while agoe in the house of Bon|dage,
that they forgot this very Caveat, (as many
will do this very Sermon,) which was meant to
bring it to their Remembrance; When the Lord thy
God shall have brought thee into the Land, to give
thee great and goodly Cities, and houses full of all
good things, (c.) THEN beware that thou for|get
not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt.
Pass we now (if ye please) out of the Vine|yard,
into the Fold; from the People under the
Law, to Us who live under the Gospel; whom
though our Lord (out of goodness) was pleas'd
to call his Flock of Sheep, he might have stil'd
(out of Iustice) his Herd of Swine. For if He,
the great Shepherd, withhold his Crook, Lord
how quickly we go astray! And for here and

there one who will be led into the Fold, how
many are there that must be driven? like the
Prodigal in the Gospel, (who would not return
unto his Father until he was brought to feed on
Husks,) we seldom care for our Physician, until
the time that we are sick; and then as soon as
recover'd, are very glad, rather than thankful.
And this may point us out a Reason, why for
so many years together, (before this last,) our
Heavenly Father made use of his sharpest Me|thods
for our amendment; even placing us as Is|raelites
amongst Egyptians, like so many flowers
amongst thorns; of which the principal design,
was not to torture, but to defend us. To de|fend
us from the danger of carnal security, and
presumption; of pride, and wantonness; of for|getfulness,
and ingratitude. And since the way
to be thankful for our twelve months liberty, is
very soberly to reflect on our twelve years thral|dome,
Let's so transcribe a fair Copy of God's
Oeconomy on the Iews, as (with a grateful com|memoration,)
to consider it also in our selves.
We who flourish at this day like a goodly Tree,
not only planted by the River of God's Rich
Mercies, but surrounded (like our Land) with
an Ocean of them; we who stretch forth our

branches, not only for our own, but for foreign
birds also to build their nests; and whose spring
(blessed be God) doth promise at least to be as
lasting, as once our Autumn was like to prove;
we who flourish like a Myrtle, how like a Willow
did we droop? How was our verdure almost
exhausted? and our boughs, how deflowr'd? How
did we fall after the measure our sins had risen?
First God blasted our noblest Fruits; then he
spoyled us of our leaves; next he hew'd down
our branches. Nay, how strangely were we fed
on, by those very vermin which we did feed?
how greedily eaten up by all those Caterpillars,
and Locusts, which though ingender'd perhaps
by a Nothern wind, I am sure were bred out of
our Body? It is not easie to recapitulate how
many Mercies we now injoy, which our Iniqui|ties
had withheld for so many years; and how
many good things our sins had turn'd away from us.Jer. 5. 25.
And now if after our Restitution, we shall be
found to be a barren, unfruitful Tree, or fruitful
only in our Impieties; so as That which was in|tended
to make us better, shall render us worse
than we were before; what better usage can
we expect, than (after a little tract of years)
to be grubbed up by the Root? to have that sen|tence

sent out against us, which once went out
against the Fig-tree, Cut it down, why cumbreth
it the ground? Luk. 13. 7. Then give me leave
to repeat the Caveat; And in the meekness of a
Remembrancer,2 Pet. 1. 12. to put you in mind of these things,
although ye know them already, and are established
in the Truth. To put you in mind of being wary,
not so much for your selves, as for the people ye
represent, by contributing to a Law for the put|ting
of Laws in Execution; that they may not
intoxicate their Souls, with too many and great
draughts of their peace and plenty, for fear a Curse
shall break forth from our this daies Blessing, by
our unthankfully forgetting the God that gave it.
And let this suffice for the first importance of
the word Then, as 'tis a particle of connexion,
betwixt the Occasion, and the End of our present
meeting.
 SEcondly let us beware, amidst the pleasant
effects of our Deliverance, (such as liberty and
plenty, living in idleness, and at ease,) that we
forget not the Author of it; because of the dig|nity
of the Duty, rather Then, than before, or
after. For, as 'tis the mark of a most servile
and base-born spirit, to be the worse for the good

that is done unto us; so 'tis the noblest generosity,
to mend our lives with our conditions. The deep
and serious consideration of which great Truth,
as it should lift up our Hearts to a thankful use
of our prosperity, so it should also pluck them
down, to an humble sense of our obligations. For
That indeed is the proper season, wherein humi|lity
is a noble, because a diicult vertue. Humi|liation
in a Captive, is not a grace, but a necessity.
Nor hath Temperance any place in the house of
scarceness. These two must have a Theatre,
wherein to set themselves forth; cannot easily be
seen in a little Room. The proper time of see|ming
base in our own modest eyes, is when we
are matter of admiration in other mens. The time
to shew our selfdenial, (that is, our victory over
our selves,) is when we are brought out of an
Egypt, into a Land overflowing with Milk and
Hony; when our houses are full of all good things,
and our Tables stooping under the weight of
their sumptuous load. As our Afflictions a year
ago did make up God's opportunity, whereby to
shew us his Mercy, and loving kindness; so pro|sperity
ever since should make up ours, whereby
to shew him our meekness, and moderation. The
very Atheist will cry [O God!] in a fit of the

Strangury, or the Stone; but let us be Religious
in time of health. The profanest Mariner will
be devout in a tempest; but let us be so in a calm:
when the tide of our injoyments is at the full,
Then in a more especial manner let our ambition
ebb lowest: when we are mounted aloft on the
wings of Fame, Then let's retire into the Desert
of our most humble contemplations; and be so
meek amidst our eminencies, as to become most
eminent for that our meekness.
There are some of whom I may say, they
have been arm'd with infirmities against the De|vil:
some, whose Ignorance hath kept them
safe; some, whose coldness hath pass'd for con|tinence;
who have been flegmatick, and therefore
meek; or been kept under hatches, and therefore
lowly. But then it being their necessity, and not
their choise; rather their luckiness, than their
valour; they having kept their ground, not by
vertue of any conquest, but meerly because they
never fought;Aristot. Eth. Nichom. l. 1. , we do not
properly commend them, but call them happy;
they are but sancti Planetarii, (as a Father of
the Church made bold to word it;) All their
armour, if they have any, is but defensive; And
for their not being worsted, they may thank their

Bucklers, but not their Swords. Alas, it should
not be a wonder, to see simplicity in the village;
or to keep ones integrity, where 'tis an hard thing
to lose it.Quis abstinens dicetur, subla|to eo  quo ab|stinendum est? Quae Tempe|rantia gulae in fame? quae Ambitionis repudiatio in egestate; quae libidinis in|frenatio in Castratione? Tertul. ad|vers. Mar|cion. l. 1. C. 29 (We cannot call That man abstemious,
who only riseth with an appetite, because he hath
not enough to appease his hunger; nor is He to
be commended for not being drunk, who either
hath not sufficient to quench his thirst, or has an
able Brain to carry it, or else loves his purse a
great deal more than his Intemperance, and so is
beholding to his baseness for his sobriety. We
do not say that He is strong, who does not fall
when no man thrusts him. Nor that he is caute|lous,
and wary, who does not stumble when the
way is plain. No, 'tis He is the brave and the
gallant Christian, who can hold out his Castle
however besieged with temptations; who can be
chaste even in Italy, or mild in Scythia; who can
be a Spaniard, and yet not Proud; an English
man born, yet not Inconstant; who can be Loyal
amidst the Triumphs of the most prosperous Re|bellion;
and humbly thankful in his Advancement.
He is generously a Christian, who can keep his
Vow in Baptism, where 'tis Ridiculous not to
break it; who can at once live at Court, and for|sake
the world; who can be witty, yet not pro|phane;

strong, and mettlesome, yet not presump|tuous;
conspicuously handsom, and yet not vain;
a Mathematician, and a Chimist, yet not Athei|stical;
who will not be covetous in the midst of
hid Treasure; nor reconcilable to a vice, al|though
it offer him all advantages; who hath
all his five senses (those Avenues of the heart)
at once attaque't by Hell's Artillery, and yet is
able to prevent, or maintain a Breach; and
though they batter down the Walls, does not
suffer them (notwithstanding) to take the City.
This, I say, is the generous, because the self|denying
Christian. And agreeable to the figure,
by which our vitious affections are call'd our
members, (Colos. 3. 5.) we know in our Captain's
Interpretation, (Mat. 5. 29.) that to part with an
Avarice, is to pluck out an eye; and to cast away
a lust, is to cut off a hand. That, as in our Mi|litary
Oath, we Swore to fight under his Ban|ner;
so, as often as we part with a sinful passion,
we are reputed (in his accompt) to lose a Limb
in his Battle. Self-denial, it seems, being one
kind of Martyrdom; a dying daily for his sake,
who,Heb. 2. 10. as the Captain of our Salvation, was made
perfect through sufferings. 'Tis very true in this
sense, that the valiantest Souldier is the very best

Man. For no mau living is truly valiant, but he
who bravely dares be good, when the Times are
evil; and dares not be evil, when Times are
good; who stands the shock of temptations, not
only in the worst, but the best of daies; bravely
holding out his Fort against the batteries and as|saults,
not of poverty only, and pain, and other
effects of persecution; but against plenty also,
and pleasure, and other Fruits of a Restauration.
To sum up all in a word, and to carry on my
Metaphor the most I can to Their advantage,
who will not be carried to any duty, which is
not honourable, and brave: The Battles of Leu|ctra,
and Mantinea, were not half so full of glory
to that immortal Theban, Epaminondas, as the
two victories of a Christian over his .
That unruly Element of double fire, his anger,
and his lust, which his greatest felicities do most
enkindle. And this I hope may be enough for
the second importance of the word Then; as 'tis
a particle of connexion betwixt the business of
the Time, and the Time it self.
LAst of all let us beware, that the manifold 
injoyments of our Deliverance do not make
us forgetful of our Deliverer, because of the

greatness of the Danger of not performing the
Duty THEN, when it becomes incumbent
on us by many unspeakable Obligations. For let
a man's sin be never so great, in point of nature,
or degree, Ingratitude will give it an Aggravation.
And Ingratitude taking its stature from prece|dent
obligations, so as the sins we commit run
higher, or lower, as the graces we receive have
been more, or less: there are not any so very
capable of provoking Gods Fury, as the men
whom he hath pleas'd to take the most into his
favour. The reason of it may be taken from
the Athenians in Thucydides,Thucydides lib. 1. pag. 52. .
The least unkindness from a Friend is of
greater smart, than the hardest usage from an
Enemy. The very sight of Brutus more woun|ded
Caesar to the heart, than all the rest of his
Assassinates had don with Daggers. David in|deed
was somewhat troubled, that they who
hated him did whisper together against him, (Psal.
41. 7.) but 'twas his greatest cross of all, that
they who had eaten of his Bread should ingrate|fully
lift up the heel against him. For, in that he
said, He could have born it from anPsal. 55. 12. 13. enemy, he did
significantly imply, he could not bear it from a
friend. And as it was David's Cordolium, the

Type of Christ; so also was it Christ's, the Son of
David: who did not weep over other Cities,
from which he met with an ill Reception; but
he wept over Ierusalem, the Royal City, which he
had so much obliged, yet found so cruel. And
no doubt but our Saviour is so much more keen|ly
and nearly touch'd, that the most obliged Chri|stians
should break his Precepts, than that the
ignorant Iews should offer violence to his Person,
that we may rationally suppose him thus speak|ing
to us. Had the Iews or the Heathens spit
upon me by their impurities, and buffeted me by
their blasphemies, and stript me by their sacri|ledge,
and murder'd me by their rage; from such
as These I could have born it. But that ye should
war against me, and in the behalf of that base
Triumvirate, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
having sworn to me in Baptism that Ye would
fight under my Banner against all Three: That Ye
who have the priviledge to be call'd by my
Name, to be admitted into my House, to have
a place at my Table, to hear my Word, and to
partake of my Supper, to be miraculously
brought from the house of Bondage, injoying your
Kings at the first, and your National Councils as
at the beginning, and sitting your selves as 

many Princes under your Vines and Fig-trees, in|joying
the liberty of your persons, the propriety
of your estates, the important benefit of your
Laws, and the glory to be subjected by a most
honourable obedience; that such as Ye should de|spise
me, and cast my Law behind your back,
this is that I can least indure. My greatest fa|vour,
thus abus'd, will be converted into fury.
And indeed if we consider, that as God (on
the one side) accepteth according to what a man hath,2 Cor. 8. 12.
so withal (on the other side) of them who have
received much,Luk. 12. 48. much in proportion shall be requi|red;
we may with good Logick infer, and strong|ly
argue within our selves, that an honest Hea|then
is far better, than a Christian Knave. And
if an Heathen shall be extirpate for being barren,
much more the Christian, if He is fruitless, shall
be cast into the fire. A fruitless Tree, which
should by nature bear fruit, being fit to make
fewel, and nothing else. According to that of
our Blessed Saviour, (which is at once of uni|versal
and endless verity,)Mat. 7. 19. Every Tree which
bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire. And we who are grafted into the
Vine, must not only bear fruit, but such fruit
too, as Christ expects to rap from us. A

Bramble cannot be censur'd for not bearing
fruit; because it is in its nature to bring forth
none. It was therefore the Fig-tree, and not the
Bramble, on which our Saviour bestow'd a
Curse, Mat. 21. 19. Nor was it the Bramble, but
the Fig-tree, which he commanded to be cut down,
Luk. 13. 7. we must one day be call'd to a
dreadfulMat. 25. 10. reckoning, for all the uses we have
made of our this days Talent. God's injur'd
Iustice must needs be satisfied, (and sure much
more his injur'd Mercy,) either sooner, or later,
either in this, or another world. And if instead
of being thankful for all the blessings we now in|joy,
more especially for That which we this day
Celebrate, we shall but turn them into wanton|ness,
and grow the worse for the effects of so
great a Goodness; what can we reasonably ex|pect,
but that the powers of Hell should once
again be let loose upon us and ours? For since
to continue in our impieties, is the greatest dis|honouring
of God that can be; a filling up the
measure of our Iniquities, and so the vials of his
wrath; He must destroy us, se dfendendo, if for
nothing but to defend, and secure his Glory.
What then remains, but that we take up the
Words of the Royal Prophet, and together with

Them, his Resolution? We will take the Cup of
Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.
The Cup of Salvation, that is to say, the Cup
of Thanks, for that Salvation which he hath
wrought; as Iunius and Tremellius do rightly ex|plicate
the Trope. And mark the force of the
Copulative, by which these Duties are tyed to|gether.
Without the Cup of Salvation, (that is)
The Cup of Thanksgiving unto the Author of our
Salvation, all our calling upon his Name will be
quite in vain: For when we spread out our hands,
he will hide his eyes, and when we make many
Prayers he will not hear, (Isa. 1. 15.) And then
to thank him as he requires, is not only to en|tertain
him with Eucharistical words, with the
meer Calves of our lips, or a Doxologie from the
teeth outwards; but to imitate, and obey him, and
to love him after the rate of his favour towards
us. That we may not forfeit all our interest in
the temporal salvation we this day Celebrate, nor
bring a reproach on the Author of it, for saving a
people so ill deserving; we must add to our
verbal, our vital Prayers; nor only keep an
annual Day, but even an Age of Thanksgiving for
our Deliverance.
And then with a greater force of Reason,

we must beware that we forget not the Lord
our God, who, if he brought us not out of
the Land of Egypt, did yet deliver us this day
from the house of Bondage. We must not any
of us forget him, in whatever Represents, or Pre|sents
him to us. But Ye especially must not for|get
him presented to you in his Vicegerent; whom
the more ye do enable to be indeed what he is sti|led,
Defensor Fidei, by so much the greater will
be your Glory, and the better ye will provide for
your childrens safety. The more ye strengthen
That Hand, which under God is to brandish the
Sword of Iustice, (and ceaseth to be a Sword of
Iustice, when wrested out of That Hand by the
hand of Man,) the better protected your Peace
will be, from the ungainable Enemies of each
Extream. Nor can ye rationally hope to keep
your Peace any longer, than whilst the evil|ey'd
Factions want power to break it. Again
beware that ye forget not the Soveraign Author of
your Deliverance, wheresoever ye shall find him
presented to you in his Messengers; (and what I
mean by that word, I need not explain in so wise
an Audience;) by whose continuing unrestor'd
to their Ancient Priviledge, and Right, your
own Restauration remain's imperfect. Again be|ware

ye do not forget him presented to you in his
Members, who are not only your fellow members,
but were your old fellow sufferers in the very
same Cause; to which they ever have adhered
with the very same constancy; and for which
they have been Actors with the very same cou|rage;
and do rejoyce in the greatness at least of
Your Restauration, how much soever they are
mourners for the scandalous littleness of their
own. Prosperity (I have shew'd) is a dangerous
weapon, such as none but the merciful should
dare to use. And if ever there were a Parlia|ment,
in which both Mercy, and Iustice met,
this has the honour to be reputed so very exem|plary
for both, that they who stand in need of
both, are very confident to obtain them, now, or
never. A Parliament so prepar'd by the special
Providence of God, for the perpetuating of Peace
in our British world, that nothing less than the
presence of all perfections in a Prince, can make
us patiently think of its Dissolution.
Will ye hear the conclusion of the whole matter?Eccl. 12. 13.
I shall deliver it to you briefly, in this Petition.
That so far forth as ye regard the Righteous
Judge of all the world, and are season'd by Him
with the manifold gifts of the blessed Comforter,

with the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, with
the Spirit of counsel and ghostly strength,Isa. 11. 2. with the
Spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and lastly
with the Spirit of his holy fear, Ye will consider
what I have said by your own Authority, because
in an absolute obedience to your own Order, and
Command.
ANd now the God of Peace and Power, who
brought you forth on this Day from the
House of Bondage, both defend and direct you,
from this day forwards, in all your wayes. That
every one of your Persons, and the1 Thes. 5. 23. whole of
every one, both Body, Soul, and Spirit, may be
kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Iesus
Christ. To whom with the Father, in the unity of
the Spirit, who is abundantly able to keep us from
falling, and to raise us when we are down, and to
preserve us being raised, and to present us so
preserv'd, before the presence of his Glory
with exceeding Joy, to the only wise God our
Saviour, be ascribed by us, and by all the world,
Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this day for|wards
for evermore. Amen.
FINIS.








Mercy  Iudgment
MET TOGETHER.
A
SERMON
PREACHED
At the ABBY Church of WESTMINSTER
by the Order of the Right Honourable
the House of
LORDS
IN
PARLIAMENT Assembled,
Upon a Solemn Day of Humiliation occasioned
by the Great Rain in Iune and Iuly,
MD.DC.LXI.







AMOS 6. 12.
Therefore thus will I do unto thee,  Israel; And
because I will do thus unto thee, Prepare to meet
thy God  Israel.

. 1. THough 'tis the Language of the
Schoolmen [Quicquid dicitur de Deo
est Deus] That whatsoever is said of God is God,
and that all his Attributes are Himself; so that
agreeably to This, Infinitely must be Their sta|ture
as well as His, and Eternity their Duration,
yet since the Psalmist hath adventur'd to take
the Altitude of Two, I mean his Mercy, and his
Iustice; And since my Text hath each of these
in so remarkable a Degree, that they seem to
be here in their Apogaeo, I shall be bold to make
use of the Psalmist's Figure,Psal. 36. 5. and pronounce
God's Mercy so much higher than his Iustice, as
to say in the words of that Royal Prophet, That
his Mercy reacheth unto the Heavens, and his Iustice
[in comparison but] to the Clouds. Which is as

much as to say in Directer Termes, That
though neither can be the greater, where Both are
Infinite, yet he is much more delighted in the
exhibition of the one, than 'tis possible for him to
be in the execution of the other.
. 2. For though the Doom here denounced
is sad and direful, even the  of which
St. Iohn speaks in the Revelation,, Rev. 6. 8. (that is)
The Pale or Green Horse whose name is ,
bringing Death in the Front, and Damnation in the
Rear; Though the Lord of Hosts in this Chapter
does Bellum dicere, proclaim a War against his
Rebells, and that so grimly set off with a Train
of Iudgments, that War it self is one of the least,
And the Plague of Famine none of the greatest;
Yet if we look upon the Object of this Severity,
those Kine of Bashan, the Ingrateful Inhabitants
of Samaria, and if together with their Ingratitude,
we compare his Goodness and Longanimity, the
several steps of the Climax, by which his Anger
went up to so ull a Measure; and if we consider
that even Then, He made them an offer of
Reconcilement, desiring earnestly they would
meet him in order to Amity and Peace; we shall
not only be forc'd to say that the Mercy of
God doth rejoyce against Judgment, and that in

the midst of all his Judgments he thinks of Mercy;
but withPhilo . p. 23. 7. Philo the Jew, whom we may En|glish
out of the Psalmist, [,]
that as his Mercy is (in one sense) over
all his works, so it is (in another) over all his
Attributes.
. 3. To give you an Instance in the Text,
(as his Majesty's Proclamation hath given an
Instance in the Time,) behold a Sacred kind of
contention betwixt the Mercy and Justice of God
Almighty. In which however his Indignation
(with proportion to the sins of his people Israel)
doth seem to be in its Exaltation, so as his Ju|stice
even begin's to pronounce the Sentence;
Yet, by a strange Aposiopesis, his Mercy presently
interrupts it. He denounceth a Desolation, and
(at the very same Instant) desires a Treaty. No
sooner threatens that he will, that he compassio|nately
Exhorts that he may not punish. No
sooner is he enter'd upon his Ideo sic faciam,
Therefore thus will I do, but he immediately
comes off with a Compone Te in occursum, pre|pare
thy self for a friendly meeting. And he
enforceth his Advice with a Cogent Reason,
Because I will do thus unto thee. That is, Repent
whilst thou hast Time, that I may not do it.

Because I threaten and do intend to turn thy
Bewty into Ashes, thy Eden into a Wilderness,
thy oyle of Joy into Mourning, and thy Garment
of Praise into a Spirit of Heaviness; ThereforeJoel. 11. 12. Now turn unto me with all thy heart, and with
Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning,
that I may alter my purpose,1 Sam. 15. 29. and Repent of the
things which I have threatned. Which although
at first hearing doth seem a Paradox, a kind of
, a Truth appearing in the disguise of a
Contradiction; yet it deserves to be the Para|phrase,
and the Exegesis of the Text,
Therefore thus will I do unto thee,  Israel;
And because I will do thus unto Thee, pre|pare
to meet thy God  Israel.
. 4. In which words being consider'd (not
so much in their literal, as) in their rational Im|portance,
there are two things express'd, and two
imply'd. We have first a Command, with a Com|mination;
(Both sufficiently express'd;) And of
the later we have imply'd, at once the Merito|rious,
and Final Cause. But in as much as the
first does carry the last along with it. They all
are easily comprised in this Tricotomie.
First a Terrible Commination of no less than
utter Ruin to the People of God. Sic faciam tibi
 Israel, Thus and thus will I do.
Next the reasonable Ground of this Commina|tion,
which is their living unreform'd under the
Essaies and Methods of lesser Judgments. And
this I cannot but Collect from the Illative
Therefore, as it looks back upon the Causal, in
the words immediately going before. For Be|cause
Ye have not return'd unto me saith the Lord,
Idea sic faciam, Therefore thus will I do.
Thirdly the End, or the final Cause, which is
not to Execute the Judgment, but to avert it.
For so I gather from the Command, as That re|lates
to the Commination. Because I will do thus
unto thee, Praepara Te in occursum, prepare to meet
thy God  Israel.
These Particulars thus premis'd, will very
naturally afford us four Doctrinal Propositions.
First, That the Terrors of the Almighty do
make up one of his choicest Methods, whereby to
bring Sinners to true Repentance.
Next that his sharper sort of Iudgments is a
fit Remedy for Those, upon whom his milder
Chastisements have been unhappily ineffectual.
And yet
Thirdly, So far is God from delighting in
his Inflictions, or from willingly grieving the Chil|dren
of men, that the first and chiefest End both
of all his Menaces, and his stripes, is to Execute
Destruction not on the sinner, but on the sin;
not to slay, but reduce the Fugitive. And
therefore
Fourthly, God antecedently desiring the
timely Repentance of a Sinner, and only by way
of Consecution, The final Destruction of the Im|penitent,
'Tis plain His Menaces are fulfilled by
their never coming to pass. Most fully satisfied
and accomplish'd, not when they Confound,
but Convert a Sinner. My Reason is, because
the End of the Command is to anticipate the
Effect of the Commination. Because I will do
thus unto thee, in case thou dost proudly neg|lect
to meet me; meet me therefore in the way,
to the end that I may not do thus unto thee.
Of these several Propositions, the two for|mer
shew us Gods Justice, and his Mercy shines
in the two later. All concurring to the ends of
our present meeting; The first to deter us from
what is Evil, The last to perswade us to what
is Good. The former respecting our late Plague
of Rain; the later our blessing of fairer weather.

Both conducing to our Design of Crying louder
by our Repentance, than we have don by our Im|peties;
That by our timely Reformation we
may retrive the heavy Judgments, which our
clamorous Sins have been lureing down.
 . 1. To begin with the First of the Pro|positions,
is not more natural to the Text, than
it is serviceable and fit to lay the Foundation of
the Sermon. For of the many strong Affecti|ons
which are seated in the Appetite and Heart
of Man, though none is certainly more Infamous,
yet (being rationally determin'd) there is not
any more Useful than that of Fear. It is in|deed
the most unhandsome, (as the World now
goes,) but being well fix'd, the most wholesome
passion; the most ungentlemanly perhaps, but
not the most unchristian Quality; And though
the worst for Execution, yet the best for Advise.
It was a very good saying, though of a very ill
man, (and meant I suppose to as ill a purpose,)
Primus in Orbe Deos fecit Timor. That had
there been less Fear, there had been also less
Religion in many Places of the World. For as
Fear was the first Engine which brought in Re|ligion
amongst the Heathens; so after the mea|sure

that It departed, Irreligion and Atheism
fill'd up its Room. This was That that taught
the Gentiles, first to make their own Gods, and
then to Worship them. They were Religious
(poor Souls!) in their own defense, (if we may
call Superstition by such a Name,) not out of
gratitude to their Deities, for that they had don
them any Good, but only out of a Fear that they
would otherwise do them Harm. Hence the
Heathen Theologists, (I mean their Poets, and
their Philosophers,) finding the People more apt
to be driven, than led, and to have easier Im|pressions
of Fear, than Hope, thought it conve|nient
to Catechize them, more in the Torments
of their Erebus, than in the Pleasures of their
Elizium. They told them of Minos, and Rada|manthus,
as the grim Judges of Offenders; of
Haggs, and Furies, as Executioners of the Sen|tence;
of such as Ixion, and Prometheus, as sad
Examples of the Condemn'd. All which (saith
Diodorus) were but , so many Bugs,
or Mormo's, to fright the People into Morality.
. 2. So great an Influence had Fear on the
False Religions of the World. And to disco|ver
as great an Influx which it had also upon the
True, Let me lead you forth a little out of the

Forrest into the Garden, wherein the very first
Precept was fens't with Terror. It was not said
unto the Protoplast, Thou shalt surely live, if
thou eatest not; But (as a method of greater
force,) In the day that thou eatest, thou shalt surely
dye. If we look into the Bible, from the Be|ginning
to the End, This we shall find to have
been the Method of each Person in the Trinity.
First of all it was the Method of God the Father,
when he deliver'd his Law from a Burning
Mountain,Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. even with Thundering and Lightning,
with Blackness and Darkness, with smoke and
Tempest, with the sound of a Trumpet, and the
voice of words, which voice they that heard, intrea|ted
that they might not hear it, and so terrible was
the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake. This again was the Method of God the
Son, who said he came not to destroy, but fulfil
the Law; his word is , to fill it up. He
did endeavour to Preach his Hearers into the
High-way of Heaven, even by setting before
them the pains of Hell. He threatn'd them
with Weeping, and Gnashing of Teeth; with a
Worm that dyeth not, and with a Fire that is not
quenched. We hear him saying, It is Impossible,
(that is to say, exceeding Hard,) for a Rich man

enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. He saith the
way to it is streight, and the Gate Narrow, and
the Travellers that find it extreamly Few. He
bids us strive to enter in; and never leave stri|ving,
until we Conquer. Nay this was the Me|thod
of the Comforter, even of God the holy Ghost;
who taught St. Paul to constrain his Scholars,
by shewing the Terrors of the Lord.2 Cor. 5. 11. Nay to de|liver
them up to Satan for the Destruction of the
Flesh,1 Cor. 5. 5. that their Spirits might be saved in the Day
of the Lord Iesus.
. 3. And indeed if we consider, How many
poor Souls have been debauch'd in these Times,
by the false Apprehensions of Christian Liberty,
and Conscience, of Faith without Love, Justification
without Honesty, and Repentance of Sins with|out
Amendment; so as the stales of those Here|sies
which had been brew'd in ancient Times,
are freshly broach'd in our Dayes, and given
for Drink to the giddy People; we cannot but
wish that all our Clergy would now become
Boanerges, or Sons of Thunder; at least by shew|ing
the strict necessity of Impartial obedience unto
the Gospel; that is to say, unto the Statutes or
Laws of Christ; A living in Holiness, and Righ|teousness;
in Piety, and Probity; in Godliness,

and Honesty; in the Duties of the First, and the
Second Table; without the which (saith the Au|thor
of the Epistle to the Hebrews) no man living
shall see the Lord.Heb. 12. 14.
. 4. This (we see) is so peculiar to that
Amazing Lover of Souls, that he does not only
set Hell before us, and sad Examples too behind,
but Temporal Crosses on either side. And how|ever
surrounded thus with Terrors, we find them
All little enough. For first it being not the great|ness,
but the presentness of Danger which most
affrights us; He does not threaten his Rod only,
but often layes it upon our Backs. And then
because (like common Mariners) we would not
Pray, though in a Tempest, were it impossible
to be drown'd, or to suffer Shipwrack; He does
not Punish only at present, and for a Time; But
also threatens he will do it to all Eternity. For
if after this Life is swallow'd up of Immortality,
He should only have an Heaven for Loyal Sub|jects,
and never a Hell for his Rebellious ones;
men would be readier to say, at the last period
of their lives, Let us eat and drink, for to mor|row
we dye, Than Let us fast and pray, for to
morrow we shall be happy.
. 5. If any iduciary shall say, That

Terrors work not a filial, but servile Fear; and
rather cause an hypocriticall, than Godly sor|row;
the Answer to it is very Easy, That as
Gods severity speaks his Power, and That his
Excellence; so many times a servile Fear begets
a Fear of Admiration; And Admiration is apt
to end in a Fear of Reverence; and Reverence is
a Compound, which has Love, as well as Fear,
for a chief Ingredient.
. 6. And if again it shall be objected, that
John and James are but uncomfortable Preachers,
enough to blast a mans Faith, and Thunderstrike
him into Despair; I Answer to it by these de|grees.
First that for here and there one who
possibly falls into Despair, Thousands rise to
Presumption, and Millions lye down in carnal
Security. Again, The Sin of Despair is not so
commonly understood, as it is dangerously mista|ken,
and that by some who Domineer in our
open Pulpits. There is a kind of Despair, which
is only the effect of a broken heart, and the ma|nifest
sign of a tender Conscience. The mark of
such a , as is , a Repentance never
to be repented. There have been Persons in the
world, who have been so very passionately in
Love with God, and so amorous of his Purity,

that they have hated themselves extreamly, be|cause
they have suspected they have not lov'd
him; And have been easily betray'd into such
suspicion, by their sense of some things which
are unavoidable, even the natural Infirmities of
Flesh and Blood. Every small Mote in anothers
Eye hath seem'd a Beam in their own. They
have look'd upon their Sins through a kind of
Microscope, (for such is the Glass of an holy
Jealousie,) which hath made a little Ignorance to
look as bigg as an Infidelity; an human Frailty to
seem as monstrous, as an Apostacy from Grace.
Thence come those Syncopes of Spirit, by
which they are made to cry out, with Christ
Himself upon the Cross, (although 'tis quite in
another sense,) My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me? An evident Argument, and sign,
not that God hath forsaken Them, but rather that
They have forsaken Sin. So when Peter cry'd
out (and even to that very Saviour on whom he
depended for his Salvation,) Depart from me
Lord, for I am a sinful man,] He drew Christ
to him, by his intreating him to Depart; The
more a Saint in Christs Eyes, for being a Sinner
in his own. As there are many silly Shepherds,
who mistake a Repenting for a Despairing Sheep;

so there is oftentimes an Innocent, but silly sheep,
which mistakes his own Weakness for want of
Faith. And in as much as he does not at all
Presume, is very apt to apprehend he does not
sufficiently Believe; whereas his seemingness
of Despair is a real Argument of his Faith, whilst
attended with an hatred of former sins, and fear
of falling into the like. For whilst he thinks he
has not Faith, he does at least desire to have it.
And whilst he desires, 'tis plain he loves it. And
because of just nothing there can be no love at
all, He that loves must needs believe, that the
object of his Love has a real Being. And if he
desires what he wants, and truly loves what he
desires, and by consequence believes what he
truly loves; Then sure the sequel is unavoid|able,
That this falsifying Despair is an excellent
good mark of a True Believer. And to This alone
it is I would fain drive Others, because to This
I would fain be driven. But now the Murder|ing
Despair is another Thing, and often issues
from the Preaching of unconditional Reprobation;
when whosoever thinks himself of the Hopeless
Number, is apt to hold it so vain a Thing to
catch at an Interest in Heaven, that he resolves
to enjoy his good Things upon the Earth. And

as nothing is so daring as a Desperate Coward,
when he finds no way to obtain his safety by his
escape, and thence is made by his Despair a most
insufferable fighter, (from whence ariseth the
common saying, That when an Enemy is flying,
'tis good to make him a Golden Bridge) so there
is nothing more jovial (at least by Intervals and
fits,) than the Desperate Sinner which now I
speak off; whose Famous Character we meet
with in the second Chapter of Wisdom; where the
Despairer of Immortality in an extreamly better
world, does make an hearty resolution of living
merrily in This. This is that desperate Despair
which is as mischievous as Presumption, in that
it placeth the sinner beyond Repentance. And
so the objection notwithstanding, my Doctrine
seems to stand firm, and unremoveable, [That
the Terrors of the Almighty do make up one of
his choicest Methods for the bringing of Sinners
to true Repentance.]
. 7. Having briefly thus insisted upon the
proof of the Doctrine, methinks our manifold
Experience should save me the Labour of Ap|plication,
whether we fall under a publick, or a
private consideration. We must confess, as to
the publick, That our sins have been as clamo|rous

as those of Israel; and God hath us'd the
same Method for our Amendment. We have
many years felt the effects of War; and now
are exercised afresh with the Fear of Scarceness.
The very Perfection of our Spring hath as it
were been swallow'd up by a Second Winter.
The late Abuses of our Plenty have been the
Heralds of a Dearth; And the Deluge of our
Impieties hath been so rebuked by that of Waters,
That God does seem to have alter'd the course
of Nature, as 'twere to try if we will alter our
course of Sin. 'Tis true the Season began to
mend, upon its very first sense of our Humiliation.
And God hath only said to Us, as to the People
in my Text, Ideo sic faciam, Therefore thus will
I do. All is hetherto but a Threat; and That sus|pended
with a Condition.Gen. 9. 13. Through the Bowe in
the Cloud which was set as a sign betwixt God
and Us, he is pleas'd to shoot comfort throughout
our dwellings. But then the ground of its con|tinuance
doth stand conditionally in This, That
we do all at this Instant Prepare to meet Him.
. 8. As to our private Consideration, perhaps
there is hardly any man here, whom God hath
not terrefied one way or other, and sent his Rod for
an Ambassador to speak his Will. As either by the

loss of a Darling Child, or of a most endeared
Wife, or else by some pungent and grievous sick|ness,
or by some eminent miscarriage in point
of Honour, or Estate; or if by none of all These,
yet at least he has been threatned, by the woful
Examples of other men. (Nam tua Res agitur,
Paries cum proximus ardet.) The Rod that is bru|shing
but in the Aire, may (we cannot tell how
soon) be sharply beating upon our shoulders.
The very weather which now is better, may
soon be worse than it was before. And though
the Immoderation of Rain is pass'd, yet the conse|quences
of it are still remaining; And the Re|membrance
of the Threat should be present with
us. Nay since 'tis clear from that difficult, but
useful Text, Mark 9. 49. []
That we must every one be Season'd
with Salt, or Fire; That our putrid Affections
must be eaten out here, or else our Persons de|stroy'd
hereafter; (there being no medium be|twixt
the one and the other;) blessed be He
who shall preserve us in Tears of Brine, that he
may not consume us in Fire of Brimstone.Rev. 21. 8. We
ought to smile on those stripes, which are meant
to drive us to Immortality.
. 9. Let us not think our selves too wise,

to be thus Instructed; or too old, to be thus
Educated; or too great to be thus Corrected.
Perhaps the Robbins of our Schools, are in the
School of Jesus Christ no more than humble
ABC darians; They that are Aged enough by
Nature, may have hardly yet attain'd to be Babes
in Grace; And they who brandish the Sword of
Justice, are themselves under God's Lash. And
since we cannot ever enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, unless we receive it as little Children; Let
us therefore, as little Children, down on our
Knees before our Father. Let us confess that
we have sin'd; Let us ask him Forgiveness, and
promise never to do the like. He will not cast
away his Rod, until he see's that we have Kiss'd
it; And that we can say with the Prophet Da|vid,
It is good for us to have been afflicted. For
whom his Menaces do not better, they acciden|tally
make worse; And if we harden our Hearts,
we do but weighten his Hand. The shewing of
which will be the work of my Second Doctri|nal
Proposition.
[That God's Severer sort of Iudgments is a
fit Remedy for Those, whom his milder Chastise|ments
will do no good on.]
. 1. I cannot shew you this better, than by
Example; nor by a better Example, than what
this Chapter does here afford us. For when the
Kine of Bashan on the Mountains of Samaria,
(the Schismatical Tribes of the People Israel,
whom God did therefore stigmatize with so
disgraceful a Periphrasis,) had oppress'd the
poor, and crush'd the needy, (ver. 1.) when
they had greatly transgress'd at Bethel, and mul|tiplied
Transgressions at Gilgal, (ver. 4.) God
was pleas'd to proceed against them by several
steps and degrees of his Indignation; that if a
lesser corrosive would not cure them, a sharper
might. For first he sent them cleanness of Teeth,
as his Embassadour or Herald to fetch them in.
There was a want of Bread in all their places,
which was the first part of Famine; and yet
for all this they would not return unto the Lord,
(ver. 6.) Next he Plagued them with a Drowth,
that second part of Famine; Their Sins had
made the Heavens Brass, and the Earth Iron.
So that two or three Cities were fain to wander
into one, and all to drink a little water. But yet
for all this they would not Return unto the Lord,
(ver. 8.) After this he proceeded to pour out a
Curse upon all their fruits; The fruits of their

Gardens, and of their Vineyards, which were sud|dainly
blasted, and devour'd, partly by the Mil|dew,
and partly by the Palmer-worm. And this
(we know) was a third part of Famin; But
notwithstanding all this, They would not return
unto the Lord, (ver. 9.) Hereupon his Indignation
waxt hot against them; For seeing the Gastly
Pale Horse had been so utterly unsuccesful, He
sent the Red Horse amongst them, and that in
both parts of the dreadful Hieroglyphick; I mean
the War, and the Pestilence. And yet for all this,
They would not return unto the Lord, (ver. 10.) In
the Fifth place therefore, when neither any of
these Judgments, nor altogether, could do the
work; what remained but that the Earth
should open her Mouth, and swallow them up? or
that a Fire sent from Heaven should send them
hastily into Hell? And even of This they had a
Tast, (as appears by the verse before my Text,)
God overthrowing some of them, as he had Sodom
and Gomorrah; and the Rest were but respited,
after the manner of a Fire-brand pluckt out of
the Burning; And yet in despight of all This,
They would not return unto the Lord, (ver. 11.)
Sixtly and lastly, when so many Prelusorie
Iudgments were in effect cast away on a stubborn

People; when all those Emisaries and Heraulds
were sent in vain; when Death it self could not
fright them, however usher'd and waited on with
so grim and formidable a Train; what could
in reason be expected but such an Absolute
, such a complete Devastation of Them, and
Theirs, as should not leave so much as a Praeco,
(no not so much as a ) to carry the Ti|dings
of their Ruin to late Posterity? And even
This is also Threatned in the words of my Text,
Ideo Tibi sic faciam, Therefore thus will I do unto
thee  Israel.
. 2. And as Thus unto Israel, so why not
Thus unto England too, if we continue (as they
did) to corrupt our selves with his Goodness to
us? If we make no better Use of our Peace and
Plenty, and the other effects of a Restauration,
than to turn our Peace into Wantonness, and our
Plenty into Luxury, our Liberty into Licentious|ness,
and our Strength into Presumption, our
Power into Oppression, and our Dignities into
Pride? Nay in as much as the Dimensions of
our Ingratitude, like the Highth and Depth of our
Obligations, are far beyond those of the People
Israel; God will not only do Thus unto us, but
more to Us, than unto Israel, unless we timely

prepare to meet him, and present him with the
Fruits of sincere Repentance; which, we have
nothing to excuse us (when God hath don so
much to us to make us fruitful,) if we do not
bring forth in the greatest plenty. 'Tis true, we
have often gon out to meet him; But not with
Prayers, and Tears, the only Armour of a Chri|stian,
whereby to hold out against Omnipotence,
and the only Weapons to overcome it. We have
rather gon out to meet him, as we commonly
meet a Just Enemy; Not to ask him forgiveness,
but give him Battle. We have gon out to meet
Christ, not like Them on Palm Sunday, who
ran before him into Ierusalem, with Doxologies
and Hosannahs to the Son of David; But rather
like his first Crucifyers, with Swords and Staves
to apprehend him. And how improsperous so|ever
we have hitherto been in our Encounters;
Though God hath many years knockt us against
each other, and so oppos'd us unto our selves, as
that we really became no less his Host, than his
Enemies; yet like Marcellus in the Historian,
Certamen ferociter instauramus, we are as sturdy a
sort of Sinners, (many of us,) as if we never yet
had smarted for having sin'd. It was Phormio's
saying in Thucydides, That conquer'd men are

commonly Crest-fallen,. Thucyd. lib. 2. p. 161. and do remit of their cou|rage
against a second Encounter, as soon as they
have fatally incur'd the first. And shall we on
the contrary be such a besotted kind of Warriars,
as like the Indians in Valerius, (even in spight of
Pythagoras his Golden Symbol,) to dare Encoun|ter
with Fire it self? (For to those that fight
with him, we know our God is a Consuming fire,
Heb. 12. 29.) And since there is hardly any
Affliction, (no not our late immoderate Rain)
but is a spark of Gods wrath;Job 5. 6, 7. Ch. XLI. ver. 29. Let us not by our
Impenitence presume to heighten it into a Flame.
But
. 3. Let it rather be our wisdom, from this
day forewards, Venienti occurrere (non jam morbo
quidem, sed) Medico. Since our Indeavours will
come too late for the prevention of the Disease,
Let us go meet our Physician, and stay the sharp|ness
of the means he is preparing for our Recovery.
We know not what Judgments may yet be ho|vering
over our Heads; and perhaps our very
Harvest may be as Terrible as our Spring. God
will not give over the Cure, till the Disease is
Desperate. For though his lesser sort of Punish|ments
did scarce incline the Heart of Pharaoh,
his last orecame it; (so far at least as to compel

him to let the People go free.) And if his Launce
is unsuccesful, we shall be so much the surer to
feel his Caustick. But yet behold the Sun of
Righteousness breaking forth in this place like
the Sun of Nature. There is not wanting mat|ter
of comfort, in the midst of those Terrors which
have besieg'd us; Because the sharpest Judgments
here are but the Regia Medicamenta, or Magiste|rials
of our Physician; which, though by accident
they may kill, are yet intended only to cure us.
And this does lead me to consider the Third
Particular in the Division,
 That God is far from delighting in his Inflictions;
He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Chil|dren
of men. For the first and chiefest end both of
his Menaces and his stripes, is not to destroy the
sinner, but the sin; not to slay, but to reduce the
Fugitive.
. 1. Amongst the Reasons which may be
render'd to prove the Truth of this Doctrine,
This may certainly pass for one, That God is
never so much in Wrath, as when he will not
vouchsafe to strike. I remember Spartianus ob|serves
of Geta, (much what Tacitus of Tiberius)
Quod iis praecipue blandiretur quos ad Necem desti|nabat.

He made so much of those persons whom
he design'd for slaughter, That his Embraces and
his best looks became more dreadful than all his
Frowns. And though 'twere Impiety but to
imagine, (what some notwithstanding have dar'd
to Preach,) that God can absolutely will the
eternal Ruin of his Creatures; much less that
He can will it, when He hath sworn he wills it
Not; much less yet that he can contrive it, by
taking care for an Impenitence to bring it orderly
about;Luk. 16. 25. Yet considering how rarely 'tis given to
one and the same man, To sit with Dives at his
Table, and to lye with Lazarus in Abraham's
Bosome; To have his Good Things here, and
hereafter too; I cannot but say of many persons
whom the World calls happy, that They who
have most of God's Bounty, may yet have least
of his Love and Favour. For seeing it is True
(what the Scripture saith) That whom God
loveth he chasteneth,Heb. 12. 6. 7, 8. and Act. 14. 22. and scourgeth every son whom
he receiveth; we may with good Logick infer,
That whom he chasteneth not, he doth not love; nor
receiveth any Son whom he doth not scourge. 'Twas
very shrewdly said by Solon,Herodot. lib. 1. pag. 14. (if we believe He|rodotus,)
, That
the Minions of the Earth are but theProv. 1. sport of

Heaven. God often lends them a kind of hap|piness,
only to shew them he does but lend it.
At once does prosper their Branches, and Curse
their Root; turns them loose into Plenty, as fit
to be fatted for the Shambles.
. 2. But not to spend time in this Inquiry,
How hardly God's Friends can be the Favorites
of the World, or vice versa; And how by
Consequence to be pitied those Creatures are,
whom God Almighty in his Wrath permits to
wallow in superfluity; Methinks the Difference
may be This, betwixt a good man afflicted, and
an ill man prosperous, that the first does seem
to be clearly under God's Cure, and the second
to be beyond it; That indeed a Tormented, but
This a desperate Patient.
. 3. It is another way of proving the Infi|nite
Goodness of God's severity, in his willing|ness
to Cure whom he vouchsafes to Wound,
That he is pleased still to threaten, before he
strikes; whensoever he is an Enemy, he is de|claredly
such in his written Word. He is ,
(as Aristotle calls a Generous Enemy,Aristot. Eth. lib. 4. cap. 8.)
And though his Love towards his Children may
be sometimes conceal'd, yet his Anger at their
Rebellions is still profest; and profest even to

Them, whom he does punish with Impunity on
this side Hell. Not like Brutus and Cassius, those
reserv'd Enemies of Caesar, who Plotted to
Murder him in secret; But like Pompey, and
Cato, those Brave Antagonists, who bid him De|fiance
in the Field. God does tell us when He
will Arm himself, that we may stand upon our
Guard by sincere Repentance; and he does shew
us where he will strike, that we may look unto
our Posture. He Brandishes his Rod, that he
may not scourge us; and hangs his Sword over
our Eyes, that it may not fall upon our heads.
There is a Story of Diogenes, That being ask'd
what he would take to receive a Blow upon his
Head, his Answer was, He would take an Hel|met.
Now such is the Mercy of our God, that
he gives us an Helmet, before he strikes; And
when at last our Provocations have forc'd his
Sword out of his Hand, he is willinger to
drop it, than throw it down. He does not pour
out the Vials of his Displeasure all at once; but
first he dispatches his lesser punishments; and
those not as Harbingers, to prepare the way for
greater, but rather as Heralds to prevent them.
And when those greater too do follow, (I mean
the Punishments inflicted in this present life,)

they are oftner , than , (as Philoso|phers
distinguish,) rather as motives to our
Amendment, than as Acts of his Revenge. Thus
we find it to have been in the case of Zacharie,Luk. 1. 19. 20.
whose miraculous Iudgment was a Token of his
Pardon, as well as Sin. God indeed struck him
Dumb, but it was that ever after he might speak
so much the better, and the Privation of his Lan|guage
was to habituate his Faith. Nay I dare be
bold to say, (what yet I cannot without Asto|nishment
at the wisdom and goodness of our
Creator,, Ploti|nus Ennead. 2. lib. 3. pag. 48.) that Damnation it self was at first
meant to save us, in as much as it is evident that
God made Hell, as well for the best as the worst
of men; as well for the Terror of the former,
as for the Torment of the later; as well to fright
all men from coming thither, as to punish the
Impiety of bold and desperate Intruders. Much
like the merciful severity of former Magistrates
here in England, who set up Pillaries and Gal|lowses
in publick places of the Realm, as well
to keep men from stealing, as to hang up Thieves
and Robbers; as well to prevent, as to punish
wickedness. And what a fathomless Abysse of
God's compassion must we esteem it, to set his
Bridewell before our eyes, as some say Phalaris

did his Bull, meerly to compel us to take his
Favours? How indulgent a Father must He be
thought, who when his Prodigal Children are
running from him,. Barnab. in Epist. p. 249 Edit. Voss. sets a Lyon in their way, to
fright them back into his Embraces? Nay so a|stonishing
is the Depth of the Riches of his Good|ness,
that He converts our very Tempter into an
Instrument of our Good. For when the Devil
was such a Dunce, as to accelerate and further
the Death of Christ, who was to dye the Propiti|ation
for all our sins, and only by Dying to con|quer
Hell, he spent his Malice indeed upon our
Saviour, but really the mischief was all his
Own. So that considering how the Death of our
blessed Saviour was at once a sure passage both
to His, and Our Glory, It follows that when
Iudas did kiss his Master, he only delivered up
Christ, but betray'd the Devil. Thus we find
St. Paul himself making very good use of the
Devil's Discipline. For as one while we have
him delivering others up to Satan, and that to
this wholesome end,1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. 1 Tim. 1. 20. That they may learn not to
Blaspheme; so another while we meet him under
the buffeting of Satan in his own person also, and
that for this important end, That he may learn
not to be haughty,2 Cor. 12. 7. or highly minded. And so the

Devil, in that case, was made Instrumental to his
Salvation.
. 4. Thus we have the words verified which
were written to the Christians who dwelt at
Rome; to wit, That all things work together for
good,Rom. 8. 28. that is, to them that love God, to them that
are called according to his purpose. All that be|falls
us by God's Appointment, and the most
things that happen by God's Permission, are
strangely turn'd to our Advantage, though we
are many times so stupid, as not to be able to
apprehend it. First the evils of affliction are uni|versally
made to better us; And next, by the
Wisdom of God's Disposal, the evil of sin, in
other men, is many times of great use to secure
our Innocence. Nor have we only heard the ob|liging
Method of God's Proceedings, but I
think I may say we have felt it too. How he
first of all threatens, that he may not inflict; and
how he afterwards inflicts, that he may not
consume. How he mercifully indeavours to whip
the Sinner into a Saint; destroying the Beast in
us, to save the Man. How his Wisdom does
sometimes suffer us to be intangl'd with Temp|tations,
that so his Goodness may deliver us, and
help us out; And that we may be able to say

with David,Psal. 119. 75. Thou Lord of very faithfulness hast
caused us to be troubled. That many times his se|verities
are Mercies to us, will be intelligible to
any, who shall but consult their own experience.
I mean the experience of their lesser, in preven|tion
of greater Punishments. As the loss of some
Chattels, to save a Limb; or the loss of a Limb, to
preserve the whole Body; or the loss of that
Body, to save the Soul. Now if God shall de|prive
us of one or two Parts, of all we Have, or
of all we Are, when All of Both are confiscate for
our Treasons committed against his Majesty;
shall we not think our selves bound to be glad,
and thankful, that even so he hath been pleas'd
to reprieve the rest? Admit a Friend should be
falling from off a Tower,Quae per insu|avitatem me|detur, emo|lumento cura|tionis offen|sam sui excu|sant. Tertul. de Poenit. cap. 10. and we in the snatching
of him back, should put his Arme out of joynt;
would he impute his Deliverance to our unkind|ness,
because it cost him some pain in the pur|chase
of it? And if in our violent Career of Sin,
when we are rushing as it were headlong into the
bottomless Pit of Hell, God is pleas'd to pull
us back with a stronger violence, (be it by Poverty,
or Disgrace, by the Plague of Pestilence, or of
Famine, be it by any other purgent or dreadful
means,) yet let us thankfully consider, 'tis but

to snatch us from a Precipice. And again let us
consider, (with as much thankfulness unto God
as our hearts can hold,) That if Amendment
is the End of his Threats and Terrors, Then
that which frustrates his Threats, must needs
fulfil them. Which I proceed to shew at large
in my last Doctrinal Proposition.
That God desiring antecedently the timely Re|pentance
of a Sinner,Qui Poenam per judicium destinavit, Idem  ve|niam per poe|nitentiam spospondit. and only by way of conse|cution,
the final destruction of the Impenitent;
'tis plain his Menaces are fulfilled by their never
coming to pass; most fully satisfied and accom|plish'd,Tertul. de poenit. c. 4.
not when they confound, but convert a
sinner.
. 1. For the better Elucidation of what may
seem a dark Point, and for the prevention of such
objections as may be made by those men, who
are either so unconsidering as not to think of Gods
Methods, or so unlearned as not to know them,
or so prophane as to murmur and quarrel at them;
we shall do well to take notice of those two sorts
of Menaces, which do occur to us in Scripture
under two several Notions. Some we find under
God's Oath, and others only under his Word.
The first of which are positive, the second sup|positive.

The former are purposed as Revenges,
but the later only as Remedies. The Menaces
under his Oath he does evermore execute; where|as
Those under his Word only He does many
times Retract.
. 2. But now it being not consistent with
the simplicity of the Almighty, that either his
Oath or his Retractation should differ really from
his Will, the Eighth Council of Toledo will give
us the Ground of this Distinction. Iurare Dei
est,Concil. Tolet. 8. cap. 2.  seipso ordinata nullatenus convellere; Poeni|tere
vero, eadem ordinata, cum voluerit, immutare.
When God will Execute his Sentence, he is
then said to Swear; And when he will alter, or
remit it, he is said to Repent.Poenitentia Dei nihil aliud est, qua~ simplex con|versio prioris sententiae. God's Repentance
(saith Tertullian) is nothing else, but a simple Re|suming
his former Purpose.Tertul. con|tra Marc. lib. 1. c. 24. And his Oath (saith
learned Philo) is nothing else but his Word exerting
it self into Effect. So that the Promises and the
Threats which are deliver'd under his Oath, Philo Iud. Allegor. lib. 2. pag. 75. are
That indeed which was but said of the now An|tiquated
Laws of the Medes and Persians; Irre|versible,
and peremptorie, and incapable of a
Repeal. I shall make them both plain by a few
Scriptural Examples. And
. 3. First of the Promises under his Oath,

the Prophet David gives us an Instance in the
89 Psalm, at the 34 verse, where first he posi|tively
pronounceth, My Covenant will I not break,
nor alter the thing that is gon out of my lips. And
then the reason of it follows, I have sworn by
my Holiness that I will not fail David. Another
Instance of it we have in the 7. of Deuteronomy,
at the 8. verse, where God is said to love Israel
more than any other Nation, even for this very
reason, and this alone, because he would make
good the Oath which he had sworn unto their Fathers.
Secondly of the Threats which God delivers
under his Oath, we have a very pregnant In|stance
in the 95 Psalm, at the 11 verse, where
speaking of the Israelites to whom the Holy Land
was promis'd, saith He, I sware in my wrath that
they should not enter into my Rest. Nor did one
of them enter, excepting Caleb and Ioshua, who
were exempted from the Sentence, Num. 14.
30. Nay they did not enter in, though God had
sworn they should enter. From whence ariseth
an objection, How it can stand with God's
Veracity, to Swear they shall, and they shall not.
For Num. 14, 23, Surely, saith God, they shall
not see the Land which I sware unto their Fathers;
And (vers. 30.) Doubtless ye shall not come into the

Land, concerning which I sware to make you dwell
therein. First he swore they should inhabit in
the Land, and yet afterwards He swore they
should not see it, much less should they enter,
or dwell within it. This objection seems hard,
but yet the Answer is very easie, and may be
rationally drawn from the same verse with the
objection. For the Promise was not made to the
Individuals, but to the Nation; not to the Per|sons,
but People Israel. So as both these Oaths
were most inviolately accomplished, the Nega|tive
in the Parents, and the Affirmative in their
Posterity. The Negative in the Provokers, and
the Affirmative in the Obedient. So that the
, does still stand good.Heb. 3. 16. The
Oath of God does still imply the Immutability
of his Decree, Heb. 6. 17.
. 4. But for the Menaces under his Word
only, the Case is different. He had much ra|ther
they should be frustrated, than severely
fulfil'd upon us. And perhaps I may say with
more propriety of speaking, that to frustrate
such Menaces is most perfectly to fulfil them.
So very signal is the Indulgence and Love of God,
that he will imitate and follow his very Creatures.
For no sooner can it Repent us of the evil of Sin

which we have don, but He as suddenly repents
him of the evil of punishment which he intended.
It is his own Affirmation, Ier. 18. 8. If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil which I thought
to do unto them. And again in the same Chapter,
Behold (saith God) I frame evil against you,Jer. 18. 11.
when straight it follows, Return ye every one
from the evil of his way. A fit example of this
we have, 2 Kings 20. 1. where saith Isaiah to
Hezekiah, (as a Message sent from God,) Set
thy House in order, for thou shalt dye, and not live.
And yet so far he is from dying, in the fift verse
of that Chapter, that There we find tidings of his
Recovery; yea and his Lease of Life renewed for
fifteen years longer. Now the reason of it is,
because such Menaces are conditional; And con|ditio
non impleta non obligat Fidem. If it Repents
us of our sins, God Almighty is not obliged to
put such Threats in Execution, as were only
denounced on a supposal of our Impenitence.
Such was that Threat of God Almighty to
Abimelech, (for unwittingly taking the Wife of
Abraham,) Behold thou art but a dead man. But
the meaning of it follows a little after, If thou
restore her not, thou shalt surely dye. Now there|fore

restore the man his Wife; for he is a Prophet,
and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live. Gen.
20. 3, 7. And now if any shall yet object, that
God did earnestly threaten both Hezekiah, and
Abimelech, without a Proviso, or Reserve; I
shall send him for an Answer to the Rule of
Equity in Quintilian. Quaedam, etiamsi nulla
legis significatione comprehensa sunt, natura tamen
excipiuntur. The very Nature of certain words,
whether promising, or threatning, do so imply an
exception in certain cases and suppositions, that
they save the Author of them the care and la|bour
of expression. A plain Example of which
we have in the 7 Chapter of Deuteronomy, where
God had forbidden his People Israel to have any
Traffick or Commerce with the Neighbouring
Nations. And yet if any of those Nations
should submit to pay Tribute, and yield obedi|ence
to the Precepts which had been given down
of old to the Sons of Noah, from that very In|stant
Commerce was free. The Prohibition being
silent, where the Cause of it did cease. Nay 'tis
so absolutely impossible that any Falshood should
proceed from the Mouth of Truth, or that his
words should be found light in the Ballance of
the Sanctuary, that we shall find them holding

weight in our humane scales. For 'tis a Rule in
our Law, Comminationes nemini jus conferre. And
such is the Goodness of our Divine Legislator,
that though he gives us a Title to any Rewards
which he shall promise, yet he denies us all
claim to any Punishments which he shall threa|ten.
The reason is, because Promises are foun|ded
in materia favorabili, which is in Equity to
be stretch'd; But Menaces on the contrary in
materia odiosa, which by consequence is to be
streightned. For 'twas exactly said by Aristotle,
That as the proper vertue of the Intellect is
, so That of the Will is . Both im|porting
such an Equity and Equanimity in the
Iudge, (that is to say,) such a propensity towards
the right hand of Favour, as blunts and mollifies
the Edge of a Rigid Iustice. Thus it ought to be
in Man; But in God thus it Is. The Court of
Heaven hath been alwayes a kind of Chancery,
wherein he useth an Equiprudence in his judging
of the Fact, and a gracious Equity in his passing
of the Sentence.
. 5. To conclude this part of my under|taking,
and to vindicate God's Veracity from
any unworthy Imputation, in the judgments
of the best, and the worst of men also, (if they

will but deal with God, as they Themselves
would be dealt with by humane Laws,) There
are three Cases amongst Civilians, wherein all
obligations (whether by promises to Reward, or
by Menaces to Punishment,) do cease to bind.
And we shall find them all applyable to the
Doctrine or Thesis we have in hand. First I say
they cease to bind, per Cessationem rationis unicae;
to wit Impenitence. Next per Casus emergentis
Repugnantiam cum voluntate; to wit Repentance.
Then per comparationem alterius legis; to wit the
law of forgiveness to such as sincerely do Repent.
If God hath threaten'd us with Destruction upon
a supposal of our Impenitence, (which is the sole
reason for which he threatens,) And if our
Repentance shall interpose betwixt the Threat and
the Execution, (which Repentance is an Emer|gency,
to which the Will-of-God-to-punish is most
Repugnant,) Then by vertue of the Promise of
God to men, [That when soever they repent, they
shall not fail of his Pardon,] he cannot possibly
be obliged to put his Threat in Execution. For
whatsoever may have been said to a yet-sinning
People, (as once to Nineve,) yet such a People
(like the Ninevites) may seasonably break off
their sins by Righteousness, and make it just that

the Statute should void the sentence. that is to say,
that the Statute enacting Pardon to the Penitent,
should void the sentence of Destruction which was
but made to unrepenting and desperate Sinners.
. 6. Now from all that hath been said of
the last observable in the Text, it is obvious to
gather this observation. That as the Impeni|tence
of the Jews did work one Miracle, in that
it hinder'd our blessed Saviour from working Mi|racles
among them,Mat. 13. 58. which made it look like an
infeebling even of Him who was Omnipotent; so
Repentance can do a Miracle as great as That,
even change the purpose of the Immutable; and
when his Arrows are flying at us, can send them
back into their Quiver. What a kind of Almigh|tiness
hath the Almighty thus indowed Repen|tance
with? And what stratagems does he use
to induce us to it? How does he fright us to this
Duty, (after the manner in which we deal with
our little Children,) as well by slight and
empty Buggs, as by real Dangers? How does he
thunder out his Threats, as so many gracious
Equivocations, which with a blessed kind of
Fraud are meant to beguile us into Obedience?
(It is indeed a bold Metaphor, but I borrow it
from St. Paul,2 Cor. 12. 16. who told his Corinthians, that
being crafty, he caught them with guile.) How does

he hold forth his Comets to a sinful Nation, very
much rather to prevent, than presage his Pla|gues?
How does he send out his Thunder, before
his Bolt? and affright us with his Lightning, that
he may not consume us with his Fire? How did
he scare us very lately with Gluts of Rain, that
he might not destroy us with perfect Famine? I
pray contemplate on my Text, a little more
attently before I leave it, and ye will find how
exactly it is conformable to the Time. What
Beams of Mercy may we descry, most sweetly
breaking forth from a Cloud of Justice? How does
his Pity in a manner give a Counter-check to his
wrath? whilst he says in his Anger, Thus and
thus will I do; his Loving kindness interposeth,
Prepare to meet thy God  Israel. Thus will I do,
to destroy the Sin; but prepare to meet me, to the
end that I may not destroy the sinner. 'Tis true
we read that when Adrastes had kill'd the Son
of King Croesus, Croesus was so touch'd with that
very Murderer's Humiliation, as at that very
time to pronounce his Pardon. A Temper (ye
will say) in an Heathen Prince, which the grea|test
part of Christians would admire sooner than
imitate. But how transcendently greater is the
Patience and the Love of our God to Us? For al|though

by continuing in our Impieties, we often
Crucify his Son, he is not only inclinable to give
a Pardon, or a Reprieve, but does invite and desire
us to give him leave too.
. 7. If ye will take a right Prospect of both
together, (I mean the twofold transcendency
both of his Patience and his Love,) hear him
speaking unto Israel, and through Israel unto
our selves.
Your Povocations,  Kine of Bashan, have
fill'd my Vials full of Wrath.See a De|scription of God's Artil|lerie, Wisd. 5. 17, 18, c. Behold my Ar|rows
are on the strings, and my Thunder-bolt in
my hand. I am now riding towards you upon
the wings of a whirlewind; And as hetherto ye
have found me a quickning Light, ye shall feel me
henceforwards a killing Fire. But is there ne|ver
a man among you who will make up the
Hedge? who will come before me for the Land,Ezek. 22. 30.
that I may not destroy it? Is there never a Moses
who will stand in the Gapp? not a Phineas
among you to stand up and pray? not an Abraham
to plead for a Sister of Sodom? nor a Priest to
weep out betwixt the Portch and the Altar? Is
there never a man of Wisdom to hear my Voice,Mich. 6. 13.
how long and audibly soever I have been crying
unto the City? O come and stop me in my Carier.

Let your Tears disarme me, and let your Pray|ers
bind my hands. I will destroy you, But fain
I would not. I am Allmighty indeed, But I am
All-mercy too. And though ye cannot Resist, ye
may Prevent me. Because I will do thus unto
thee, prepare to meet me that I may not.
. 8. Let us imagin within our selves, that
God is speaking thus to Us, as once to Israel.
And withal let us consider, what 'twill be fit|test
for us to do. If he is coming to meet Us, as
heretofore he met Ephraim,Hos. 13. 8. like a Leopard or a
Bear that is bereaved of her Whelps; let us go
out to meet Him, even as Benhadad met Ahab,1 Kings 20. 32.
even with Sackcloth upon our Backs, and with
Halters about our Necks; or else (as Hushai met
David,) with our Coats rent,2 Sam. 15 32. and with Earth upon
our Heads. If God's Coming be as silent as a
Thief in the Night, and withal as violent as a
Thief in the Day; it will be infinitely better
that we meet him half-way, than that we ex|pect
him within our Dores. It will be best for
us to meet him, that so his suddainness may
not surprize us; And 'twil be best to prepare,
that so his severity may not oppress us. Let us
not meet him so soon, as not first to prepare; nor
be so long in preparing, as not to meet him. They

are Both together in my Text; and may they
Both be together in all our Practice. Let us so in
good Time meet our God with the fruits of
sincere Repentance, as that our God in great
Mercy may be pleased to meet us with Grace
and Pardon.
And This the God of all Mercy vouchsafe
unto us, both for the Glory of his Name, and
for the worthiness of his Son. To whom with
the Father, in the Unity of the Spirit, be ascri|bed
the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, from
this day forwards forevermore.
FINIS.







THE
Embassy of the Rod
AND THE
AUDIENCE
WHICH IT REQUIRES.
A
SERMON
PREACHED
BEFORE THE
KING
At WHITE HALL,
Upon the Wednesday-Monthly Fast, when the
Pestilence Decreased, but yet Continued,
As did also the War with the French
and Dutch, 1665.







MICHA 6. 9.
Hear ye the Rod, and who hath Appointed it.

. 1. THe Text (as things stand) should
now be handl'd in such a manner, as
to respect the double quality and complexion
of the Time. A Time of Thanksgiving, and
Fasting too. A Time of great Comfort, and yet
of Mourning. A Time which placeth us in the
Confine of those two Passions, which seiz'd
upon the two Maries at the Sepulcher of our
Lord; from which they are said to have de|parted,
with Fear and great Ioy. Mat. 28. 8.
First 'tis matter to us of Ioy, that after the
very same measure in which our Enemies from
abroad did Increase upon us, our abler Enemy
here at home began to be at Peace with us.
And I think I may say without a Figure, that
both the Dutch and the French have one Defeat
without Fighting. For, weighing well the two

Grounds whereupon the two Nations pre|sum'd
against us, The unanimity of our Coun|trymen
corrects the Insolence of the Dutch, and
the Abatement of our Pestilence does Plague the
French for their Supercherie.
But yet 'tis matter to us of Fear, and of Hu|miliation,
that though the Pestilence decreases,
it also continues in some degree; That whilst
the Rod is removing, 'tis also hanging over our
heads; And though the Furie of the Judgment
is (God be thanked) well pass'd, yet the sense
of its Threatnings is present with us. We know
the Autumn, many times, is a pregnant season;
nor can we Prophecy, This Month, what the
Next may bring forth. And as the likelihood of
a Victory must needs be very much allay'd by
the Possibility of a Defeat; so must the Hopes of
a Recovery by the great Danger of a Relaps. And
seeing the Wisdom of Authority hath still ap|pointed
this Day (although a Day of no sad
Tidings) to be observ'd in all our Churches as
a Day of Solemn Humiliation; let us Rejoyce
with so much Trembling at the Retreat of God's
Anger, as by Prayer and Fasting to stop the
way to its Return. The Text which now lies
before us is very fit for this Purpose. For
. 2. Now it was that God's People, the
men of Israel and of Iudah, after their mani|fold
obligations to Watch, and Pray, and give
Thanks, for their Deliverance out of Egypt, that
House of Bondage, were most securely faln asleep
in a dead Lethargy of Sin. A sleep in which they
lay snoring with such Indulgency to Themselves,
that all his ordinary Calls were too low to wake
them. But God hath two sorts of Voices where|by
to rouze us into Repentance. The one he ut|ters
by his Prophets, and the other by his Rod.
And we have Both in this verse, whereof my
Text is the later part. For what we call the
Lord's Voice, in the next words before my Text,
The Chaldee paraphraseth well by [the voice of
the Prophets of the Lord.] And This was it he first
us'd to the men of Ierusalem and Samaria. Nor
did he whisper into the Ear of only here and
there one, but extended it to the hearts and the
ears of all. The Lord's Voice cryeth unto the City,
that is, his voice by the Prophets is lifted up like
a Trumpet, to shew the people their Transgressions,
and the House of Iacob their Sins. (Isa. 58. 1.)
But since the Voice by his Prophets is only heed|ed
by very few, (that is to say, here and there
by a man of Wisdom,) at least give ear unto the

voice which now he uttereth by his Rod; and
look ye up unto the hand that hath laid it on.
The Chaldee Paraphrase on the Persons to
whom the words are directed is most remark|able.
For 'tis not only, hear ye Tribes; as the
Septuagint read, and the vulgar Latine; nor only
hear ye the Rod; as the Interlineary Hebrew. But,
here ye Princes, and Rulers, and People of the
Earth. Or (as I find it translated by Learned
Grotius) Audite Rex,  Proceres,  Conventus.
Which I cannot better English, than by King,
Lords, and Commons. Let your Qualities or
Conditions be what they will, Audite Vos Virgam,
Hear Ye the Rod. So that the Voice of the Pro|phets,
(in the beginning of the verse,) does seem
to differ just as much, from the voice of the
Rod, (in the later end,) as the Prophecy from the
Iudgment which is Prophecyed of; or as the
Threat from the Sentence, and some degree of
Execution; or as the Preaching from the Text
which is Preached on.
. 3. This is therefore God's Method for the
calling of Sinners unto Repentance. The pub|lick
Preachers of his Word do first give warning.
Then the truly wise in heart do fear and tremble
at the Word Preach'd. Yet the foolish and in|considerate,

(who are the most of Mankind) be|ing
deaf to that Word, and not afraid of that
Warning, The Rod comes in with its Sermon,
or excitation to Repentance, and All are conju|red
to hearken to it.
This (considering how the words are made
obscure by an Elipsis, which the most Critical
Commentators have several Methods of filling up)
I do conceive to be the plainest and most satis|factory
scope of the words in Hand. The Lords
Voice cryeth unto the City, and the man of wisdom
shall see thy Name.
Hear ye the Rod, and who hath appointed it.
. 4. The Text in the General, or in the
Great, does present us with an Embassy from
Heaven to Earth; which being taken in the Re|tail,
doth spread it self into these Particulars.
First the Embassadour here employ'd; and that
is expressed to be the Rod.
Secondly the People to whom directed; And
These are imply'd in the Pronown Ye. My Israel,
my Chosen, the peculiar Lot of mine Inheri|tance,
Audite Vos, hear Ye.
Thirdly the Audience, or Attention, which is
to be given to the Embassadour; Audite, Hear.

Last of all we have the Potentate from whom
the Embassadour is dispatch'd, described clearly
by the Periphrasis of [Him who hath appointed it.]
The first and second of these particulars will
be best capable of Discourse, not severally
handled, but in conjunction. For the close Ap|plication
of the Embassadour to the People, the
Rod to Israel, will very seasonably afford us this
Doctrinal Proposition.
That God Almighty is so far from conniving
at, or not seing Sin in his Children, (though the
Tempter in these Times hath taught a great num|ber
of men to flatter themselves into Destruction
by this Opinion,) that he hates, and will punish
it, much more in Them, than in Those that are
Stranger, and Aliens to him.
. 1. Which to the end I may evince in the
clearest Method that I can use, I shall first of all
observe out of Aulus Gellius,Aul. Gell. l. 6. c. 14. p. 224. (what He him|self
does observe out of Plato's Gorgias,) That
there are three distinct ends for which Offenders
are to be punish'd. Whereof the first is ,
for the Amendment of Offenders. The second
, for the Benefit of such as are Lookers-on.
The third , for the Party's Satis|faction

who is Offended. And if we look on all
Three, as they are applicable to God, in his
laying on of stripes on the sons of Men; whe|ther
the End of his Inflictions is to redeem us
from our Iniquities, or to fright Lookers-on from
daring to do as we have don, or to make some
Amends to his injur'd Goodness; we shall find
him ever Iust, after the measure that he is
Merciful. And as he is kinder by much to the
little Flock, which he hath tenderly Pent up in
his rich Inclosure, than to the numerous Herd
which are turn'd out into the Common, so is he
rigider to the Sheep that rudely break out of the
Fold, than to the Swine or the Goats that were
never in it. For the better evidencing of which,
let us consider his Rod of Iustice with its three
final Causes, and mark how fitly it tends to each.
. 2. First I say the Rod of God is ,
(as Plutarch calls it,) the Med'cin, or means
of Cure, unto the Souls of such men as are sick
of Sin. So much the Med'cin, that Plato will
allow it no other end; and Lucius Seneca looks
upon it, as a Thing that can be useful for no|thing
else.Seneca de Ir. l. 1. r. 16. p. 406. Nemo prudens punit, quia peccatur,
sed nepeccetur. We are not punished (saith he)
because we have already sin'd, but only to the

end we may sin no more. And his Reason is as
plausible as the matter will bear. Revocari praete|rita
non possunt, futura prohibentur. Whatsoever
is past, is past all Remedy; And an evil of Sin
already don, no evil of Punishment can have the
power to undo. But what is future, and yet to
come, may be anticipated at present; and though
we cannot retrive yesterday, we may wisely
provide against the morrow. Nay the sharpest of
Remedies is so desirable, where continuance in
Sin is the Disease, that when the Patient cannot
be cur'd, 'tis a kind of a Favour, to cut him off.
Interdum ut pereant,. Helio|dor. lib. 1. interest pereuntium. Even
Destruction it self is many times very Medicinal.
And many thousands had been undo, if they had
not perish'd. Sure I am that St. Paul was of this
opinion, when he deliver'd men up to Satan for
the Destruction of the Flesh,1 Cor. 5. 5. that their Spiris might
be saved in the Day of the Lord Iesus. And re|flecting
upon the words which were spoken by
Christ of his own Betrayer,Mar. 14. 21. Good it were for that
man that he had never been born;. Plotinus Enn. 1. l. 7. p. 62. we may infer,
with good Logick, It had been good for that
man, to have liv'd very little beyond his Birth.
For when the Devil shall give a Visit to such an
Impenitent on his Death-bed, his wish will una|voidably

be one of these two, That he had led
his life better, or sooner dyed. So clear a Truth
as this is the very Heathens could discern by the
light of Nature.Alexis in . Not Plotinus only the Platonist,
but Alexis the Comoedian.
,
.
That is, the first Degree of Happiness, is not
at all to receive a life; And the next, is to leave
it early.
. 3. To make my meaning more plain by
a familiar Illustration; Admit the Arm or the
Legg of any mans body is gangren'd, we do not
say it is the Cruelty, but the Skill of the Chirur|geon
to cut it off. And if the Patient being angry
shall expostulate with the Artist in such a Case,
or demand by what Authority he does such
things,Crysost. ad 2. Cor. 7. 13. St. Chrysostom tells him he may An|swer,
. Dost thou ask me,
honest friend, why I cut thee off a Limb?Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera traba|tur. That
which gave me this Authority was my Art, and
thy Disease. My Art inform'd me 'twas to be
don, and thy Disease bid me do it.
Crudelem Medicum Intemperans Aeger facit.

And then considering how much the Soul is
more preferable to the Body,Apul. de Phi|los. l. 3. p. 48. 49. than the Body can
be to a single Member, I cannot choose but as|sent
to that Platonick Aphorism in Apuleius,Si nequitia miseros facit, miserior sit necesse est diu|turnior nequa~, quos infelicis|simos esse judi|carem, si non eorum malii|am saltem mors extrema iniret. Boeth. de Cons. Phi|los. l. 4. p. 150 Gravius  acerbius est omni supplicio, si noxio im|punitas
deferatur; that to the wicked, in this world,
the greatest Punishment is Impunity. For Remedy
being by Nature very much better than Disease,
and so a desperate Remedy than a desperate Di|sease,
it must necessarily follow, that to a sin|ner
who is Incorrigible, Death it self becomes a
Curtesy. The reason is, because it renders him
less unhappy,Mali cm Supplicio a|rent, inest iis aliquid alte|rius mali, ipsa Impunitas. than he would otherwise have
been. For that even in Hell there is Room for
Curtesy, is just as clear as that the greater infer's
the lesser Damnation,Multo igitur infeliciores sunt Improbi injust impu|nitate donati, qum just ltione puniti. Id. ib. p. 152. Mat. 23. 14. And as one
Star differs from another Star in Glory; so in the
Territories of Darkness, we are told of a diffe|rence
between the Sodomites and the Iews, Mat.
11. 23, 24. and so we read of great difference be|tween
the punishments inflicted on several Ser|vants;
some whereof shall be beaten with many
stripes, and some in comparison with but a few.
Luk. 12. 48. Now they who know what it is,
for the unjust to be reserv'd unto the Day of Judg|ment
to be punished, (2 Pet. 2, 9,) will soon con|fess

it to be a Truth which is asserted by Boetius,
(however an Infidel may be so dull as to be|lieve
it a Contradiction,)Cui sententiae consequens est, ut tum de|mm gravio|ribus supplici|is urgeantur, cm impuniti, esse creduntur. Id. ib. p. 153. That wicked men are
Then plagu'd with the more grievous kinds of pu|nishment,
when they are thought by standers-by to
escape unpunish'd. And clear it is that That
Tradition of the wandring Cartophilus, who had
been Ianitor (saith Cluver) to Pontius Pilate,Cluverius in Rudolpho Se|cundo ad an. 1600. p. 759. 760.
(whether Truth, or Fiction,) does shew a good
part of Christendom to have been strongly of
this Opinion. For it seems they could not in|vent
a severer Punishment to the Iew, for his
having contumeliously struck our Saviour, as he
was going from Pilate's House unto the Place of
Execution, than that our Saviour should condemn
him to an Immortality upon Earth; to wander
up and down in several parts of this world,
beaping up wrath against the day of wrath, and then
only to fall, when all the world must rise again.
And if 'tis so in good earnest, as it hath hetherto
been contended, That previous Punishments are
conducing to the Amendment of a Sinner, and
conducing in such a measure, that even De|struction
is for his Interest, when past Amend|ment;
sure God will not withhold it from the
unworthiest Subjects of his Dominion, much less

from Them who are the Children of his Household.
If Pharaoh the Drudge be once admitted under
his Cure, sure Ioseph the Darling shall much
more be so. For the first and chiefest end of our
being so judged as to be chasten'd in the world,
is , that we may not so be judged
as to be damned with the world. 1 Cor. 12. 32.
And therefore ye that pretend to be none of their
number, who by being uncorrected are known to
be Bastards rather than Sons, (Heb. 12, 8,)
Audite Vos Virgam, Hear Ye the Rod.
. 4. The Second End of Punishment is
, for the Benefit of such as are Lookers-on.
And it tends to their Benefit in two respects.
First by removing an Example of Sin, which
might otherwise make them worse, and next by
shewing one of Punishment, which hath an Apti|tude
at least to make them better.
. 5. For the first of these two there is very
great Reason. Because your Exemplary Sinners
are such a publick sort of Mischiefs, such Epi|demical
Diseases, that Seneca looks upon them
as on Venemous Beasts,Seneca de Ira, lib. 2. and professeth he would
destroy them with the same temper of mind,

wherewith he would chop off a Vipers Head; lest
by permitting them to live, and to fill the
Aire with their poison, they should happen to
be contagious to all that neighbour within their
stentch. So that Seneca (it seems) was a kind of
a Zelot, though not a Iew; and spake at the
rate at which Phineas acted; who finding Zimri
and Cosbi in their openfac'd Villany, dispach'd
them both in as great hast, as a man would have
us'd to a couple of Serpents. And indeed he had
reason for what he did. For as the rational kind
of Viper is more malignant than any other, so of
that sort too the most destructive is the religious;
(such I mean as are reckoned such, by their
putting on Godliness for a Disguise.) There are
no such false fires for the leading of Passengers
out of their way, as the reputed People of God
when they once turn straglers. For as their good
Conversation is the Decoy of Heaven, and brings
in Proselites to God; so their scandalous exam|ple
is the Pandar to Hell, and makes Clients for
the Devil. If the People of God refuse the Love
of the Truth,2 Thes. 2. 10. how shall the Heathens then em|brace
it, to whom it is but seldom, if sometimes
offer'd? If Iudah her self become an Harlot,
Babylon is confirmed in all her Whoredoms. And

if Israel worship a Calf, how shall Egypt not be
Idolatrous? when there ariseth a Dispute betwixt
the Iews and the Gentiles, (as once betwixt
Elijah,1 Kings 18. 21. c. and the Prophets of Baal,) whose God
is the truest, and so the fittest to be adored; The
Iews have need to prove Theirs, as well by the
Sanctity of their Lives, as by the strangeness of
their Miracles.Aestimari de Cultoribus suis potest ille qui colitur. Quo|modo enim bonus Magister est, cujus tam malos vide|mus esse Dis|cipulos? Sal|vian. de Gu|bern. Dei. l. 4. Else the Gentiles will conclude
them, not to have the truer Prophets, but the
skilfuller Magicians. And all their signes which
are drawn from Heaven, will pass but for Sor|cery
fetch't up from Hell. David laid so great a
stress upon this one consideration, that when an
evil Example was shewn in Israel, it was his
first and greatest Care to have the matter kept
secret from those without, 2 Sam. 1. 20. know|ing
well that the Example of a scandalous Israel,
would soon redound to the discredit of Him that
had owned them for his People;Deut. 7. 6. And that it is
the usual Custome of the giddily-unjust and
censorious world, to pass their Judgment upon
the Master, by the Behaviour of his Servants;
to make an estimate of the Father, by the Breed|ing
of his Children; and so to measure the God
too, by the practice of his Votaries.
. 6. Now since Experience it self, as well
as Scripture, doth serve to prove it a disgrace to
the Truth of God, for the Professors of the Truth
to hold the Truth in unrighteousness; Can we ima|gine
it to be likely, that God will harden the
Pagans Hearts by the prosperous example of
Israels Sin? no, he will mollifie them rather by
the publick Example of their Correction, (which
is the second of those Respects, in which the pu|nishment
of Offenders is for the Benefit of such
as are lookers on.) So he once tells them by the
Prophet Ezekiel, (chap. 5. vers. 7.  8.) That he
will punish them in the sight of all the Nations round
about. Nay so he tells them in one Chapter no
less than 4 or 5 times, (it is the 39. of the same
Ezekiel,) I will not let them pollute my Name any
more, and the Heathen shall know that I am the
Lord. (ver. 7, 21, 24,) And again, (ver. 26, 27,
28,) They shall bear their shame, and be led into
Captivity among the Heathen, that God may be san|ctified
in them in the sight of many Nations. And
why is all this, but that their Sufferings for sin
may be as Exemplary and publick, as their Sins
for which they suffer? God will be very far
from giving a just occasion, of his being ill thought
of amongst the Heathen; They shall be far from

finding Him to be a Sanctuary for sinners, re|maining
such. When Israel will not hear, they
shall feel his Rod; and the Rod shall be so laid
on, that even Edom and Philistia shall hear its
Voice. And the Voice of this Rod shall be like
that of the Prophet Zachary.Zack. 11. 2. Howl Firr Tree,
for the Cedar is faln; howl ye Oaks of Bashan,
for the Forest of Vintage is cut down. The Voice of
this Rod shall be heard in Babylon; and it shall
make the same Inference, which St. Peter did
when he was there. If Iudgment begin at the
House of God,1 Pet. 4. 17. what shall their end be who are not
obedient unto the Gospel? I will shut up this
point with that of Salvian. Deus partim gladio,
partim exemplo corrigit, ut omnibus simul  coer|cendo
censuram  indulgendo pietatem probaret.
God does partly punish by Stripes, and partly
by Example, (that is, partly by the stroke, and
partly by the voice of his Fatherly Rod,) that
at once he may testify to the world, as well his
Iustice, by the one; as by the other, his Longani|mity.
This is said by God in Scripture to be
a great end of Punishment,Deut. 17. 13. That all the People
may hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.
And therefore Ye that have been hetherto the
greatest strangers to Affliction, by the Injoymens

of your Peace in a Time of War, and of abun|dance
of Plenty in Times of want, and now of
bodily health in a Time of sickness; who seem
to look as unconcern'dly on the miseries of your
Brethren, as if yourselves had an exemption from
all Adversity, and were seated above the level of
all God's Arrows; Audite Vos Virgam, hear YE
the Rod.
. 7. The Third End of Punishment is
, for Revenge;. Arist. Rher. l. 1. c. 10. that is, (as Aristotle in|terprets
it) to repair the honour, and to satisfie
the Iustice of that Authority, which the Trans|gressions
of a Sinner appear so highly to have
offended. And in this respect also, as God is iust
to all in general, so to his People in particular he
is severest. He is very much offended with the
Adulteries of the Harlot, but more with the
Whoredoms of an obliged Spouse. If the Doves
which have an house on purpose erected for
their Reception, shall fly away from that House,
to be Birds of Prey, they deserve by so much
a greater punishment, than Crowes and Harpies,
by how much the more they were cared for, and
with a more peculiar Providence. So by the same
proportion of Justice, God will much sooner

scourge the Flocks of Ioseph for their wandrings,
than the Kine of Bashan, because there is much
a richer feeding in the Plains of Iordan, than
on the Mountains of Samaria. Now he whips
them with Babylon, ThatIsa. 10. 5. Rod of his Anger.
Anon he beats them with Aegypt, ThatIsa. 10. 5. Staff of
his Indignation. And if That will not serve, he
hews them down at last with Rome, which we
may call (by good Analoge) the Axe or Hatchet
of his Fury.
. 8. And if now after the Iews, the People
of God under the Law, we reflect upon our
selves, who are his People under the Gospel, ob|serving
whether we have been falling, as well as
from whence, (from the most Christian, the most
Reform'd, and the most Disciplin'd sort of Peo|ple,
to the most barbarous, the most profane,
and I wish I may not ay, the most disorder'd in
all the world,) we shall find this difference be|twixt
the Heathens and our selves, That They
indeed are a diseas'd People, but we commonly
a relaps't one. They indeed do disavow the Lord
Jesus in their words, But we deny him in our
works. They indeed do not receive the Love of
the Truth, But we refuse it. They indeed are

Erroneous in a very deep measure, but (which
is infinitely worse) how many amongst Us are
grown Heretical? In so much that whilst They
do only want a Physician, the generality of us
do stand in need of an Executioner. And now,
to compare our selves with some of our Fellow-Christians,
(those I mean in the Church of Rome,)
whilst their Church is called the Whore of Baby|lon,
do not they call ours the Whore of Babel,
though not with any Truth, yet with some Plau|sibility?
there being a Babel in our Nation,
though not in our Church? and many parts of
this Nation being become so much the fouler,
(I will not say for having been, but) since the
time of her being swept, that for one Devil of
Popery She hath been dispossessed of, She may
be thought (by the Care of Rome) to have given
entrance unto seven. It is therefore (as it proves)
our unhappy Priviledge of having once drawn
neerer, not only to the Mercy, but to the Holi|ness
of God, than other Nations, that God is the
radier now in Iustice to stand the farther off
from us. And if by a seasonable Repentance, we
do not recover our first Approaches, 'twill be as
tolerable for Rome in the last great Day, as for
Us of this Nation. And so (on a Parallel suppo|sition)

it will be somewhat more tolerable for
Jerusalem, than for Rome; for Aegypt, than for
Jerusalem; for Babylon; than for Aegypt; for
Sythia, than for Babylon; and for the wild
Salvages, than for them all.
. 9. Ye will consent the more readily to what
I say, by considering those words of our blessed
Saviour, Luk. 10. 15. And thou Capernaum which
art exalted to Heaven, shalt be thrust down to Hell.
Therefore to Hell, because from Heaven. For
the higher any one is, by so much greater must
be his Fall. When the Eagle in the Apologue
caught up the Shell-Fish into the Clouds, it was
to break it the more infallibly by letting it fall
upon the Stones. And though indeed the God
of Heaven never takes any into his favour, to
the end he may give them the greater Fall; yet
when such will needs fall from their highest
Station, they must needs be the unliklier to rise
again. They being so broken by their Fall from
so high a Pitch,Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. that hardly any thing can joynt
them, or make them whole. For, in our Saviour's
own phrase,Mat. 21. 44. They will be grinded to Powder.
And 'tis obvious to infer from those other words
of Christ, Sin no more, least a worse thing come

unto thee,Confer John 5, 14. cum 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. (Joh. 5, 14,) That God will punish
Malefactors, as well in regard of the Benefits
they have received, as for the Sins they have
committed. And therefore ye that make it your
Boast, That ye are Members of a Christian Re|formed
Church,Gal. 4. 24, 25, 26. not the Children of Hagar, which is
Mount Sinai, and which gendreth to Bondage, but of
Jerusalem which is above, and therefore Children
of the Promise, whereby ye have the priviledge
to call him Father, who by Them that are without,
is to be look't upon only as a Creator, and a Judge;
And by your being more obliged than other men,
are grown by so much the more accountable;
Audite Vos Virgam, Hear Ye the Rod.
. 10. But (Lord) how many have we
known, in these last and worst times, who (like
Hiel the Bethelite in the Building of Jericho) have
laid the Foundation of their Greatness in their
First-born,1 King. 16. ult. and set up its Gates in their younger
Children, and yet have been deaf as any Adders,
to the Voice of God's Rod in so clear a Cafe?
Unto how many of our new Builders, who have
cemented their Walls with the price of Bloud, and
have set their Nest on high, (with a presumption
to be deliver'd from the Power of Evil,) hath

the well-instructed Stone cry'd out of the Wall,
and the Beam out of the Timber made answer to it,
who yet have stop't their Eyes and Ears against
the Messages of the Rod that hath spoken to
them? I hearkened and heard, (said God here|tofore
of his People Israel,) but no man repented
him of his wickedness, saying, what have I don?
every one turned to his Course,Jer. 8. 6. as the horse rusheth
into the Battle. And we do commonly so resem|ble
that senseless People, (as to the Callousness
of our hearts, and inconsideratness of mind,) that
whensoever God dispatches any Embassadour of
his Displeasure, although he speaks so loud,
that it is hard not to hear him, yet we commonly
care so little, as that we seldom or never give
ear unto him. Or if perhaps we are attentive to
the Voice of Gods Rod, yet we are deaf to the
Message on which it comes. Whereas the Audi|ence
and Attention which God requires, is rather
meant of the second, than of the first of these
two. We are not to hearken how it sounds only,
but to consider what it says too. Every lash of
Gods Rod should make us reflect upon a sin.
And as Joseph's false Brethren, when they were
brought into Distress, did straight reflect on that
Distress into which they had brought their

Brother Ioseph;Gen. 42. 21. so if at any time we are groan|ing
under the Miseries of a War, we should ex|amine
how many ways we abus'd our Peace. If
at any time we are brought into some great De|gree
of Penurie, we should consider if we have
not abus'd our Plenty. And if at any time (as
of late) we fall into Times of general sickness,
we should reflect on those Sins which have been
the great Abuses, and so the Forfeitures of our
health. Might I ground a conjecture touching
the Message or the Cause of our present Rod, from
the words of three Prophets,2, 12. Habakkuk,3, 1. Na|um,
and24, 9. Ezekiel, I should be prompted to con|sider,
how many Houses in the late Times have
been built with Blood. And Blood we know hath
a Voice; yea, and such a Voice too, asGen. 4. 10. cries to
Heaven for Revenge. And being the loudest of Cry|ers,
'tis soonest heard. But yet the lover of Souls,
who is a God ready to Pardon, in the midst of his
Iudgments remembreth Mercy. From whence
it is, the Lords Voice does cry aloud unto the City,
that the Voice of the City may cry as loud unto the
Lord; and that the Voice of mens Tears may even
drown that of Blood, as the louder Stentor. Cer|tainly
nothing but Repentance will be able to cry
up those hovering Judgments, which our Na|tional

Sins have been calling down. Nor can
any other Repentance cry louder unto God than
our Sins have don, but that which brings forth
Amendment, and change of life. And this does
lead me to the Audience which God would have
given to his Embassadour, the third particular in
the Division, and next in order to be consider'd.
Audite Virgam,
HEAR ye the Rod.
. 1. Hear the sound of God's Rod, and
hear the sense, or signification. For as the Voice
of his Rod is double, to wit the lashing of the
Aire, and the beating upon our shoulders; the for|mer,
when he threatens, and only threatens to in|flict
it, the later, when he proceeds to put his
Threats into Execution; so the Message which
it brings us is double too; for 'tis expostulatory in
part, as when it chides us for our Sins; and in
part it is exhortatory, as when it presses us to Re|pentance.
Such is the admirable contrivance
and disposition of Gods Inflictions, that they
commonly speak his Mercy at the same instant
with his Iustice. As if it were not sufficient that
his Ballance is equal, and that he puts Punish|ment
into one Scale, as we Offences into the other;

He makes the Punishment many times to have
such a similitude with the Sin, as that the Pati|ent
may see his Malady in the Nature of the
Means which are meant for Cure.. Thus in that
famous Controversy 'twixt God and Sodom, we
may observe an Analoge as well of Likeness, as
of Proportion; for besides that his Iudgment was
just as general as their Sin, and only a Lot exem|pted
from the one, who only was guiltless of
the other; they were appositely burnt with Fire
of Brimstone, as before they had been with the
Fire of Lust. And as their Lust was contrenatu|ral,
although from Hell; so likewise was their
Fire, because from Heaven. Thus when Corah
and his Confederates (the very first Levellers we
ever read of) had widely open'd Their Mouths
against Moses and Aaron, straight the Earth, by
way of Talio, open'd hers against Them. No
sooner were their Throats become open Sepul|chers
for the Burying of their King and their
Priest alive, but straight it follows in the Text,
that they were swallowed up quick. And thus as
Iosephs cruel Brethren would not hearken to
His Request, when he besought them in the anguish
and in the bitterness of his Soul;Gen. 42. 21. vers. 17. so for three
dayes together He would not hearken unto

Theirs, when in the bitterness of their Souls
they had sought it of him. And so, as Dives
denyed Lazarus a Crum of bread to stay his hun|ger,
he was denyed by the same Lazarus a drop
of water to cool his Toung. But we need not go
further to find out Instances of the Harmony,
betwixt the Punishment of Sin, and the Sin it
self, than to the words of the Commission with
which the Rod was here sent to the men of
Israel. The Lords voice cryeth unto the City. And
first it crys for Attention, hear Ye the Rod. Next
it cryes as an Herauld, that is, it Proclaims the
Sin and Punishment of the People. Are there yet
the Treasures of wickedness, and the scant mea|sure
that is abominable? There's their Sin.
Then follows the Punishment, (vers. 14.) Thou
shalt eat, but not be satisfied. Again the Rod of
God saith, (vers. 12.) The rich men thereof are
full of Violence. Whereupon it denounceth,
(vers. 15.) Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap;
thou shalt tread the Olives, but not anoint thy self
with Oyle. Nor is there any thing more equal,
than that wicked men should suffer the hainous
things that they have don; that the covetous Op|pressor
should be Plagu'd with Penurte; and that
They who have grinded the very faces of the

poor, should finally be famish't for want of Bread.
. 2. But let us divert our thoughts a while,
from the Times of the Text to these we live in.
For God hath sent such an Embassadour unto
Us of this Nation, as heretofore to the People
Israel. And it is now a great while, since our
Guilts have risen up into a Rod of wickedness.Ezeck. 7. 11. I
mean the Rod of Gods Anger, by which our
wickedness is corrected. It being more than
twenty years, (and with but little Respiration)
since his Rod has been speaking to us in several
Dialects of severity. First of all it spake to us
by Drums, and Trumpets, and by as many wide
Mouths, as the Sword had made wounds in our
English Nation; by lying Prophets in the Church,
by prosperous Rebels in the State, by loss of ho|nour,
and of Religion, by Sacriledge, and Regi|cide,
and other execrable effects of a Civil War.
From which we have not yet injoy'd more than
a five years Respiration, when our Unthankful|ness
for That hath betrayed us to a greater and
sadder Judgment. For so notable is the diffe|rence
betwixt our War heretofore, and our Pe|stilence
of late, That the former might be called
a Rod of Chastisement, whereas the later began
to look like a Beesom of Destruction. That Cor|rected

our Nation, but this did threaten to sweep
it away. In a very long War there may be very
few Battles; But the Pestilence is an Enemy so
very skilful to destroy, as that it makes both a
nightly and daily Slaughter. It hath slain many
more Thousands within the compass of a few
months, than our War was found to do in as many
years. Just so it was with the famous Pestilence
in Thucydides.Thucyd. l. 2. p. 129. ad p. 134. More Athenians were taken off
by that invisible Arrow in a few dayes, than by
all the great Armies of the Peloponnesians in di|verse
years., c. Ib. p. 129. Invisible I call it, because it walketh
in Darkness, and even at that very time when
it destroys at noon Day. (Psal. 91, 6.) And 'tis
fitly call'd anPsal. 91. 5. Arrow, as well for the swiftness,
as sharpness of it. For how swiftly did it fly
(in Thucydides his Time) from Ethiopia into
Egypt, from thence to Libya, from thence to
Persia, from thence to Athens? And how like
an Arrow did it fly,. ib. p. 129. (to give an Instance in our
own,) as from Amsterdam to London, so pre|sently
from thence into divers Countries? Nor
did the swiftness of this Arrow exceed the sharp|ness
of it at Athens. Where having kill'd up the
Physicians, it bred a general neglect of all Indea|vours
of Recovery. It made them weary of their

Devotions, which at first they had imploy'd as
the means of Cure. And, pushed on by their Im|patience,
to a. Ib. p. 132, 133. contempt of things Sacred, as well
as secular, they grew elaborately Voluptuous in
the injoying the goods they had, because they
knew not how soon they might loose or leave
them. None would enter on any work,. Ib. p. 133. as look|ing
to dye ere they could end it. Nor did they
fear any Breach of Law, as not believing they
could live to be punish't for it. Again this Arrow
is so noysome, as well as sharp, (and therefore
fitly call'd by David the noysome Pestilence, Psal.
91, 3,) that it does many times kill with the
Breath of life. Nay (which is much worse than
killing,) it makes a man to be forsaken by the
Wife of his Bosom, and even abhor'd by his inward
friends;Job 19. 17, 19. as Iob acquaints us with the Acme of
all his sufferings. Zosimus tells us of a Pest in
the Time of the Emperour. Zosim. Hist. l. 1. p. 21. Gallienus, which
was so very much more fierce than the fiercest
War, that all they suffer'd from their Enemies
was light and moderate in comparison. Nay he
tells us of a Pest in the Time of Gallus, (and in
the Northern parts of the Roman Empire,) which
coming presently after a War, ,
destroy'd the whole of Mankind which

the War had left.. Zosim. Ib. pag. 14. There the Rod of God's An|ger
was improv'd into the Beesom I lately spake
of. It was not only a pungent, but sweeping Rod.
And truly such as it was there, it will be here
when God pleases. For our greater means of
Grace, and more abundant measure of knowledge,
are apt to aggravate our Iudgments, because our
Sins. And if our Punishment is less, when our
Sins are much greater than other mens, it is a
just ground of fear, that we are not wholly
pardon'd, but only temporally repriev'd, not ac|quitted
from the present, but rather reserved for
a future, and greater Judgment.
. 3. Yet so little is this consider'd, and laid
to heart in our English Nation, that our general
unconcernedness in the miseries of others, and our
apparent Inadvertency how much our own may
be greater by seeming less, does pass with some
for the greatest of all our miseries. For though
the Rod of Gods Anger, hath been thus far the
Rod of his tender Love too, that it hath sought
to gain from us a Day of Hearing, first by its
brushing in the Aire, and then by its beating upon
our shoulders; yet so barbarous have we been in
our Reception of God's Embassadour, that we

have hardly yet allow'd it a patient Audience.
We have not hearkn'd to the Rod, nor to him who
hath appointed it. Nay so much are many of us
become the worse for those Messages, which
God had purposely designed to make us better,
that we may seem to have abused his special
Grace into an Instrument of becoming the more
ungracious; And by a necessary consequence,
to have so much of God's Mercy as to be damn'd
by. For should a Porphiry or a Iulian revive
amongst us, and together with the profession
compare the practice of many Christians, they
would have reason to admire, why a great part
of Christendom should be rather call'd Christians,
than by any other Name; why rather Christi|ans,
than Antichristians, considering how they
live in a direct contrariety, at once to the Do|ctrine
and Life of Christ, What have such men to
do to take his Name within their mouths, whilst they
hate to be reform'd, and cast his words behind their
backs? Psal. 0. 16, 17.) Do they not call Christ
their King by the same kind of Ironie by which
the Iews call'd him Theirs, when platting a
Crown upon his Head, and putting upon him a
Purple Robe, they said in the bitterness of their
Spirits, Haile King of the Iews?Joh. 19. 2. 3. And just as

the Gnosticks heretofore, by owning Christ for
their Masters whilst they were servants to the
Devil, brought the Christian Religion into such
hard among the Gentiles, that they esteem'd it
a meer Device to legitimate Parricide, and In|cest,
and some such other enormous Villanies, as
were not so much as to be nam'd, much less
committed among the Heathens; so 'tis worthily
to be fear'd, that when a sort of Professors a|mongst
our selves, who call themselves Christi|ans,
and Christians of the Reformation, shall be
spoken of in Gath,. Clement Rm. in Epist. ad Cor. p. 62. and published abroad in the
streets of Askelon, the Daughters of the Philistins
will too much rejoyce, the uncircumcised will
greatly triumph. I say 'tis too much to be fear'd,
(and cannot be too much consider'd, unless too
late to be prevented,) least that Christ a second
time should become through our means, To the
Iews a stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolish|ness.
The greatest comfort of hope we have
left is This, That as the scandalous Aspersions
which first were cast on Christianity were wash'd
away by the Blood of the antient Martyrs, and
blotted out by the Ink of the learned Fathers of
the Church; so our Protestant Religion may yet
be vindicated and rescued from those Aspersi|ons

and Brands of Schism and Atheism, where|with
some of our Enemies already have, and
others are likely to stigmatize us, by the great
Piety of some, who do express it in their Practice;
by the learning of others, who do assert it with
their Pens; and by the Martyrdom of a third
sort, who have readily seal'd it with their lives.
. 4. But be our Fame what it will, unless
our Nation shall so repent upon the Preaching
of the Rod which God is now holding over us,
as once the Ninevites did at Ionah's; or unless
it shall be spar'd for the few Righteous that are
within it, (as Jerusalem for the righteousness of
Iames the Brother of Christ, who was the first
Bishop there;) God will probably say to us, by
the Rod of his Anger, as heretofore to the Assyri|ans,
by his Prophet Isaiah. I will rise up against
them, and cut off from England the Name, and
Remnant,Isa. 14. 22, 23. and Son, and Nephew. I will also make
it a Possession for the Bittern, and Pools of Water
and I will sweep it with the Beesom of Destruction,
saith the Lord of Hosts. Such is the Voice of
God's Red, whereby it would fright us out of
our sins; which is the Negative part of a true
Repentance. It hath another sort of Voice where|by

by it would Woe us to satisfaction, and Refor|mation
of life; which is the Positive part of a
true Repentance. And so 'tis easie to hear it
speaking, as 'twere in genere demonstrativo, in
that persuasive way of Rhetorick, wherein another
holy Prophet did once bespeak another People
in God's behalf. Cast away from you all your
Transgressions,Ezek. 18. 31, 32. whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit. For why
will ye dye  house of Israel? For I have no de|light
in the Death of Him that dyeth, saith the Lord
God. Wherefore turn your selves and live.
. 5. But these are no more than the general
Lessons of the Rod. The Lessons it teacheth us
in particular are more especially these Three
First it teacheth us to reflect on those particular
crying Sins which have probably been the Cause
of our present Iudgment. Such as are Sacrilege,
and Simonie, Perjury, and Profaneness, and Im|patience
of the Cross, Schism, and Faction, and
an Itch after Changes, and that as well in the
Civil, as Ecclesiastical Estate. Next it teacheth
us the Necessity of casting out the Accursed Thing,
however seemingly as gainful as Achan's wedge;
Not an Agag, not an Oxe, not the bleating of a

Sheep is to be left in God's Ears, when His
command is gon forth for the utter Destruction
of an Amaleck.1 Sam. 15. 3, 14, 20. The choicest spoyles must not
be sav'd, though it be for Sacrifice, when it
stands in competition with our obedience.Vers. 22. Lastly
the Rod which at the present is threatning every
one of Us, by whipping others into their Graves
who are round about us, does teach humility
and dejection to such as prde it in their persons,
whether for the strength or the Bewty of them.
It seeks to pull down their vain and exalted
thoughts of Themselves, as well as to abate their
contempt of Others, by making them to know
whereof they are made, and by compelling them
to consider of what materials they do consist.
For if it is true, what is said by the Philoso|pher,
, That natural
Bodies are resolv'd into the very same Ingredi|ents
of which at first they were compos'd, And
so that nothing is dissolvable into any other Prin|ciples,
than those of which it does consist, and
which it potentially conteins; It cannot bt fol|low
that the Pestilence is the best Orator in the
world, to speak the Frailty and the Filthiness
of humane Nature; because it teacheth us into
what loathsome and detestable matter, the fairest

Complexions may be resolv'd, and that by a
mouthful of filthy Aire too.
. 6. If we shall therefore now consent, that
God's Rod, as well as his Prophet, his Deluge,
as well as his Noah, is still a Preacher of Repen|tance,
let us impartially consider, whether the
sorrow and Anxiety which the Calamity of the
Time may have wrought within us, does pro|ceed
from a Resentment of Sins, or Sufferings.
Whether it be a Contrition, or an Attrition only.
Whether a sorrow that is worldly, and worketh
Death,2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. and by consequence is to be sorrowed for,
or a sorrow according to God, hilo Id. . c. pag. 141. which worketh Re|pentance
to Salvation, and therefore is never to be
Repented. If the first of these two, we ought
to begg of God Almighty, that he will add to
our Patience, rather than take from our Punish|ment;
that he will strengthen our shoulders, ra|ther
than lessen our Burden; And much rather
sanctifie, than recal his Rod. But if we find it
to be the second, we must not pray for a Remedy,
but rather for a Paroxysm of our Disease; and
rather exasperate our pain, than too soon asswage
it. We ought to be sadded for nothing more,
than that we cannot be sad enough;  only glad,

that we cannot be so. For let the man of this world
but imagin himself upon his Death-bed, And
what then would he not give for the completing
of that Anxiety, whereof he is now so over apt
even to conjure for an Abatement? Afflictions
help to make us happy even in this present
world, if we have but the Grace to use them
rightly; else they will make us the unhappier
in that world which is to come. For without
the right use, even the Grace of God it self does
accidentally highten our Condemnation. And
though I never had yet such a Roman Faith, as to
believe that there IS such a thing as Purgatory;
yet, with submission to God's Oeconomy, I think
the most of mankind might be glad there were.
Because it seems a very easy Composition with
his Justice, to suffer Hell for a time, in order to
happiness for Eternity. It concerns us therefore
to pray, in this conjuncture of our affairs, that
God will give us to drink of his bitter Cup, not
as our Appetites shall crave, but as He in his
wisdom shall judge expedient. Let him enable
us to choose but this one Requisite for our
selves, even His sanctifying Grace; And then in
company with That, let him allot us what he
pleaseth. Be it War, Pestilence, or Famine; be

it Ignomy, Overthrow, or suddain Death. For as
by looking upon our Sins, we cannot but see
matter of Terror, whereby to hold us in con|stant
fear; so by reflecting upon our sufferings,
we may discern matter of Comfort, whereby to
couple our Fear with Hope. I say 'tis matter of
some Comfort, that God doth seem by his Cor|rection
to own us still for his People; that he
does not severely suffer us to be over prosperous
in our impieties; that he has not so wholly left
us, as not to visit us with his Rod; but that at
least he does vouchsafe us the Mercy of his
Iudgments to work upon us. And though he
threatens to give us up to some of the cruelest of
our Enemies, (such as are the two plagues of per|fect
beggery, and the Pestilence,) 'tis that he may
not give us up unto our more cruel selves; that
we may never indure the Tyranny of our own
hearts lust, or live under the Yoke of our vile Af|fections.
And therefore to the end we may ra|ther
kiss, than undutifully repine at his gracious
Rod, which does so charitably smite, and would
fain wound us into a Cure; let us continue to fix
our eyes, as on the Errand on which it comes,
so withal on the Author from whom 'tis sent.
Which leads me to the Potentate by whom the

Embassadour is dispatcht, The last particular in
the Division.
Hear ye the Rod, and who hath Appointed it.
. 1. That the same Dispensation of the Cup
of Trembling and Astonishment should not only
have such diverse, but such contrary effects,
upon the several Complexions it meets withal,
as to be one mans Restaurative, and anothers
Poyson, softning one into Repentance, and hard|ning
another into Despaire; might seem a diffi|cult
kind of Riddle at the very first hearing,
were it not that this Accompt may be given of it,
That the one looks only downwards, and views
the Rod of his Afflictions as meerly springing out
of the Dust; whereas the other looks upwards,
and acknowledges the Finger of Him that sent
it. They whose Spirits and Contemplations are
ever groveling on the earth, and look no higher
than second Causes, are commonly sorry in their
Distresses as men without Hope; whereas the
men whose Affections are set on things that are
Above, and with the Lyncean Eye of Faith can
look on the other side the Veil, do so submit to,
and comply with the will of God in their afflictions,
as to desire it may be don, as well on Earth as it is
in Heaven.
I know not whether it is more to be fear'd,
or hop'd, that God will never withdraw his Rod
which lyes so heavy upon our shoulders, until he
has first of all whipt us into the wisdom to discern,
and into so much Humility as to acknowledge,
That the Original, and Increase, and present
Continuance of our Plague, hath not only arisen
to us out of natural Causes, (much less out of
fortuitous,) to wit from Atomes, or Insects, or
from I know not what malignant and secret qua|lities
in the Aire; but from the wrath of a pro|voked
and jealous God, for the most brutish un|concerdness
and Impenitences of Men. The Pla|gue
of Pestilence being a Rod of so astonishing a
Nature, that though the Heathens look'd upon
it as a thing rooted in the Earth, yet they thought
it laid on by an hand from Heaven. TheDiodor. Sic. lib. 14. p. 291. Car|thaginians
at Syracuse, and the People of Tolouse
in the timeIustin. l. 32. p. 271. of Brennus, ascrib'd the Cause of
their several Pests unto the Anger of their Gods
for the Sin of Sacriledge, and fled for Refuge
to Restitution, as the great means of their Reco|very.
And however Diodorus did take upon him
to assign the. Diodor. Sic. l. 12. p. 100. natural Causes of the Pestilence
that reign'd at Athens, yet he assures us that the
. Id ib. p. III. Athenians did look upon it as a Rod of super|natural

contrivance. Much more should we
Christians impute the Cause of our Plague unto
God's Displeasure; as being that that serves to
humble, and raise us up too. For as 'tis matter
to us of Terror, to fall into the hands of the living
God, (Heb. 10. 31.) so 'tis matter also of Comfort,
that we do not fall out of the hands of God; no
nor yet into the hands of relentless men. For
with God there is Mercy, and that in the midst
of his Iudgments too; whereas the very tender
mercies of men are cruel, (Prov. 12, 10.) God does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men;
and when at last he is fain to wound, 'tis to the
end that he may heal us. But men to men are so
inhuman, that they will commonly break our
heads with their pretious Balmes too. And there|fore
David having his Option betwixt the Sword
of the Lord (for so the Pestilence was call'd) and
the Sword of man, did soon determin to choose
the former. Let me fall now (says he) into the hand
of the Lord, (for very great are his Mercies,) but
let me not fall into the hand of men. 1 Chron. 21. 13.
. 2. If we look back upon the Church whilst
she was yet but in her Childhood, and consider
her Tribulations as far as from Nero to Dioclesian,
we may observe how mens reflections upon the

Wisdom and Goodness of God's Oeconomies, did
smooth the face of Death it self, as 'twas in|flicted
by the Rod of Divine Appointment; and
made her Children even to Court it, how grim
soever it became by its greatest Torments. A|mongst
a thousand Examples which might be
given of this Truth, I shall not trouble or de|tein
you with more than one. In that dreadful
and most bloody Sedition at Alexandria (just as
if Cadmus had sow'd his Teeth in that fruitful
Soil,)Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 17. when the Gulf of Arabia became a red Sea
indeed, which before was only call'd so by either
aDiod. Sic. figure or a mistake; when that Sea was so
polluted with Blood and Stentch, that had its wa|ter
been to be wash'd, all the Ocean (saith Dio|nysius)
had been too little to wash it clean; and
when, in consequence of This, there was a Pe|stilence
so extream,. as that there was not one
House wherein there was not one Carkass; They
that were Gentiles in the City were every whit
as much terrified, as if Moses once more had
turn'd their waters into Blood, and had afflicted
that Place with the sad repetition of all his Iudg|ments.
Whereas the Christians on the contrary,
who to their War and their Pestilence, had a
third Plague added, (That, I mean, of Persecu|tion,)

were so far from sincking under, that ra|ther
of the two they injoy'd their sufferings.
Whereof the reason in Eusebius is only this,
that they heard not the Rod only, but had regard
unto Him who had laid it on. And so they look't
upon their Iudgment, , as the Test
or Touchstone of God Almighty, for either the
Triall of their Patience, or for the Exercise of
their Faith, or for the Proof of their Fidelity. So
extreamly much it is for any mans Interest, and
Ease, when the Rod of God is sent in a Message
to him, that he consider why it comes, and by
whose Appointment.
. 3. And indeed to speak Truth, whoso|ever
like the Heliotrope that is still intent upon
the Sun, or like the Pilot in a Ship, who, though
the waves and the wind do both conspire his Di|sturbance,
does keep his eye the more carefully
on his Compass and his Star; I say whoever is
this steady, well byass'd Christian, that is not a|fraid
for any evil Tidings, and though his heels
are tripp'd up,Psal. 112. 7. yet his Heart standeth fast, and be|lieveth
in the Lord; He is the Person of the world,
that leads the world into Captivity. And is not
only plac'd above the level of Fortune, but (as

slippery as she is,) seems to have caught her
within his Net. He seems to have gotten the
Gladius Delphicus, that Catholical kind of Sword,
by which he easily cuts asunder all the Difficulties
of Life. For if he dwell amongst those that
are Enemies unto Peace, who, when he speaks to
them thereof, make them ready to Battle; behold
his Remedy is at hand, whilst he can say with
King David,Psal. 121. 1. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills
from whence cometh my help. Nay if his Troubles
are yet inlarged, so as they that destroy him guiltless
are mighty, and do not come into Misfortunes like
other men; yet his Remedy is at hand still,
whilst he can say with David too, Verily there
is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a
God that judgeth the Earth. Nay if a Messenger
come and tell him (as heretofore 'twas told
David) that he who came out of his Bowels does
seek his Kingdom and his life; still his Remedy
lies in this, that he can say with David still,
Behold here I am; if the Lord say, I have no de|light
in thee,2 Sam. 15. 26. let him do with me as it seemeth good
to him. Nay if Isaiah bring him a Message, that
all the Possessions of his house shall be led captive in|to
Babylon, and that the Sons which Issue from him
shall be taken away by force, to serve as Eunuchs

amongst the Heathen; yet still his Remedy is at
hand, whilst he can answer with Hezekiah, Good
is the word of the Lord which thou hast spoken.2 Kin. 20. 19. Nay if
the Devil besiege his Patience with all the wittiest
of his Engines, and reduce him from his great
Affluence, unto his Potsherd, and his Byles; yet
even then he hath his Remedy, whilst he can ask
with holy Iob,Job. shall I receive good things at the
hand of God, and shall I not receive evil also?
The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, blessed
be the name of the Lord. Nay if a Samuel bring
him Tidings, not of a private Judgment only,
[that the Iniquity of his house shall not be purg'd with
Sacrifice,] but of a publick Judgment also, (which
whosoever shall but hear shall find that both his
ears shall tingle,) to wit, That even the Ark of the
Lord is taken, and that the glory is departed from
Israel; yet even then he hath his Remedy,
whilst he can say with good old Eli,1 Sam. 3. 11, 18, c. It is the
Lord, let him do what seemeth him good. To con|clude
with an Instance much neerer Home;
Admit the Dutch and French Armies should
come upon us whilst we are sick,Gen. 34, 25. as Simeon and
Levi fell on the Shechemites when they were sore;
And so should be the same to us, which both
Egypt and Assyria were once to Israel, to wit the

Rod of God's Anger, and the Staff of his Indigna|tion;
yet if We are his Children, and They his
Rod, let us but strive as little children to be the
better for our Correction, and 'twill be natural for
the Father to cast his Rod into the Fire.
. 4. Which being seasonably premis'd, we
are no otherwise to bewail the Rod of God upon
our Country, then as we have either by our
Sins helpt to betray her to its Infliction, or have
not been helping by our Prayers to ease her of it.
Let us repent us of the first, and betake our
selves unto the second, and then submit the event
of All, to his Disposal who hath appointed it.
To him therefore who is able to keep us from fal|ling,
and to raise us when we are down, and to pre|sent
us being risen, before the Presence of his Glory
with exceeding Ioy, To the only wise God our Sa|viour,
be ascribed by Us and by all the World,
Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this time for|wards
for evermore.
FINIS.







Concio Synodica
DE POTESTATE
ECCLESIASTICA,
AD
CLERUM ANGLICANUM,
EX
Provinci praesertim Cantuariensi, in Aede Paulin
Londinensi habita
VIII. Idus Maias, MDCLXI.




REVERENDISSIMO
IN CHRISTO PATRI
AC DOMINO,
D^o^. GUILIELMO,
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi; Totius Angliae
Primati  Metropolitano;
REVERENDIS DOMINIS
EPISCOPIS;
Totique Clero Anglicano, Decanis, Archidia|conis,
aliisque Compresbyteris, ex singulis
Dioecesibus,  Cathedralibus Ecclesiis,
Provinciae praesertim Cantuariensis, in Sy|nodo
Londinensi, Auctoritate Regi Con|gregatis,
T. P.
,
Hoc 
Qualecunque
Dicat Dedicatque.






Actorum Capite quindecimo, versu 28. 
sanct Synodo Apostolic sic
scriptum legimus;
Visum est enim Spiritui Sancto  nobis, nihil ultra
imponere vobis oneris, quam haec Necessaria.
. 1. QUemadmodum olim apud veteres
mos hujusmodi inolevit, ut opus
aliquod sive arduum, sive augu|stum
aggressuri, in ipso operis quasi vestibulo
 summo Numine auspicarentur; pari modo,
(quod ben vertat,) opus arduum Augustum
(si quod aliud) aggressuro, (Reverendissimi ad|modum
in Christo Patres, vosque quotquot ad|estis,
viri Fratres dilectissimi,) liceat mihi
vobis omnibus (si cum Sancto Psalmist loqui
deceat,) exPsal. 116. 13. Illud Po|culum Salutis dicitur, quod est rever , seu gratiarum actioni de omni salute quam Deus in me contulit. Vide Jun.  Tremell. in Locum. Quem etiam confer cum poculo  sive benedictionis. 1 Cor. 10, 16.  poculo propinare.
. 2. Quid enim homini Christiano, aut
prius aut antiquius haberi debet, (aut nunc prae|sertim
opportunius,) qum ut  laudibus 
Elogiis Patri Luminum buccinandis, verba pub|lic
facturus exordium sumat?  post nau|fragium
litat factum, votivam Tabulam sus|pendat?
. 3. Deo scilicet providente, Deploratis|sima
scelerum mancipia, quorum audaci ante
Decennium Domi fortisque exulabamus, ipsa
tandem dispersa vicissim exulant; nec jam am|plius
assidentes
Cernimus immunes aliena ad pabula fucos.
Deo brachium exerente, Phaethontes isti praeco|eiores,
qui annos proxim elapsos alienis curri|bus
insedissent, ceu Brontia quadam perculsi,
praecipites ruunt prout aguntur. Nec aliud
illis jam superest protervitatis suae solatium,
qum magnis ausis excidisse,  (quod habemus
apud Longinum)  illud 
documentumque reliquisse, Posteris suis salu|tiferum,
, nec ulla mancipiis Sa|turnalia
in omne aevum duratura. Deo deni
curante,  mirum in modum procurante, ex
qum procul dissitis Britanniae partibus, post

duodecennem , unius corporis 
in unum denu coalescimus? nec jam ampli|us
periculosa, sed utili fruimur Innocenti?
. 4. O qum gratulor vobis vestrum ad
vos Receptum exoptatissimum! quodque non
amplius in Britanni ipsa Britannia sit requi|renda!
Quin  solennia Gratiarum vota sunt
Hostibus vestris nuncupanda; qui rabie su ef|fecerunt,
ut  accenseamini; deturque vo|bis
conspectiorem de Fortun ferociente Tri|umphum
agere. Operae pretium prop erat in
tot discrimina incidisse, ut de Divino in vos fa|vore
vel sic constaret;
Aliquisque malis fuit usus in illis.
. 5. Nam si Gregorius Adami Culpam rect
dixerit felicem, quippe quae talem Redemptorem
habere meruit: Quidni etiam vobis gratuler
Ruinae nuperae Beneficium, quibus Talem,
Tantumque (qualis est Caesar noster Britanni|cus)
indulsit Deus Instauratorem?
. 6. Illi ergo bonorum omnium Fonti si|mul
 Largitori, qui quantumlibet immeren|tibus
haec otia fecit, luctumque nostrum tam diu|tinum
in Citharam vertit sempiternam, utpote
nobis in quantum Subditis, Imperii Principem

Augustissimum; (fugientium Charitum cum
Camaenis Deo proximum Statorem:) nobis in
quantum Christianis, Ecclesiae Proceres corda|tissimos;
nobis in quantum Reformatis, hodier|nam
Synodum Consultissimam; nec nostra so|lm,
sed nosmetipsos nobismetipsis etiam resti|tuit;
soli (inquam) Thaumaturgo, Triuni
Deo, Sospitatori nostro sapientissimo, sit Ho|nos
 Gloria in omnem deinceps Aeterni|tatem.
. 7. Nec tantm DeoHeb. 11. 6.  Gratia|rum
Actiones habendae sunt de tot tantisque
beneficiis in nos collatis; sed insuper nobis o|randum
est pro Catholic Christi Ecclesi, per
varia Regna Resque publicas quaquaversum
disseminat. Nominatim ver, pro Anglican
hc nostr; Atque inibi ante alios, ejusdem
Ecclesiae Nutricio Carolo, peculiari Dei gra|ti,
Magnae Britanniae, Franciae,  Hiberniae
Rege, Fidei Defensore, in omnibus Causis,
omniumque Personarum, sive sacrarum, sive
civilium, immediat secundum Deum Supre|mo
in Terris Moderatore. Pro Regin Matre
Henriett Mari; pro Illustrissimo Principe,
Jacobo Duce Eboracensi; aliisque quibuscun|que
 Regio stemmate oriundis.
Pro utra Domo Parliamenti; pro Regni
Proceribus Nobilissimis; praesertim iis qui
Regi adsunt  secretioribus consiliis. Specia|tim
ver Preces apud Patrem Coelestem sunt
effundendae, pro universo Clero Anglicano, in
utramque Domum Convocationis mox deinde
coituro; pro Reverendissimis Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis etiam Reverendis; aliisque quibus|cunque
inferioris subsellii Clericis, quibus-qui|bus
sive muneribus sive nominibus insigniantur;
ut Pater Luminum benignissimus, cujus ver|bum
est ipsa veritas,  via ad vitam explora|tissima,
pro bonitate su dignetur Hodiernis
Caetibus Interesse; Qu quaecunque demum
consilia ab iis erunt ineunda, in publicam cedant
utilitatem, inque Dei nostri Gloriam usque 
usque efferendam, per Jesum Christum Do|minum
nostrum: cujus meritis innixi, ejusque
adjuti oratione, (brevissim quidem ill, sed om|nibus
numeris absolut,) haec  caetera qualia|cunque
quae nobis ex usu futura sunt,  Deo op|timo
Maximo iisdem verbis exoremus, quibus
Ipse Incarnatus orandum statuit.
Pater Noster qui es in Coelis, sanctificetur nomen
tuum. Adveniat Regnum tuum. Fiat voluntas tua
sicut in Coelo, sic  in Terra. Panem nostrum
quotidianum da nobis hodie:  dimitte nobis de|bita
nostra, sicut  nos dimittimu Debitoribus no|stris.
Et ne nos inducas in Tentationem, sed libera
nos a Malo. Nam tuum est Regnum, Potentia, 
Gloria, in Secula Seculorum.
AMEN.



Visum est enim Spiritui Sancto  nobis nihil ultra
imponere vobis oneris, quam haec Necessaria.
INeunti mihi rationem de suscepto munere
obeundo, (Reverendissimi admodum in
Christo Patres, Fratres in Domino Dilectis|simi,)
in mentem illic immissum est, (,
an secus, aliorum per me licet judicium esto,)
quemadmodum Synodi  Synedria in id prae|cipu
indicuntur, ut hominum animos com|ponant,
 paci publicae velificentur; Ita duo
esse potissimm humani generis Propudia, Loio|litas
nimirum  Erastianos, qui (instar Davi
illius Terentiani) certatim omnia interturbant;
ac utramque , civilem pariter  Ecclesia|sticam,
(nec enim illa minus, qum haec, vide|tur
coelitus oriunda,) qu public, qu privatim,
non modo vellicant delibant, sed pro virili sua
parte convulsum eunt. Quicquid est juris Ec|clesiastici,
aut ad sacram  quoquo modo
pertineat, Illi solis Ecclesiasticis (Papae scilicet
cum Praelatis) in totum asserunt; Civilium
interim Magistratuum nulla habita ratione. Isti
ver  regione ad stuporem usque abrepti
, (ut Sancti Basilii verbis utar,) in|super

habitis Ecclesiasticis, ad solos homines
seculares Rem totam deferunt.
. 2. Haec sunt Monstra illa Dogmatum,
de quibus Primaeva Dei Ecclesia nunquam vel
fando inaudivit; sed quae ab aevis sequioribus
ex nescio quo Tartaro erumpentia,  in Bri|tannias
has nostras malis avibus advecta, cre|dentium
animos mentesque ad subjectionem
debitam emicantes, ceu pestilenti quodam sy|dere
eum in modum afflaverunt, uti corrupta
Christiani Obsequii Regula steterit diu,  ob|mutuerit.
Hinc enim odia saepe progerminant
plusquam Vatiniana; ex odiis Schismata, Facti|ones,
Secessiones in partes,  quod malorum
fere omnium extrema linea habenda est, Ne velle
quidem sibi ut ab altera parte benefiat. Hinc Templa
Templis adversantur, Conciliabula ex diametro
Conciliabulis opponuntur, atque Altare contra
Altare ubi loci fere erigitur. Nec in Schismate
(Proh dolor!) sibi terminum figit malorum
seges; sed (gliscentibus indies Animorum Pa|roxysmis,
 ,) Res subinde repetun|tur;
 fact clarigatione, fecialis hasta conti|nu
mittitur; Bellum public indicitur; ad|versis
concurritur aciebus;  (nisi Divinits
sit provisum) ad ipsam internecionem jugi tra|ctu
dimicatur.
. 3. Neque tamen hc obtinet, quod 
fort objiciant;
Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum; Quod
enim Dominus salvator de se edixit, Nolite ar|bitrari
quod Pacem venerim immissurus in Terram;
Non enim Pacem,Mat. 10. 34. sed Gladium; non ad Finem ad|ventus
Christi, sed tantummod ad Eventum re|ferri
debet, prae hominum vitiis oriturum. Non
est , sed  tantm , quod ibi loci
intelligitur: praedixit Ille quid cert futurum
esset, non quid fieri decrevisset, aut faciendum
esse existimaret. Non se causam fore dissidii, sed
puram putam occasionem. Ipse enim qui 
Auctor Princeps Pacis, tanti Pacem aestima|vit,
ut etiam sudore suo  sanguine facil dux|erit
redimendam, suisque Disciplulis valedictu|rus
Pacem habuitJoh. 13. 27. commendatissimam, nihil un|quam
sollicitis in votis habuit (imm ver nec
in Praeceptis) qum ut Pacem Amoebaeam in
cunctis hominum commerciis vigere faceret.
Et nequid nobis videretur intentatum reliquisse
(quantum humanae voluntatis ingenium fert,)
qu quod maxim cupiebat effectum daret;
promisit suis, abiturus, se missurum Spiritum
Sanctum, cujus aura non secus ac Pacis vinculo,
omnes obicem non ponentes in unum corpus

coagmentaret.. Chrysost. Hom. 61. in Mat. 18. p. 659. Promisit Episcopis vel duobus in
nomine suo congregatis (sicut Chrysostomus Eu|thymius
Textum illum interpretantur,) se, per
spiritus sui virtutem, in eorum medio affuturum.
(Mat. 18. 19, 20.)  si numerus tam exiguus
spiritu sancto non destituitur, (ut rect arguit Coe|lestinus
in iis quos scripsit codicillis ad Syno|dum
illam Ephesinam,) Quomodo (inquit) non
credemus in medio vestrum futurum esse, ubi in
unum simul conveniunt tanta sanctorum multitudo?
ut quod Apostolus dixit de Juramento, [
esse exhibitum, qu succrescentibus controversiis
in Finem esset, ad Heb. 6. 16.] non dubitave|rim
etiam de Synodis optimo jure asseverare.
Convenit enim inter omnes, (exceptis solis So|cinianis,
 si qui sint ejusdem furfuris,) penes
Synodum Oecumenicam, omnis dissidii Ecclesia|stici
jus supremum decisivum censendum esse;
in quantum nullum sit Tribunal (nec ullum san
vel fingi potest) ad quod  Synodo Oecumenic
ulla competat Appellatio. Quantum autem
Oecumenica quaquaverss per orbem Terra|rum
valet, Tantundem fer Nationalis, (prae|sertim
in regno pleni juris, quale Britannicum,
Siculumque, quae ver audiunt , atque
,) intra suarum ditionum Pomaeria obti|net.
. 4. Ne ver longe abeatur, dispiciamus
jam de Synodo, quam habemus prae manibus
expendendam: Prim scilicet  celeberrim;
 ad quam, tanquam ad normam, Reliquoe om|nes
sunt exigendae. Nam quemadmodum olim
inter Iudaeos, si quaestio aliqua orta esset quam
Schismatis suspicio sequeretur, Synedrium il|lic
consulebant, prout illis ex LegeDeut. 17. praecep|tum
erat; Pari modo  Christiani, exort
gravi Controversi de Lege Ceremoniali per
Moysen lat,  gliscentibus inter illos de die
in diem simultatibus, evestigi ac sine mor
Concilium ver Apostolicum consultum eunt, (ver|sibus
2, 4, 5.) Apostoli Presbyteri de propo|sit
controversi consilium ineunt. (v. 6.) Inter
caeteros Assessores, Beatus Petrus Iacobus
sententias dicunt;  edem fere dicendi for|mul,
qua Senatores apud Romanos sententiarum
Dictionem solito more concludebant; ,
quamobrem ego sic censeo, (v. 19.) Mox in Iacobi
sententiam illam universi pedibus euntes, de
communi plan consensu hujusmodi placitum
decreverunt:
.

Visum est sane Spiritui sancto  nobis nihil ul|tra
imponere vobis oneris, quam haec necessaria.
. 5. In quo verborum circuitu sive com|plexione,
habetis Canonem Ecclesiasticum, ab
ipsis Apostolis cum Presbyteris  con|gregatis,
ad lites quasdam dirimendas, Hiero|solymis
constitutum.
Tria sunt autem quae prima fronte hc se of|ferunt
observanda. Quorum illud inprimis no|tandum
venit, qud in ipso Canonis statim ini|tio
Spiritus Sancti fit metio, ne de negotio plan
humano, aut mer humana Auctoritate, hc agi
videretur. Non enim Synodi sibi ipsis, nec
 multitudini, nec soli Regum praecellentiae
(quorum aut jussu aut permissu in unum coe|unt,)
sed annuenti Spiritui Sancto, quicquid ha|bent
potestatis acceptum ferunt.
At postquam Synodus dixiset, ,
quorsum illud etiam adjecit, ; num
ob istam ratiunculam, (quam tanti faciunt Ro|manenses,)
Quia de Spirits Testimonio ne|quaquam
nobis constare potest, nisi Synodus
Inspiranti suppetias ferat? minime Gentium.
Sed per figuram illam effertur, quam vocant
Rhetores Hendiadyn, sive (ut alii explicatis)

. Ut sensus sit; visum est nobis ,
nobis , nobis edoctis  directis per
Spiritum Sanctum, (non ne errare valeamus, sed)
ne erremus. Unde  Patres in Conciliis solen|niter
dicere assolebant, [Decrevit haec sancta Sy|nodus
in Spiritu sancto convocata.]
Secund ver est observandum, Qud sancta
Synodus non censuit, monendas esse hc Gentes
de Rebus ad vitam necessariis, quas jam illis
innotuisse compertum habuit, [nempe  caedi|bus,
Latrociniis, Rebellionibus, Sacrilegiis, atque
id genus aliis omnin esse abstinendum,] sed de iis
tantum praecepit, de quibus potuit litigari, illis|que
aliquid subesse Dubii;  per quae stetit,
quo minus Gentes cum Hebraeis in unum coe|tum
coalescerent. Cujusmodi erant , sive
Immolatitia, sanguis etiam,  suffccata, quae ne
Gentes degustarent hc cautum est. Si quis
autumaverit, sub hoc Canone comprehendi
quaecun ad salutem requiri solent, toto Coelo
errsse dicendus erit. Quum praecepta sint alia
at alia, sub poen mortis etiam sancita, quae
ade non comprehenduntur  sub
isto tam brevi verborum ambitu; ut nec legi|tim
ad eundem reduci queant. De illo uno
Quaesitum est,  quibus rebus Incircumcisos

cavere sibi oporteret, (sintne malae, an mediae, non
multum refert,) qu inter Gentes  Judaeos
aliquando tandem conveniret. Esu Sanguinis 
Suffocatorum. Christianis etiam est interdictum
(implicite saltem  interpretativ)  secundo. Conc. Gangr. Can. 2. sed in Cod. Can. Ec. un. Can. 60. A. D. 32.
Canone Concilii Gangrensis: diuque postmodm
fuisse in Ecclesi Dei observatum, (nempe post
tempora Apostolica,) Testes habemusSuffocatis  Morticinis abstinemus, ne qu sanguine contaminemur, vel intra viscera sepulto. Tertul. Apolog. c. 9. Tertul|lianum,
Tantum ab humano sanguine cavemus, ut nec edulium pecorum in cibis sanguinem noverimus. Min. Fael. in Octavio. Minutium,, c. Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 3. cap. 3. p. 228. edit. Paris, 1629. Clementem etiam Alexan|drinum,
quin  Novollam Leonis 58^v^a^m .
. p. 475. edit. Scrimger. Quanquam prorsus exolevisse
sub Temporibus; Euseb. Hist. Ec. edit. Steph. 1544. l. 2. fol. 46. p. 1. Augustini, hujusce Canonis
Reverentiam, (si non ubique, saltem in Afric,)
ipse nobis Augustinus testatum fecit. Atque vel
inde satis constat de rerum istarum indifferentia,
sive , quibus tamen accedens Lex mora|lem
impingit necessitatem. Necesse est enim sub|jici,
Rom. 13. 5.  visum est nobis (inquit Syno|dus
Apostolica) aliud onus non imponere, qum
haec necessaria; vel (ut ex voce ill  in
promptu est hariolari, praesertim illis qui Grae|c

non vulgo sapiunt,) visum est nobis ea tan|tummod
imperare, quae omnino ut fiant, pro|pter
Legem nunc latam necesse est.
Quin  illud est terti notatu dignum, qud
quemadmodum ipse Christus Religionis cor|ruptelas
reformaturus, ad Primordia rerum 
Fontes recurri voluit, (Mat. 19. 8.) ita  Syno|dus
Apostolica de re praesenti decretura, ad Le|gem
illic respicit Geneses nono promulgatam,
non tantm Gentibus, aut Judaeis, sed Filiis
Noae, Aut (quod in idem plan recidit) Huma|no
Generi observandam; utut, tempore pro|cedente,
apud solos fer Judaeos vigorem tenuit.
Expensis autem his Tribus, in quibus Scopus
hujus Canonis praecipu vertitur  consistit;
Tria  statim emergunt, cum bono Deo
eventilanda.
Inprimis enim videndum habeo De Potestate
Ecclesiastica hujusmodi Synodo competente;
quousque scilicet de jure protendi debeat, 
quibus cancellis circumscribi.
Secundo loco agendum erit de Rebus pur
Adiaphoris; an,  quatenus,  cujusmodi,
Necessitatem sibi acquirant;  (legitim Synodo
decernente) in Leges abeant.
Tertio demm dispiciendum de Norma illa 
Perpendiculo, ad quod decreta Ecclesiastica ne|cesse
habent ut exigantur. Haec sunt Tria illa
, quae pro Temporis ratione,  quant po|terunt
Brevitate, incumbunt mihi enucleanda.
. 1. Ad primum  quod spectat, Quic|quid
est juris Ecclesiastici ad quatuor haec ca|pita
referri potest. Inprimis nempe Liberam
Religionis professionem, quam Constantinus 
Licinius [Libertatem Religionis] in Edicto suo
nuncuprunt; Deinde etiam Immunitatem 
cunctis publicis muneribus, quae 
Iustiniano appellatur; Terti ver Ex|emptionem
Secularibus Iudiciis; postrem Ius
Auctoritativum de Laicorum causis Cognoscendi.
Quid ex his Divino jure,  quid humano sit in|troductum,
(nempe favore Imperatorum,.
Constantini, Constantii, Constantis, Leonis deni|que,
 Anthemii,) facil cuiquam innotescet,
qui cum Scriptis Canonistarum Divina confe|ret.
Gravitr autem errare solent, qui non
distinguunt Potestatem  Deo datam Ecclesia|sticis,
ab e quam Regi acceptam ferunt. Illa
enim quasi separat Rempublicam ab Ecclesi,
sed Ecclesiam Reipublicae adjungit ille. Nam
ante tempora Constantini qui Magni nomine in|signitur,

(Nominisque mensuram rever implet,)
ita Ecclesia in Regno erat, ut pars ipsius non
censeretur. Neque enim aequo jure cum reli|quis
civibus utebatur, nec praeter Iesum Cruci|fixum
(cui sub cruce militabat) contemptae pas|sim
Disciplinae ultorem habuit.
. 2. Quantum ad Ius Ecclesiasticum in|ternum
attinet, Jus nimirum praedicandi, ad pre|ces
publicas conveniendi, sacram Synaxin cele|brandi,
aedes sacras aedificandi, sacras Synodos
cogendi, sacram denique Disciplinam pro rei
merito usurpaudi; Illud Apostolis Episcopis,
quiApud nos Apostoloru~ locum Epis|copi tenent. Hieron ad Marcellum adversus Mon|tan. Ep. 54. p. 160. B. tenent Locum Apostolorum, (ut ipse Sanctus
Hieronymus disert docet) non nisi desuper
Deo concessum venit. Sed quantum ad juris
Exercitium, (quod jus externum vocare licet,)
Jus nimirum faciendi quicquid ad sacram 
pleno modo administrandam optari queat, id
non clanculm  in Latebris, sed ,
(ut loqui solent Imperatores,) Illud  piis Im|peratoribus
(sed per illos etiam  Deo) Ecclesia|sticae
Hierarchiae indultum fuit.
. 3. Nam licet Synodus Ancyrana atque
Neocaesariensis (ips Nicaena Anteriores) absque
jussu Constantini coactae sint; Regi tamen
auctoritate munitas esse, nemo sanus inficiabitur.

Distinguendum autem est semper inter Syno|dos
Generales,  mer Topicas; Illae  solisVide Eu|trop. Longo|bard. p. 10.
Imperatoribus, Hae ab EpiscopisEpistolae per fratres  Metropolitano dirigendae sunt, c. Concil. Tarra|con. 500. post Christum annos in Hisp. celebra|ti, Canon. 3. . Con|cil. Antioch. Can. 19. Sed Cod. Can. Eccl. univ. Can 98.
. Concil. Antioch. Can. 20.
. Concil. Chalced. Can. 18. Codicis vero Can. Eccl. univ. C. 197. Metropoliticis
(sive Principum Iussione, sive tacito consensu,)
pro veteri more indici possunt. Ad remConsule Euseb. lib. 3. de vit. Const. cap. 4. Evagr. l. 2. cap. 4. Theodoret. lib. 2. c. 8. Anonymum I. C. de libertate Eccl. cap. 3. exem|plis
evincendam, (si per otium meum liceret,
aut vestram saltem per patientiam,) sexcenta
san in medium proferre posem. Sed ne testi|bus
supervacaneis impraesentiarum abuti vi|dear,
sufficiat semel vel dixisse, quod sanctis|sim
recipio in me probandum, (tum contra
Papae Parasitastros, tum contra eos qui hc ex
parte Mephitim illam Papismi plus nimio re|dolent,)
Qud sine Regibus annuentibus, ex
quo Reges evaserunt Ecclesiae Filii, Nutriciique,
 quasi Episcopi , etiam divinits con|stituti,
(ut Magnus Ille Constantinus non semel
dixit,) nunquam Placitis Synodalibus subscribi
licuit.
. 4. Jus autem liber cogendi Synodos, 
jus in Synodis celebradis condendi Leges, pars
est cults Christiani necessaria prorsus,  .
Quomodo enim fient omnia ,1 Cor. 14. 40. nihil
scilicet confuse,  pro cujusque Temeritate?
Quomodo controversiarum figetur Serra, 
malae fidei mercatoribus Labia saltem obtu|rabuntur?
Unde tollentur corruptelae, quae
in Ecclesiae Disciplinam subrepsisle comperi|entur?
(ut paucis denique absolvam,) Ubi loci
dificillimae de Rebus Fidei Quaestiones, aut
tut poterunt eventilari, aut ad optatum ali|quando
perduci Finem, si non in Synodo Nati|onali
in Nomine Domini congregat, cui vel
ipse fidem dedit, se pro certo interfuturum?
. 5. Quotus enim quisque est, etiam in
sacris versatissimus, (si privatim accedat, 
extra Synodum,) cui cm abdita mysteria Di|vinae
Naturae appropinquant, simulque incum|bunt
enarranda, non refugiat evestigi trementi
sanguis, atque prae metu exalbescat? Quo|tusquisque
vel Ingenio complecti queat, (nedum
verbis assequatur,) quomodo Pater sine initio,
 sine fine gignat Filium, in quem ita Gene|rans
sese totum effundit, ut ipsi nihil decedat,
 a quo Generatus e nascitur ratione, ut ab

eo qui generat recedat nunquam?   quibus
utrisque Spiritus Sanctus eo pacto procedit,
ut ne  quidem confusis Personarum Trium
proprietatibus, ejusdem naturae inter omnes
consortium existat absolutissimum? Quis est
ille in Theologicis usque ade oculatus, ut
expedire mihi queat (saltem pro rei dignitate)
ineffabile illud Divinae cum nostr Natur con|tubernium?
quove nexu sibi invicem eum in
morem sint copulatae, ut idem qui semper
ex Deo vero verus Deus existat necesse est,
Homo quoque,  quidem verus, ex ver ho|mine
nasceretur? aut quomodo mulier Des|ponsata
ita Parentem suum pepererit, ut virgo
uerit, etiam  Partu, multo qum ante Imma|culatior?
. 6. Certo certius (Auditores) tantm
abest ut privatim de rebus hujusmodi sit statu|endum;
ut nulla sint capita Theologia, unde
natae sunt aut plures, aut cert difficiliores de
ipsa Fide Quaestiones. Nulla de quibus erra|tum
est, aut facilius utique, aut periculosius. Nulla
in quibus insudarunt majore cum animi conten|tione,
supr-qum-dici-potest eximia Scripto|rum
veterum Ingenia. Nulla in quibus expli|candis,
aut magis variant Interpretes, aut ma|jores

veritati offundunt Tenebras. Tanta est ho|minum
imbecillitas, in Rebus Dei investigan|dis;
Tanta verborum etiam obscuritas, in in|vestigatis
enarrandis; Tantaque rerum diffi|cultas,
quae omne verborum artificium plerum|que
superat,  compluribus parasangis post se
relinquit.
. 7. Egone ver, aut Ille, aut quisquam
alius , ut ad ejusmodi fer 
mysteria, per loca crebris variisque difficulta|tibus
impedita, frequentibus salebris intersepta,
lamis ac saltibus impervia, eluvionibus  vora|ginibus
saepenumer intercisa, aditum Singuli
faciamus, qui vixdum patuit Universis?
Hi sunt vel Synodo tam digni vindice Nodi,
Ut sibi in solidum enodandis, Frequentiam Ho|minum
Angelorum videantur forsan desiderare.
Nec aliusmodi san frequentiam, qum cui Chri|stus
per Paracletum ita interest,  praeest, ita
dirigit, atque gubernat; ut vere possit  sine
fuco Tritum illud pronunciari, [Decrevit haec
Sancta Synodus in Spiritu Sancto Convocata,] aut
quod edem fer redit, ,
Visum est nobis per Spiritum Sanctum, nihil ultra
imponere vobis oneris, quam haec necessaria.
. 8. Non praecise, per se, antecedenter
necessaria; Necessaria tamen omnimod, ut vo|bis
in partes abeuntibus statuatur uniformis vi|vendi
ratio. Necessaria etiam, quia Praecepta.
Charitas enim (fatente Beza) in Rebus Mediis
est necessaria. Charitas autem sine obsequio,
nulla potest excogitari. Et quandoquidem il|lud
 usque ade sit pure Graecum, ut apud
Atticos etiam Scriptores de iis rebus adhibeatur,
quas aut fieri, aut omitti Lex ipsa jubet, ideo
rect me ducit ad secundum  trutinandum;
 Nemp de rebus antecedentr  ex natur
su Adiaphoris. An,  quatenus,  cujusmodi
Necessitatem sibi acquirant,  (legitim Synodo
decernente) in Leges abeant. .
. 1. Vocabulum illud [] quod 
Sanct Synodo adhibetur, liquid notat Au|ctoritatem
Praecepto junctam.  autem hic di|citur
quod  supr (v. 10.) Apert innuens,
Materiam Canonis Apostolici Adiaphoris esse
annumerandam. Non de Fornicatione, aut com|mercio
cum Idolis, (quae Natura sua sunt mala,
 quorum merces mors est,) sed de sanguine lo|quor,

suffocatis,  quibus ut rigid se abstine|ant
tenentur Gentes. Cujus rei Indifferentiam
(si per se consideretur) ille Christi Aphorismus
abund probat. Non quod intrat in os coinquinat
hominem, sed id quod exit. (Mat. 15. 11.) Et qui
forte pauci adhuc ista tangere formidant, (inquit
EpiscopusAugustnius ubi supr, lib. 32. cap. 13. p. 200. C. Wirtemb. Con|fess. art. 35. Vide Bezae Epist. Octava~ ad D. Ed|mund. Grin|dallum Epis|cop. Lond. pag. 210. Hipponensis)  caeteris omnibus irri|dentur.
Cui etiam suffragatur universa Ecclesia
Wirtembergensis: Instituerunt (inquit illa) in
Actis Apostolicis, ut Gentes caverent ab esu sangui|nis
 suffocatorum; non ut haec observatio inter
Gentes esset perpetua, sed Temporalis;  tantis|per
duratura, dum hujusmodi esus non esset amplius
offendiculum. Ita Ecclesia etiam Bohemica, capite
dimo quinto.
. 2. Rerum autem Indifferentiam cessare
pose,   transire in Necessaria, (saltem
pro temporis conditione, necdum legibus abro|gatis
per quas jubentur,) Argumentis pen in|numeris
probare possem, nisi id hominis videre|tur
libertate loquendi su intemperantr abu|tentis.
Pace vestr tamen liceat (mod brevi|tr
raptimque) ut inde usque ab initio rem to|tam
repetam. Dignum est enim quod hic ad|vertam,
Post privilegia multifariam primis Pa|rentibus
indulta, placuisse Deo Protoplastas

triplici Lege coercere. Prim scilicet naturali,
cujus primumAquin. 1. 2. q. 94. art. 2. Praeceptum est, Bonum esse
prosequendum, vitandum malum; Altera super|naturali,
de Credendo sperando in unum Deum,
ipsumque animitus diligendo; Tertia deni spe|ciali,
(ut doctissimus Torniellus loquendum pu|tat)
De ligno scientiae Boni  Mali sub poena mor|tis
non comedendo. Si quis autem hc sciscite|tur,
cur prioribus non contentus, tertiam insuper
Legem adjecerit Deus? Respondent illico Do|ctores,
id duplici de Causa  Creatore fuisse fa|ctum.
Prima causa haec erat, ut sua in homi|nes
 luculentis aliquant constare pos|set;
cui Res per se Medias, nullisque Legibus
adversantes, pro absoluto suo imperio, aut prae|cipere
placuit, aut prohibere, quemadmodum ipsi
collibitum fuerit. Altera causa videtur esse, ut
vel sic in primo homine, (Humani Generis plan
Archetypo,) luce claris innotesceret futuris
seculis, quantum obsequii quasi vectigal (in his
quae mala non sunt)  solvendum
esset. Inprimis Deo, per Quem Rex Regnat;
deinde Regi, qui Dei in Terris vicarius audit;
postmodum ver Potestatibus Rege missis. Ita
enim Beatus Petrus, Pauli optimus Interpres,
Ep. 1. cap. 2. v. 13.  sic deinceps.
. 3. Et sicut in commodum Reipublicae
conduntur Leges seculares; ita in usum etiam
Ecclesiae, ab ipsis Ecclesiae incunabulis, Ec|clesiasticae
quaedam Leges vigorem suum obti|nuerunt.
Nascente adhuc Christianismo, ut in
externis etiam Ritibus cultus Dei promove|retur,
Beatus Paulus hanc tulit Legem; Om|nia
decenter, atque ordine fiant. 1 Cor. 14. 40.
ubi vocabulum , idem sonat quod .
(c. 7. v. 35.)In Col. 2. 5. Chrysostomus, Oecumenius,
Theophylactus, exponunt  per . ut
nihil confuse peragatur,  pro cujus temeritate.
Illud enim cum decoro, (ut S. Ambrosius in|terpretatur,)
quod fit cum Pace  Disciplina.
Rect igitur Calvinus illud Pauli praeceptum
vocavit Regulam; ad quam (inquit) omnia quae
ad externam  Ecclesiae spectant exigere con|venit.
Et si quis fort hic urgeat, quod Apo|stolus
Iacobus pugnare secum videatur, cum negat
exhibendam esse Gentibus molestiam., (Act. 15.
19.)  tamenElegisse mihi viden|tur pro tem|pore Rem facilem,  nequaquam observanti|bus onerosa~. Aug. contr. Faust. l. 32. c. 13. Ritus praescribit qui in Lege Mosis
continebantur; respondet optim Calvinus, (cu|jus
utinam hc ex parte fratres nostri dissi|dentes
sequaces fiat!)Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. p. 30 Primum nihil ab il|lis
exigit, quod fraternae concordiae non deberent.
Deinde etiam haec praecepta nihil eorum conscientiis

inquietudinis aut turbae afferre poterant; in quan|tum
scirent, se coram Deo esse liberos. Praeterea,
in externa Disciplina  Ceremoniis, sigillaim vo|luit
praescribere quid sequi debeamus.postremo;
prout Ecclesiae utilitas requiret, tam ritus usitatos
mutare  abrogare, quam novos instituere conve|niet.
Et,Demon|stravimus de principio, potestatem hnc fuisse  Christo Ec|clesiae tradi|tam, ut scili|cet pro cir|cumstantiis locorum  temporum, proque ne|cessitate Ec|clesiarum le|ges concipiat  Canones. Zanch. l. 1. in 4tum praecept. p. 765. ut in pauca rem conferam, Ecclesiae
fer ad unam omnes quae Protestantium nomine
censentur, saltem Bohemica, Helvetica, Gallica,
Belgica, Wirtembergensis etiam,  Suevica, An|glica,
Saxonica,  Confessio Augustana, (quas
de industri nudius-tertius hisce oculis usur|pavi)
uno ore confitentur, etiamsi non uno ver|borum
ambitu, Quod omnes Ritus  Ceremoniae,
quae ad pacem faciunt  Charitatem, nec verbo Dei
adversantur, sive eae ab Episcopis, sive  Synodis
Ecclesiasticis, sive ab aliis Auctoritatibus quibuscun|que
extiterint,Vide Harmo|niam Confessi num Genevae Edit. 1581. d p. 210. ad p. 231. prae|sertim p. 213. 214. semel introductae servari debent; 
de eo simpliciores laborare non debent, neque hoc mo|veri
aut perurbari, sed quia bonae sunt, iis etiam ad
bonum uti.
. 4. Quod illis potissimm notandum ar|bitror,
 remotis Arbitris expendendum, qui
ita videntur animati, ut nihil sibi mandari ve|lint,
quod non in ipso sacro Codice concepis ver|bis
praecipiatur. Cert graviter in eos censurm

agit Theologus ille consummatissimus, Epis|copus
hodie Lincolniensis, (cujus laudes
san reticeo, quia crediderim de his reticeri
velle,  ipsius modestiae parcendm puto;)
Posse (inquit) de novo Leges condi,Sanderson de leg. Hum. oblig. Prael. 7. p. 288. de Ritibus, de
Rebus,  personis Ecclesiasticis, omnibusque sacri
cultus externi circumstantiis, ad ordinem, honesta|tem,
 aedificationem spectantibus, extra eas quae
sunt a Christo  ejus Apostolis traditae in sacris
literis; adeo manifesta res est  rationi consentanea,
ut perversi judicii obstinatique animi suspicione aegre
se liberaverit, qui siccus  sobrius id negave|rit.
. 5. Quin  Res per se Medias Necessitatem
posse induere, si non satis aliunde, vel inde liquet;
Qud duplici semper Iure, Divino scilicet 
Canonico, Primaeva Dei Ecclesia felici omine re|geretur.
Quorum illud in Sacro Codice, Hoc in
Codice continetur quod  Concilio Chalcedonen|si
Corpus Canonum appellatur. Uterque olim in
Conciliis Sedile habuit Peculare, in ipso Con|sessus
Meditullio eminentissim collocatum; ut
ex conspecto eorum jure, Apostolorum suc|cessores
Religionis Dogmata explorarent, ob|ortas
Haereses succiderent,  quicquid uspiam
controversiae ad Rem-publicam Ecclesiasticam ali|quo

modo pertinebat, Divino semper admini|culo
ad laetum exitum perducerent.
. 6. Qud autem Leges Ecclesiasticae, Au|ctoritate
Regi statuminatae, ipsas hominum
conscientias in Deo onerant, ex eo facil con|ficitur,1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
qud  eo modo ac methodo
parendum docet Beatus Petrus, ut Regi in
quantum supremo Domino, Reliquis in quan|tum
a Rege missis, utrisque ver propter Deum
obsequium debitum exhibeatur. Et merit qui|dem;
quum Totum Regimen exprimatur per
, (Rom. 13. 2.) unde  Petrus nos
jubet (apto vocis delectu) :1 Pet. 2. 13.
nimirum Rom. 13. 1. . Et quando|quidem
in ordine sive Progressu Potestatum,
Presbytero ad Episcopum, ab Episcopo ad Syno|dum,
Synodo ad Regem, Rege statim ad Deum
scandimus; ineluctabili consequenti videtur
mihi concludi posse, Quod quicquid Reges prae|cipiunt,
sive per se immediate, sive per alios
quoscunque quos Potestatis suae participant, si
nusquam  Deo prohibeatur, id ipse Deus praece|pisse
censendus est. Nam  identidem praece|pit,
ut unusquisque Potestatibus obsequium prae|stet.
Nec illud tantm, ut unusquisque; verum
etiam ut Omnis. Rom. 13. 1. Anima sublimioribus Pote|statibus

subjecta sit. Cujusmodi phrase sub|monetur,
qud non in speciem, aut ore tenus, sed
medullitus, ex animo; non propter iam amoli|endam,
sed propter ipsam Conscientiam, fidem|que
nostram liberandam, morem gerere Potesta|tibus
devincti sumus. Non ad oculum servientes,
quasi hominibus placentes, sed ut servi Christi faci|entes
Dei voluntatem, in Cordis nostri simplicitate;
bona fide servientes, sicut Domino,  non homini|bus.
(Eph. 6. 6.)
. 7. Nec hc immemores esse decet, quod
in Synodo Nationali Res Regis agitur; quippe
qui duplicem Personam sustinet,  Jure duplici
potitur; unde  Regis Auctoritatem, non mod
in Personas, sed  in Causas Ecclesiasticas ag|noscit
Artic. 37. Ecclesia Anglicana. Et quandoquidem
edixit Salvator noster, redde Caesari quae Caesaris,
perinde est ac si dixisset, (Judice saltemAug. in Matth de pu|ero Centurio|nis judicantis se indignum Praesenti Domini. Au|gustino,)
Nisi Caesaris praeceptum praecepto Dei ad|versatur,
tanquam judici supremo parendum est.
Cui consonum accinuit Iohannes Bekinsau apud
Goldastum. Quicquid jusserit Supremus Magi|stratus
quod Dei mandatis non repugnat, ita ut locum
non habeat illud, [Melius est Deo quam hominibus
obedire,] omnes, cujus-cujus honoris fuerint, nisi
Dei ipsius Ordinationi resistere velint, profecto ob|sequi

tenetur. Eundem in sensumApud Con|fess. Bohem. cap. 16. de Magist. Polit. Hieronymus,
Si Dominus (inquit) jubet quae non sunt adversa
sacris literis, servus Domino subjiciatur. Huc ac|cedunt
Confessionum Reformatarum etiam
suffragia, nimirumVide Har|mon. Confess. Sect. 19. pag. 276, 281, 282, 286. Belgicae, Bohemicae, Saxonicae,
Augustanae. [Universi  singuli eminentibus Pote|statibus
subjectionem praestent, in omnibus quae Deo
non sunt contraria. Necessario debent obedire, nisi
jubentibus peccare.
. 8. Nec tantm numero suffragantium,
sed  gravissimis Rationum momentis nitimur.
Illud enim inprimis incumbit Regi, (aliisque sub
eo qui Gladium habent,) summam curam adhi|bere,
ut Ecclesia Dei Rit, atque ordine Gu|bernetur;
ne polluatur unquam, aut corruat,
sed contra omnigenas corruptelas sarta tecta
praestetur. Privatis omnibus curandum, ut in|cera
Ecclesiae membra sint; neve sinant cor|pus
suum (quod Templum Dei nuncupatur 
Spiritu Sancto) pluribus sordibus inquinari,
qum ut purissimus ille Spiritus in eo velit in|habitare.
Regibus ea propter commissus est
Gladius secularis, quo extrinsecus accingun|tur
ceu Dei vindices in iram, Rom. 13. 4. Pri|vatis
ver non permittitur nii gladius ille spiri|tus,
(seu verbum Dei,) quo Christianos ad unum

omnes adversus impetus Diaboli accingit Paulus.
(Eph. 6. 17.) Praefectis denique Ecclesiasticis
commissus est Gladius Spiritualis, quo omnes
subditos immorigerosMatt. 18. 17, 18. Tit. 1. 13. , (id est, per
modum Excisionis,) eosque Satanae etiam tradere
1 Cor. 5. 5. , ab ipso Deo mandatum habent.
Frustr enim dixisset Christus, Dic Ecclesiae,
(Mat. 18. 17.) nisi effraenes compescendi facul|tas
ei competiisset. Ita natur est comparatum,
ut Gemella haec Potestas, Sacra pariter,  Se|cularis,
(prorsus ut Pietas, Probitas,Prov. 24. 21. Timor
Dei, Regis,) manus porrigant sibi invicem ab
omni parte auxiliatrices.
. 9. Ab utriusque Auctoritate quicquid
Legum positivarum de rebus nud Adiaphoris
sancitum fuerit, (ex sententi Ecclesiae Angli|canae,)
ipsam obligat conscientiam. Conscientiam
dicimus, non Rei ipsius, (sive prohibitae, sive prae|ceptae,)
quae per se est , sed nostrae saltem o|bedientiae,
quam Lex Divina  nobis exigit; 
ade non est , ut ad salutem etiam aeternam
sit usquequaque necessaria: utpote quam qui
non praestiterit, damnationem sibi accersit, si fides
Apostolo sit habenda, disert illud asseveranti,
Rom. 13. 2. Hanc esse mentemVide Tom. 2. Hmil. 4. Ecclesiae nostrae,
videre est in Homilia de Bonis operibus institut.

Dicit autem Ecclesia Suevica;Harm. Con|fess. Sect. 19. pag. 292. Graviter peccant qui propter has indifferentes Ceremonias turbant Ec|clesias, dam|nant alios principes,  Magistratus. Haeccine Pietas quam jactamus? Haeccinecha|ritas quam debemus Ec|clestis  fra|tribus? Zanch. de Rel. lib. 1. pag. 765. se inter primi
Ordinis Bona opera, dedisse locum Obedientiae quae
Magistratibus exhibetur. Et unusquisque studiosius
publicis legibus se accommodat, quo sincerior fuerit
Christianus, fideque ditior. Verba san, si qua
alia, vald , prop dixeram etiam dig|nissima,
quae Canonibus nostris accenseantur.
Videant, quibus vacat, Confessionis illius Sue|vicae
caput tertium supra vicesimum.
. 10. Hc Gemell Auctoritate, Regi
scilicet  Ecclesiastic, utrque coelits ori|und,
adhuc in Lumbis Proavorum innixi su|mus,
cm ab ill sive Ecclesi sive curi potius
discessimus, quam ab omnibus deserendam Ro|mani
fecerant. Unde nihil frequentis in ore
erat Pontificiis, qum nihil apud nos ordine, ni|hil
decenter , sed susque deque potius
omnia in sacris coetibus usurpari. Quibus ut
os occluderemus, eo pacto resecuimus quic|quid
aut spurcum fuit, aut frigidum, aut sacris
literis adversarium; ut retinenda etiam censue|rimus,
non tantm ea quae nrant omnes ab ipsis
Apostolis derivata, verm etiam  alia quae|dam
quae exNunquam Ecclesia Dei in Terris ca|ruit Cere|moniis, ne carere po|test; cum sine Ceremoniis, nec fideles in unum con|venire  co|alescere pos|sunt, nec Deo public ser|vire. Zanch. de Rel. l, 1. p. 420. Thes. 2. usu publico videbantur, quippe
quadantenus facientia1 Cor. 14. 26. .
. 11. Rectne, an secus, non Illorum erat
dispicere, nedum cert pronunciare, quibus di|citur
ab Apostolo, obedite Praepositis,  subja|cete,
Heb. 13. 17. si quid aut deficit, aut redun|dat,
aut quocun modo claudicat in itis Pla|citis
Ritualibus, quibus obstrepunt Novatores,
totisque viribus adversantur; totum illud luben|tissim
Gubernatoribus Ecclesiasticis, in legi|tim
Synodo convocatis, seu auferendum, seu
ampliandum, seu castigandum etiam submittitur.
Absit autem in tali Synodo, ut cum carne 
sanguine deliberetur; aut consilium ineatur de
istis Homulis deliniendis, quibus quieta movere
magna merces. Nam (ut optim Hilarius,)
Dulce quidem est nomen Pacis, sed aliud est Pax,
aliud servitus. Et aliquant quidem praestat
,Ignat. ad ol. Edit. Voss. pag. 12. (ut Ignatius scribit ad Polycar|pum,)
discerpi simul  vincere, quam turpi
cedere contumaciae;  optimas Leges abrogare,
e tantm de caus, quod saep  pessimis vio|lantur;
aut summis curis distringi nequid illis
non placeat, quibusRom. 131. Dei Ordinatio vix unquam
placuit,  quibus non placet placere Deo. Il|lud
fer unum Curandum est, ut in omnibus
Placitis Synodalibus, identidem respiciatur ad
illam duplicem Evangelium praedicandi ratio|nem,

; Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 1. p. 270. in 2 Tim. 2. 2,  15. . Id. ib. p. 271. . Id. ib. p. 272. Clemente Alexandrino indigitatam;
nempe , quarum una erat 
altera. Illud enim in moreCatholici ex more suo fidem veram duobus his modis approbant.Non quia Canon solus non sibi ad universa sufficiat, sed quia S. Scripturam pro suo quisque arbitratu interpretantes varios errores concipi|ant, adeoque necesse sit, ut ad unam Ecclesiastici sensus Regulam Scripturae Coelestis Intelligentia dirigatur. Vinc. Lirin. advers Haeres. cap. 41. erat Eccle|siae
adhuc incorruptae, (testante Vincentio Liri|nensi,)
Fidem veram probare duobus his modis; Di|vini
Canonis auctoritate,  Ecclesiae Catholicae Tra|ditione.
Ad quam utramque Beatus Paulus
hortatur Thessalonicenses. Itaque fratres perstate,
 retinete Traditiones, quas didicitis, sive per
Sermonem, sive per Epistola nostram, 2. ep. c. 2.
v. 15. Atque ita traducti sumus ad tertium
 pensitandum; Nempe
De Regula illa aut Norma, ad quam decreta Eccle|siastica
necesse habent ut exigantur.
. 1. NOn abhorrebit  proposito (hinc ar|rept
occasione) secretioribus aliquan|tisper
suspiriis vicem nostram lugere, nostris
malis non tantm Poenae, sed  Reatus ingemis|cere.
Unde enim in Clerum,  in Ecclesiam, nisi
ab ipsis Ecclesiasticis tam atrociter animadver|sum?
ex quibus quippe qum plurinii, malae

fidei mercatores,  quaedam   sim|pliciorum
ex vulgo hominum credulitati ob|truserunt:
 nescio quem fucum nundinarium
veritatis Fronti illinentes, offucias fecerunt Re|ligioni,
fraudem Populo,  proxim aberant
ne sibi ipsis etiam perniciem. Nam dum sa|crae
paginae  venditabant, sugillabant in|terim
Ecclesiam, (ut ut1 Tim. 3. 15. Columnam  firma|mentum
veritatis,)  Disciplinae receptissimae
Antichristi stigma inurebant; Patrum Naevos
 labeculas sub aspectum vulgi ponebant; sua|que
ipsorum deliramenta pro imperio obtru|dentes,
Scripturas Dei sacrosanctas in Lesbiam
Regulam demutabant. Quae horsum-versum
versatilis, ad Fidei dogmata dijudicanda vice
Canonis illius  (proh dolor!) adhibeba|tur.
Et quemadmodum de olivae nucleo mitis|simae
asper exoritur oleaster, Deque papavere
Fici gratissimae ventosa  vana Caprificus exur|git;
Ita  Haereses de nostro fructificaverunt
non nostrae; degeneres veritatis grano,  mendacio
sylvestres.
. 2. Sed Haec utique (inquit ille)  Ipsi ha|bent
in nos retorquere,Tertull. de Praescript. ad|versus Haeres. cap. 17. 18.  nobis Scripturarum Adul|teria
fieri. Ergo non proficit Congressio Scriptura|rum
[ex privat nimirum interpretatione] nisi

ut aut stomachi quis ineat eversionem, aut Cerebri.
Si enim recipit Adversarius, non recipit integras;
Et si aliquatenus integras praestat, nihilominus diver|sas
expositiones comminiscitur. Tantumque veritati
obstrepit Adulter sensus, quantum utique corruptor
stylus. His nituntur Novatores, pro iis scilicet
stabiliendis quae ex falso composuerunt.
Id. ib. cap. 19. Ergo non ad Scripturas provocandum est, [pro
cujusque Arbitratu explicatas,] nec his constitu|endum
certamen, in quibus aut nulla aut incerta vi|ctoria
est, aut parum certa. Ordo rerum expostulat,
ut illud inprimis decernatur, Quibus competat fides
ipsa, cujus sint Scripturae,  quo,  per quos, 
quando,  quibus sit. Tradita Disciplina, qua fiunt
Christiani. Ubi enim apparuerit esse veritatem Dis|cipline,
 Fidei Christianae, illic erit Veritas Scri|pturarum,
 Expositionum,  omnium Traditio|num
Christianarum.
. 3. Seri dicam, Auditores, ( quantum|vis
Literatori, liceat tamen vel dixisse,) quod
quotiescunque apud me solum rationes ineo,
quibus aut funi Disputationum, aut Schisma|tum
cumulo, aut Haeresen Congeriei aliquando
tandem occurratur; non videntur haec mihi a|liter,
qum in Ecclesiasticae Auctoritatis sta|bilimento
expediri posse. Nec unquam erit ut

procedamus in Animorum consensu  Pace
public stabiliendis, (quae jam sola fere Sparta
incumbit Clero adornanda,) priusquam ad de|cantatum
illud indubitatae per omnia secula
In ips Ca|tholic Ec|clesi mag|noper cu|randum est, ut id tenea|mus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. Vin. Lir. ad|vers. Heres. cap. 3. Traditionis fulcimentum pro sua quisque virili,
, qu public, qu privatim, nosmet|ipsos
accinxerimus. Quicquid extra hunc api|cem
insudabitur, totum  quantum-quantum
non nisi  comperietur;  utcunque 
elaboratum, cert  evanescet, Iunone nostr
fruamur, sed momentanea; nullque extrinsecs
adhibit vi, mox in nubeculam desitur. Nova|tores
illi inter Clericos qui in ipsum os Anti|quitatis
contemptim admodm oggannierunt,
quot quantisque hoc in Regno  qum
promptos Aditus patefecerunt? Si quicquid
Vetus Ecclesia sive decrevit, sive admisit, per|que
decursum tot seculorum ad hunc usque di|em
 deduxit, susque deque jam tandem
habendum sit; valeant per me licet un cum
, etiam Decimae, Paedobatismus, Diei
Dominici Reverentia. Imm (quod totus horreo
inter effandum) ipsius Numinis Tres Persona|litates,
Processio Spiritus etiam  Filio, ad
privati cujusque arbitrium tanquam ad Lydi|um
Lapidem revocabuntur, Nihil deinccps

in Ecclesi relinquetur illibatum, sed ex easto
Veritatis Sacrario in turpissimum haeresiarcha|rum
lupanar desinet. In obscurioribus aut am|biguis
Scripturae locis interpretandis, abundet
quisque suo sensu per Ecclesiam licet; e lege
videlicet, ut ad Fidei  exigantur omnia;
semperque (ut Vincentius Lirinensis monet)
Propheticae  Apostolicae Interpretationis Linea
juxta Ecclesiastici atque Catholici sensus Regulam
dirigantur.
. 4. In hujusmodi Thematis tractatione,
cert si quantum mihi rerum dicendarum sup|petit,
tantum vobis Patientiae in promptu esset,
periculum vobis immineret, ne in suggesto con|senescerem.
Sed opportun mihi succurrit, qum non
facil condonetur ad clepsammidium concio|nanti,
prolixius agere. Et ne Tempus praeter|labatur
hujusmodi Pensis praefinitum, satius
duco circumscribere quod alioqui restat discu|tiendum,
qum aut vestro taedio non occur|rere,
aut modestiae meae limites videri saltem
transilire.
. 5. Interim tamen non possum quin vos
obtester, (Reverendissimi admodum in Christo
Patres, Fratres in Domino dilectissimi,) per

Patrem Luminum benignissimum, qui Divini
vos Luminis participes fecit; per Sacrosan|ctum
illum Spiritum, qui vos obsignavit
:Eph. 4. 30. perque dulcissimum illud No|men
quod super omnibus vobis est invocatum;
per siquid vestris animabus aut unquam Cordi
aut Curae fuit; ut ea vestrm unicuique obe|undi
muneris sit conscientia, quae memoriam
Sui non perhorrescat, suae ipsius non metuat
interesse Posteritati. Ut ab hc Synodo Apo|stolic
Pharmaco vobis indicato, morbis pub|licis
sanandis medicatrices manus adhibeatis.
Ut quod in Synodo Oecumenic, nemine qui|dem
refragrante,Concil. Ni|caen. Can. 6. A. D. 325. id in vestr Provinciali, laeto
celeusmate excipiatur, . Utque
de vobis unusquisque dicendum putet, contra
qum Ille Greg. Naz. Epist. 55. ad Pro|copium vero, 42. p. 814. Nazianzenus de sui seculi Conciliis,
.
. 6. Nihil mihi ulteris restat, qum ut
suppliciter  obnix atque animits Deum ve|nerer,
ut ducat vos omnes per Spiritum San|ctum,
in omnem omnino veritatem; suggerat|que
vobis consilia Ecclesiae suae salutaria, pro|pter
Merita Mortemque Filii sui unigeniti. Cui
Filio cum Patre in unitate Spiritus sancti, Im|mortali,

Invisibili, soli Deo sapienti, sit Honos,
 Gloria,  Gratiarum Actio,  nunc, 
deinceps, in Secula Seculorum.
FINIS.







Concio Academica
DE
HIERARCHIA SECULARI,
Speciatim  Praesertim
De Iure Regum,
HABITA
IN TEMPLO BEATAE
MARIAE
APUD
OXONIENSES,
PRO
TERMINO INCHOANDO
XIV. CALENDAS MAIAS,
M.DC.LXIIII.






In Epistol priore Beati Petri, Capite secundo,
Commate decimo tertio, de Politi Chri|stian
sic scriptum legimus.

Subjecti igitur estote omni humanae Creaturae propter
Deum; sive Regi, quasi praecellenti; sive Du|cibus,
tanquam ab eo missis; in vindictam ma|lefactorum,
laudem vero Bonorum.
. 1. REquirenti mihi nuper, ad hanc Pro|vinciam
destinato, (Viri  Fratres
Dilectissimi,) fi quid in e (non adornand, sed)
pro viriculis obeund, vel feliciter inventire, vel
observare diligentr, vel accuratis contexere,
vel qualitercunque demum alis praestare pos|sem,
quod Audientibus aut Curae aut Cordi
esset, aut quo gratiam non plan nullam ab
aequis rerum Aestimatoribus, vel (quod potius in
votis erat) apud Deum saltem inirem; evestigi
 sine mor subibat animum-recordatio, quod

nullum certius promptiusve aut Malis Publicis
Remedium, aut Bonis Publicis Fulcimentum vi|detur
posse excogitari, qum si Principum Jura,
cum officiis Populorum qui iis subsunt, ad
testatissima sua Principia in omnium Animis
exigantur. Idque methodo tam distinct, ver|borum
ambitu tam exporrecto,  momentis
Rationum cum rationibus argumentandi tam
ad Vulgi Captum accommodatis; ut nemo
tam bardus inveniatur, qui officii sui non gnarus
sit, aut san frontis tam perfrictae, qui satis gna|rum
se esse negare ausit. Constat autem apud
omnes qui de Rebus civilibus administrandis vel
fando unquam inaudiverunt, perinde Principi ac
Populo certos limites  Cancellos statutos esse,
fines certos metasque tam  Deo  Natur
qum  Gentium legibus assignatos,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere Rectum.
Quippe quibus proculcatis, Sana Rerum Ad|ministratio
pessum datur,  contabescit. Nec
tantummod Seditiones, (ut ut Illa satis ampla
malorum seges,) sed  quae inde enascuntur,
vitia scilicet omnifaria, radices agunt.
. 2. Videtur erg totis viribus in id praeci|pu
incumbendum, ut Jura Principum in Po|Populos,

cum horum Officiis erga Principes,
 utrorumque Officia adversus Deum, non mo|d
omnibus innotescant, sed aequ lance truti|nentur.
Idque ob alias non contemnendas, sed
hanc potissimum rationem, uti tranquillam 
quietam degamus vitam cum omni Pietate  vene|ratione.
1. Tim. 2, 2. Quod videatur Sanctus
Paulus Succincte admodm loquutus, simulque
oppid Copiose. Quippe qui multum non multis
quamvis alibi passim enuntiat, plura tamen pau|cioribus
nusquam loci enuntiaverit. Nempe Vo|cabulum
illud  (fatentibus ipsis Disci|plinariis)
complectitnr omne genus officia quae
in hominum Commerciis vigere debent. Et in
eo quod superaddit [] plan omnimo|dam
comprehendit quae Deo debetur observan|tiam.
Nescio enim quo pacto, comparatum est
ita, ut Pietas simul  Politia, quemadmodum
Dei Regis Timor, manus invicem sibi porri|gant
ab omni parte auxiliatrices. Eum scilicet
in finem constituuntur Magistratus, propter
quem  Christiani Cives sumus, prorsus ut
Pietas cum Pace ubique vigeant,  conjunctis|simo
perfruantur in omnium Animis Contu|bernio.
Cujus rei Desiderio nunquam felicis
satisfiet, qum si qui Praesunt subduntur quod

suarum est partium ex aequo praestent, Illud est
maxim Subditorum, ut toti ordini Magistratuum,
seu  quantumcunque , (ut no|stra
habent exemplaria,) vel quantumlibet ,
(uti habemus in Archetypo,) perqum morige|ros
se praebeant vel propter Deum. Ad Magistra|tus
autem spectat ex alter parte, five in penam,
sive in praemium, sua cuique distribuere; Bonos
Clypeo tutari, in malos Gladio animadvertere;
Pi viventibus favere, in immorigeros ver
saevire;
Parcere Subjectis,  Debellare Superbos.
Quod utrumque simul officium spiritus sanctus
hoc Textu complexus est,
Subjecti igitur estote omni humanae Creaturae
propter Deum: sive Regi, quasi Praecellenti: sive
Ducibus, [aut Praesidibus] tanquam ab eo missis;
ad vindictam malefactorum, laudem vero bonorum.
. 3. Quod Praeceptum Apostolicum qu
fructuosis participemus, oremus Deum Mise|ricordiarum,
Patrem luminum benignissimum,
(cujus verbum est ipsa Veritas,  via ad vitam
exploratissima,) ut misericorditr ei compla|ceat
hodierno Coetui interesse; ut quicquid 

corde meo in linguam,  inde in Aures etiam
vestras, pro Bonitate su solit it perducturus,
in nostram omnium qu privatim qu public
cedat Utilitatem, atque in nominis sui Gloriam
in majus indies efferendam, per Jesum Chri|stum
Dominum nostrum.
Et ut quod nostr caus oramus, e facilis
exoremus, Oremus insuper  praecipu pro
Ecclesi Christi militante, per varia regna Res|que
Publicas quaquaversm disseminat, no|minatim
ver pro Anglican hc nostr, Atque
inibi ante alios, pro ejusdem Ecclesiae Nutricio
Carolo, peculiari Dei Grati, Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae, Hiberniae Rege, Fidei Defensore, in
omnibus Causis omniumque personarum, sive
sacrarum, sive civilium, immediat secundum
Deum Supremo in Terris Moderatore. Pro
ejus Conjuge Catharina, Regina nostr Serenissi|m;
Pro Regin Matre Henrietta Maria; pro
Illustrissimo Principe Iacobo Duce Eboracensi;
aliisque quibuscun  regio stemmate oriundis.
Pro utrque Domo Parliamenti. Pro Regni
Proceribus nobilissimis; praesertim iis qui Regi
adsunt  consiliis secretioribus. Speciatim ver
preces apud Patrem Coelestem sunt effundendae,
pro universo Clero Anglicano; pro reverendis|simis

Archiepiscopis; pro Episcopis Reveren|dis;
aliisque quibuscunque inferioris subsellii
Clericis, quibus-quibus sive muneribus sive
nominibus insigniantur. Pro utraque Acade|mi,
ac inprimis hac nostr. Pro Honoratissimo
Domino Cancellario, ejusque Vicecancellario
Dignissimo. Pro omnibus Doctoribus; Pro|curatoribus
utrisque; Collegiorum  Aula|rum
praefectis singulis;  praesertim (qu me
vocat officii ratio singularis) pro Collegio Mag|dalenensi,
ejusque membris universis.
Grata insuper publicorum qui in Album
Academiae referuntur Benefactorum, facienda
est  nobis inpraesentiarum Commemoratio.
Nimirum Principis Illustrissimi, Humphraedi Du|cis
Glocestriae; Iohannis Kempe, Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopi; Thomae Kempe, Episcopi Lon|dinensis;
Margaretae, Comitissae Richmundiae;
Henrici Septimi, Elizabethae Uxoris ejus;
Richardi Litchfield, Archidiaconi Middlesexiae;
Thomae Woolsey Cardinalis,  Archiepiscopi
Eboracensis; Henrici Octavi; Mariae Reginae;
Reginae etiam Elizabethae: Iacobi Regis: Thomae
Bodleii, Henrici Savilii, Guilielmi Sidley, Nico|lai
Kempe, Militum; Thomae White, S. Theolo|giae
Doctoris; Guilielmi Camdeni, Armigeri:

Aliorumque si qui sint, qui Academiae Oxoni|ensi
quoquo modo benefecerunt.
Et quia Deus est Ille solus Bonorum omni|um
Largitor, qui aut Nos aut Propatres nostros
per manus hominum locupletavit; (Quibus
merit accenseatur Guilielmus etiam Wainfletus,
Episcopus olim Wintoniensis, Magnus Angliae
Cancellarius, Collegii juxta  Aulae Beatae Mariae
Magdalenae Fundator longe munificentissimus,) pro|inde
soli  uni Deo, de tot tantisque Beneficiis
in Nos collatis, Gratiarum actiones habendae
sunt, per  propter Mediatorem  Dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum. Cujus meritis jam
freti, ejus adjuti oratione, Deum Opt, Max.
iisdem verbis comprecemur, quibus Ipse Incar|natus
precandum statuit.
Pater noster qui es in Coelis, sanctificetur Nomen
tuum. Adveniat Regnum tuum. Fiat voluntas tua
sicut in Coelo, sic  in Terra. Panem nostrum quo|tidianum
da nobis hodie:  dimitte nobis debita
nostra, sicut  nos dimittimus Debitoribus nostris.
Et ne nos inducas in Tentationem, sed libera nos a
Malo. Nam tuum est Regnum, Potentia,  Gloria,
in Secula Seculorum.
AMEN.



Subjecti igitur estote omni humanae Creaturae pro|pter
Deum: sive Regi, quasi praecellenti; sive Du|cibus,
tanquam ab eo missis, ad vindictam male|factorum,
laudem vero bonorum.
. 1. Quod ab initio hujus Capitis huc us
dixerat in Thesi Beatus Petrus, pergit porr jam
per partes,  in Hypothesi explicare. Inprimis
autem agit de debit ill obedientia, quam 
Legi, Regi, quin   Rege Deputatis prae|standam
statuit. Ad quam felicis evincendam,
Duobus nititur Argumentis; Quorum alterum
ab Authore, Fine alterum mutuatur. Ordi|nationis
hujus Civilis (ut ut , sive
Humanae Creaturae,) Deus ipse  Author Vin|dex
audit. Nec enim ideo Humana dicitur, qud
sit humanitu oriunda, (ut Graeca Scholia Didy|mus
videntur velle interpretari,) sed quod homi|num
sit propria, interque Homines constituta.
Finis autem hujusce Ordinis non mod utilem
eum probat, sed usquequaque Necessarium;
Quum hc potissimm ratione,  Virtutibus
Vitiis stipendia constent: Illis nimirum Praemia,
Istis Poenae constituantur. In quibus duobus
quasi Cuneis, sive vitae hujus Cardinibus, Tran|quillitatis
nostrae Ianua in totum vertitur atque
consistit.
. 2. Sed ne satis sibi duxit Beatus Petrus,
hoc officii tantm in genere,  praecepisse;
verm insuper nos docet, ( copioso quidem
Compendio,) qunam ordine methodo, quo|nam
modo atque mensura, in hoc officio exe|quendo
utendum sit. Nempe  lege Evangelic
praeceptum est, ut  Deo, Regi,  Regis
nomine Gubernantibus Subjecti simus. Sed pri|mum
Deo, deinde Regi, demum  Rege Depu|tatis.
Deo scilicet propter seipsum, Regi ver
propter Deum,  Rege denique Deputatis
propter Regem obtemperandum. Ita tamen
propter Regem, ut pris  potis propter Deum
per quam Rex regnat, ac magistratus inferio|res
Potestatis  Deo datae participes facit, tam
His quem Illi parendum sit.
. 3. Ita autem distinguit Petrus inter Regem
Rectores a Rege missos, (Verbi grati inter
Claudium qui dubio procul imperabat cum haec
Epistola scriberetur, Eosque Imperii procurato|res
qui tunc provincias Romanorum Claudii
nomine administrabant,) ut Illum vocet ,
Hos tantm . Utrae voces quid differant,
ex diversis Scripturae Locis constare queat.
Nam ut supremas Potestates per  expressit
Beatus Paulus, (Rom. XIII, I,) Ita sanctus

etiam Matthaeus, de Romani Imperatoris Vicario
loquens,  eum appellat, Mat. 27, 2.
. 4. Duo sunt igitur, inter alia, (quorum
cert hic Textus feracior est qum ut singula
tractare per tempus liceat,) quae dignissima
mihi videntur ut principe loco dispiciantur;
Magistratuum Ordinatio,  eorundem Subordi|natio.
Quumque ita  Deo sit comparatum, ut
suprema Potestas sit penes Regem, Potestas
ver Subordinata penes Populi Primores  Rege
missos; tum His, tum Illi, sed cum Dis|crimine
obediendum. Nam .
Regi quasi Praecellenti,
(secundum vulgatam versionem,) aut propter
Ipsius Potestatem, (ut habet versio Arabica,) aut
quta omnia ei sunt, (ut habet Aethiopica,) aut pro|pter
ejus Imperium, (uti est apud Syriacam.) Ut
summatim Rem dicam, Cuivis Humanae Or|dinationi,
aut cuivis Humanae Creaturae, (nam
sic Apostolo  hic loqui placuit,) ea me|thodo
ac modo parendum docet Spiritus San|ctus,
ut Regi in quantum Supremo Domino, Re|liquis
in quantum  Rege missis, utrisque ver
propter Deum, obsequii Debitum sit persolven|dum.
Et inde Duo (ut mod dixi) sese offerunt
explicanda; Nimirum Ordinatio, Subordina|tio
Magistratuum.
. 1. Ad primum membrum quod attinet,
Argumentis fer innumeris evinci potest, Quod
Magistratus etiam civilis, aeque ac Ordo Ecclesia|sticus,
summo jure censeri debet inter species
. Caelitus scilicet oriundus, jureque Divino
constitutus. Et ut palam hoc fiat in ipso operis
quasi Vestibulo, videtur mihi nostr omnium
maximoper interesse. Est enim illud vel luce
clarius,  apud omnes in confesso, quod si
Populi Universi Vicarius Rex esset  Vicemge|rens;
si solm Populi Minister  vindex Irae; si
Potestates sublimiores  Populo essent Ordinatae,
(quod toties venditant  contendunt Hyperas|pistae
Democratici,) si perverso hoc sensu huma|na
essent Creatura, nec alio jure fruerentur qum
quod effraeni Multitudini acceptum ferunt;
Actum esset illic de Causa Regia, quam tant
animi confidenti in nos suscepimus asserendam.
Quapropter Illud ante omnia incumbit mihi
evincendum, non  Populo simul convento Ordi|nationis
hujus Originem, (quod ipsiNotandum est, prim ho|mines non Dei praecepto, sed sponte addu|ctos experi|mento Infirmi|tatis familia|rum segregum adversus violentiam, in societatem civilem coiisse, unde ortum habet Potestas Civilis, quam ideo humanam ordinationem Petrus vocat. Grot. de Jure Bel.  Pacis, l. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 7. pag. 86. Grotio
 errore patrio adhuc correpto humanits
contigit autumasse,) sed  Deo constituente pe|tendam
esse.
. 2. Inprimis autem huc facit, qud Pote|stas
hinc inde in sacris literis pro ips Persona
usurpatur, quae Potestatem Illam habet coeli|ts
sibi demandatam. Quod enim dicit Gen|tilis
Ille, , (Mat. 8. 9.) perinde
est ac si dixisset, . Pari modo
 istae phrases, Homo sum sub Potestate consti|tutus,
(Luc. 7. 8.) Et omnis anima Potestatibus
supereminentibus subjecta esto, (Rom. 13. 1.) ut ut
per modum abstractionis quoad sonum efferuntur,
funt purae putae Concretivae quoad significatum.
Nam quos Apostolus (ad Romanos)  nun|cupat,
Salvator noster  vocandos cen|suit.
(Luc. 22. 25.) Cujusmodi metonymicam
loquendi rationem non in irrita usurpatam 
spiritu sancto existimemus, sed eo fine  pro|posito
ut omnibus Subditis innotesceret, non
duntaxat ad Personas  nudam  Imperan|tium,
verm insuper ad officium  respici|endum,
quibus desuper instructi unctique sunt.
Unde passim apud Homerum.
Quin  veteres Aegyptii in ea semper sententi
erant, (ut Author est nobis Diodorus,) .Diod Sic. l. 1. Cui con|sonum
est illud quod inter Placita Essenorum
Porphyrius memorat, .
. 3. Quorsum autem Magistratus passim in
vetere Instrumento per vocem Elohim efferun|tur?Exod. 22. 28.
Non propter aliquid Divinitatis ipsorum
Essentiae inhaerentis, (quippe quibus compertum
est humanitus omnia evenire, aeque ac reliquis ex
vulgo humani Generis,) Sed inprimis ob ra|tionem
 Salvatore nostro exhibitam, nimirum
qud ad eos Sermo Dei factus est. (Joh. 10,
35.) vel (ut planis id exprimam,  exegetic,)
qud ad divinum illud munus ita divinitus sunt
vocati, ut in eodem obeundo ipsius Dei in Ter|ris
Vicarii sint. Ob secundam rationem  Moyse
redditam, Quia non hominis, sed2 Chron. 19. 6. Dei Iudicium
est; aut saltem aliquid divini admistum habet.
(Deut. 1. 17.) ob tertiam insuper rationem
quam apud Psalmistam videre est, nempe quod
Deus Illis adest in Rebus Imperii Administrandis.
(Psal. 82. 1.) Unde legimus de Moyse, quod
erat in Deum Aaroni. (Exod. 4. 16.) Deusque
dicitur Pharaonis ab ipso Deo constitutus, (Exod.
7. 1.) nequaquam , ben tamen , put
divinam Auctoritatem, qu deo concedente mu|nitus
est.Psal. 61. Ego dixi vos Dii estis, id est (ut op|tim
exponit Iustinus Martyr, aut Quisquis
scripsit Quaestiones  Responsiones ad Orthodox|os,Iustin. in qq.  Resp. ad Orthod. q. 142. p. 378.)
Dedi vobis . proinde popu|lum

judicate, ac si Ego judicarem. Eodem plan
sensu  Illud dicitur (Psal. 86. 8.) Non est similis
Tui inter Deos, id est Dei in Terris gerentes vicem,
penes quos est civilis aut Ecclesiastica Admini|stratio.
Ob quartam denique rationem, Dei
nomine censentur, quia divini sunt regalis officii
Fructus, nimirum Pax, Iustitia, ex edem qua|si
Arbore aequis passibus succrescentes.
. 4. Huc accedit quod viri principes Psal. 82. 6. Filii
Dei appellantur in sacr pagin. Ut cum di|cuntur
Filii Dei Filias hominum deperiisse,
(Gen. 6, 2,) Symmacus Aquila ,
Filios Dei vertendos censent. Non propter
summam Sanctitatem qu Reges subditis antecel|lunt,
(Nam ex faece subditorum sunt Filii Dei
Adoptivi,) nedum propter Naturae prae reliquis
homulis excellentiam, (nam unus Christus hoc
pacto Filius Dei est appellandus,) Sed propter
Muneris Dignitatem statim  Deo eminentissi|mam,
qu Magistratus in Solio positi privatas
omnibus anteponuntur; vel propter Nomen
Angelorum, quod cum Illis Spiritibus commune
habent, qui  Ipsi Filii DeiIobi 1. 6. c. 38. v. 7. 2 Sam. 14. 17. c. 19. v. 27. non uno loco
denominantur. Et summ san cum ratione
dicuntur Angeli Magistratus, partim qud
Deus eorum oper in rebus mundi dispensandis

(sive in poenis sive in praemiis pendendis) uti|tur;
partim qud Angelos Illos. Coelestes perinde
animi Puritate, ac splendore Majestatis referre
debent. Idque ob Illam, inter caeteras, quam
Irenaeus innuit rationem; Cujus Iussu homines
Nascuntur,Iren. lib. 5. Hujus Iussu  Reges constituuntur,
apti iis qui ab ipsis regnantur.
. 5. Imm nec illud praetereundum, qud
Reges non rar in Sacro Codice per unctos Do|mini
exprimuntur. (Id quod David de Saule
dixit, 1 Sam. 24. 7.) non ob illud duntaxat quod
vulg creditur, quia Reges Israelitici ad jura
regia promovendi, cum ill ungendi Caeremoni,
jubente Deo inaugurabantur; (1 Sam. 9, 16.
 cap. 15. ver. 1;) sed e potissimm de Caus,
quam Sanctus Paulus assignavit, (ad Rom. 13. 1.)
quia legitima Potestas Regium munus obeundi,
non nisi coelitus Domino concedi queat. Cyrus
enim, quantumvis Ethnicus, nec unquam oleo
delibutus, Christus tamen  unctus Domini ab
ipso Domino dicebatur. (Isa. 45. 1.) Quod ma|nifestum
Discrimen innuit inter Externam Un|ctionem,
qu Invasores Imperiorum perfundi
possint,  Unctionem illam Internam, qu Dy|nastae
solm legitimi (bonae fidei possessores)
non tantummodo in Regnum, sed  in Ius reg|nandi

admitti solent. Quod ad Priorem un|gendi
rationem attinet, Haec in Unctos etiam
Diaboli conferri potest, ideoque contemptim per
se habetur. Posterior autem ungendi ratio est
quiddam divinitus impertitum,  ad Unctos
Domini constituendos, tum necessari requiritur,
tum sola sufficit. Nam ubi legitimus est suc|cessor,
Unctione opus non est, ut rect Iunius
Tremellius ad 2 Reg. 23. 30. Quocirca po|pulus
Israeliticus Iehoachazum unxerunt, non ad
aliquid Juris impertiendum, sed ut ejusmodi
Ceremoni testatum facerent, Regnum Armis
Aegyptiorum aliquandiu intercisum, quasi de
integro Huic tradi contra Aegyptios defenden|dum.
. 6. Quarto loco vel inde constat de Magi|stratus
Civilis Hierarchia; Qud, sicut omne
jus Paternum ex Iure Divino dimanavit, (idque
ponitur extra omnem controversiae aleam, si|quidem
Deus in Decalogo distinct jubet, ut
unusquisque Parentibus morem gerat,) Ia om|ne
jus Regium Paterno primits dimanasse, ali|quant
luculentius per se videtur, qum ut in
eo demonstrando prolixis agam. Praeterquam
enim qud palam constat, omne Regimen ab
initio intra solius Paterni Juris pomaeria clau|sum,

non nisi tempore procedente in varias For|mas
pullulsse;  utriusque generis 
(Regnum scilicet  Sacerdotium) ad Primoge|nitum
apud Judaeos ex Dei Decreto pertinuisse;
(ipsoque Judice Aristotele,Arist. 7. Eu|dem. 10. ,)
Accedit etiam illud notatu dignum,
qud Rex quandoque in sacris Literis per Pa|tris
Nomen enuntiatur. Ita enim David com|pellat
Saulem, 1 Sam. 24, 11. Et quum Debora
summ Rerum in populo Dei potita esset, non
Reginam se, aut Iudicem, sed Matrem in Israel
vocandam duxit. (Jud. 5, 7.) Nec hoc in loco
reticendum, quod apudHieron. l. 9. in Ezek. Sanctum Hieronymum
videre licet; nimirum Philistinos in more sem|per
habuisse, Reges suos ad unum omnes Abi|melechi
nomine compellare; quod quidem Pa|trem,
juxta ac Regem, felici omine consignifi|cat.
Et quandoquidem qui in Populo Primas
tenet, non magis Princeps, qum Pater,  Pa|ter
quidem Patriae vocari solet, (secundum illud
Xenophontaeum,Xenoph. . l. 8. ) du|plex
inde Documentum  Principibus Sub|ditis
haurire datur. Principes scilicet admonen|tur,
nequando secs illi in Subditos qum in li|beros
animadvertant, iisque de Rerum affluen|ti
Esa. 49. 23. Nutriciorum instar prospiciant. Subditis

insimul innuitur, eodem Tituli compendio, ut
Principes suos (quantumvis asperos) Parentum
loco revereantur.
. 7. Quid, qud Populi Pastores identidem
appellantur  Spiritu Sancto? Num ob Naturae
praestantiam aliquam, qu caeteris hominibus
haud secus praestant, ac homines caeteri suis
Gregibus atque Armentis antecellunt? minim
Gentium. Sed mult potis qud eandem
nascendi sortem perpessi,  ex edem humo
saepe sublati, in id fastigium Majestatis ad Dei
Nutum evehuntur, Deique in Terris Thronum
tenent.Augustin. de Civ. Dei. l. 5. Eapropter Augustinus disert docet, eun|dem
Deum qui Majestatem Suavissimis dedit
Imperatoribus, put utrique Vespasiano, dedisse
etiam Domitiano, quamvis Tyranno crudelissimo.
Eundem Deum qui Constantino, etiam Apostatae
Iuliano Majestatem regiam commodavisse.
Unde Supremis Magistratibus plan ex aequo
obediendum, sive aequis, sive iniquis, mod non
sint absque Titulo, sed exercitio solo Tyranni.
Quippe caetera dispares, in hoc conveniunt, qud
Majestatem  Deo datam videntur ex aequo
participare.
. 8. Qum reverentr denique Sanctque
Majestas Regia haberi debeat, ut Majestatis ip|sius

Dei sive Particula, sive Propago, vel inde
licet conjectare, imm fortiter arguere; qud
ab omnibus in Theologia, Iurisque Prudentia ver|satissimis,
Crimen laesae Majestatis Sacrilegio pro|ximum
judicatur. Imm crediderim esse Pia|culum
Sacrilegii nomine censendum, Vicarium
Dei, Unctum Dei, Ordinationem Dei impe|tere,
adeoque ipsum Deum in ejus Diacono vio|lare.
Ita enim Beatus Paulus de Potestate Per|sona
Regali statuit, in Epistol ad Romaos,
capite decimo tertio; ubi quinquies de utris
sic scriptum legimus. , v. 1. ,
v. 2. , v. 3. , v. 4. , v. 6. usque
adeo verum est quod Sanctus Paulus asseverat,
, ut Ipse Dominus  Salvator
ipsam Pilati  (siquam saltem haberet) con|tra
seipsum etiam adstrueret.  (inquit Ille)
. (Joh. 19, 11.)
Ideoque cm Samuel affatus Populum haec
verba praemisisset,1 Sam. 18. 18. [En Regem quem elegistis 
petiistis,] Illa statim subjunxit eodem spirits
anhelitu, [Ecce Deus posuit eum Regem super vos.]
Id est, Regem deposcentibus Deus vobis Hunc
dedit. Vos elegistis, sed Deus posuit. Vos in
speciem elegistis,1 Sam. 9. 16. c. 10. v. 24. cap. 12, v. 13; sed quem Deus
jam dudum in solidum elegerat, cap. 10, v. 24.

Quid,Iun. Brut. Vindic. contra Tyran. Qu. 3. pag. 268. qud Ipse Iunius Brutus simul fatetur
ostendit, Deum Reges instituere, Regna Regibus
dare, ipsos Reges eligere? Quibus feliciter con|cessis,
Juris Regii non refert, ut Electio quae
Dei est suffragiis Populi comprobetur. Nec
multm videtur interesse, si Populus Reges con|stituere
aut Regna tradere dicatur, dummodo
Deus etiam conceditur cm Regna dare, tum
Reges ipsos instituere. Quinimm Reges  Deo
non tantm eligi, ed  constitui,Iren. ubi supra. Clem. Constitut. l. 7. c. 17. Irenaeus
Clemens Authores sunt. 
Quod Reges regnant per Deum,
 affirmatur ab ipso Deo, Prov. 8, 15. Neque
tantm permissive, (ita enim  Diabolus per
ipsum Deum regnare dicendus est,) sed per
Deum constitutive, prout Viri oculatissimi Lo|cum
illum interpretantur. Et ben regnant per
Deum, qui solm propter Deum regnare de|bent,
Potestatisque Judiciariae Capitale sup|plicium
infligendi Deum solum Autho|rem
habent. De cujus rei ratione vel inde
breviter nobis constat, Qud Nemini liceat per
Dei leges mortem sibi accersere. Nam quod
sibi nn licet contra se, Id ut aliis contra se li|ceat,
aut sibi contra alios, nemo potest efficere.
Ratio est, quia Nemo Jus aliis conferre potest

quod ipse prius in seipso conferendum non ha|buit;
nec plus sibi adversus Alium, qum ad|versus
se sibi licere queat. Ergo Legem pro|mulgare
sub Paen Capitis observandam, 
Legem istam violantibus sententiam Capitis ir|rogare,
illud est Praerogativae quod soli Deo
Magistratus acceptum ferunt. Unde  liquid
satis constat de eorundem Hierarchi.
. 9. Sed hic objiciant Misobasiles,  magni
Nominis Litigatores, qud aliquammultis ant
seculis qum Populus Israeliticus  Deo Regem
efflagitaslet, Moses de Rege illo praedixit, Deu|teronomii
17. 14, 15. Quum perveneris in Terram
quam Dominus Deus tibi possidendam dedit, in ea
habitaveris; Tu dices, (inquit Moses) constituam
Regem super me, ut caeterae Gentes quae sunt in cir|cuitu;
tum vero eum Regem constitues quem Domi|nus
elegerit medio fratrum tuorum. Unde elici|tur
Argumentum, qud licet Regis Electio ad
Deum spectet, ejusdem tamen constitutio sit pe|nes
Populum.
. 10. Huic autem objectamento, ut ut pal|marium
esse videtur,  quod in os nobis obgan|niunt
Incerti vulgi Assentatores, videtur posse
multifariam,  tamen breviter os obstrui.
Inprimis enim Regem  Deo petiit iste Po|pulus,

utpote gnarus  sibi conscius, sui juris
non esse, Regem aliquem creare. Secund, dices
Tu, [Constituam.] Sed  Dicto ad Factum, prout
 Facto ad Ius, pessim valet argumentum.
Terti. constituam Regem (non subter, sed) su|per
me. Ergo Populo Universo, non tantm sin|gulis
in Populo, (fatente populo universo,) su|perior
audit. Dato enim, (at non concesso,)
qud summa Rerum ab origine penes Populum
permansisset; si tamen Regi  se electo ita sese
addixit in Servitutem, ut totum illud quod ha|buerat
regnandi Jus  semetipso abdicaverit, 
in alium plan transcripserit; nec amplis re|tinet,
nec jure potest revocare, quod sciens vo|lensque
non-suum fecit. Quart, Moses addidit
[constitues,] non omnino imperative, sed modo
prorsus indicativo. Praedixit quod de facto futu|rum
viderat, non praecepit quod Ipsi de Iure
facerent. Aut, quint, , per vul|garem
figurat loquendi modum, constituere di|cuntur,
Quem non-recusant, Deo agnoscunt
Constitutum. Sext. non quemcunque constitues,
sed quem Dominus tuus elegerit. Et Regem
san quemcunque, mod  Domino suo lectum,
non est Populi reprobare, quantumvis magni; nisi
fort Deus Ipse (Dominus Ille Exercituum)

qui singulis in Populo major esse non negatur,
universis tamen minor habendus sit. Septim.
dixit Populus Samueli, Praepone nobis Regem,
(1 Sam. 8. 5.) Et Commate Sexto, da nobis
Regem. 1 Sam. 10. 1. Commate 19. Rex nobis praeerit.
Dixitque Samuel, (Saulem Regem allocutus,)
Unxit te Iehova in Antecessorem super suam Pos|sessionem.
quod est perinde, ac si dixisset, Nihil
aliud nunc feci, quam quod ante in mandatis ab
ipso Domino acceperam. Edixit enim Jehova,
(verse 22,) Ausculta voci eorum, ut praeficias iis
Regem. Non erg Populus sibi ipsi, sed Samuel
Populo; neque Samuel su sponte, sed ipso Deo
praecipiente, Regem Populo praeficiebat.
. 11. Et haec sufficiat praelibsse de Magi|stratuum
Ordinatione. Quae ideo , sive
Humanae Creaturae censetur titulo, non qud non
sit , planque divinits oriunda, sed qud
Hominum sit propria; , quantumlibet  Deo,
apud homines tamen constituta.
. 1. Deinceps sequitur expendenda Subor|dinatio 
Magistratuum. Quam ita nobis hoc loco
descripsit Petrus, ut satis liquid edocuerit,
Quid uique Magistratuum,  Quo sit ordine
deferendum. Subjiciamini (inquit Ille) omni hu|manae
creaturae, sive ordinationi, propter Deum

subjiciamini. Non tantm Claudio Impera|tori,
verm  Furio Camillo Scriboniano, aliis|que
etiam Caesareis in aliis Provinciis Procu|ratoribus.
Non tantm Regi morem gerite, sed
  Rege Subrogatis,  Provincias particulares
Regis vice administrantibus. Neque summi dun|taxat,
sed imi subsellii Administris. Universis
inquam  singulis qui de Iure vobis praesunt, ac
legitim praeficiuntur; sed suo ordine  loco, suo
modo atque mensur, suum cuilibet obsequium
praestandum est. Nam Regi in quantum supremo
Domino, Reliquis in quantum  Rege missis. Regi
soli secundum Deum, Reliquis ver secundum
Regem, licet utrisque propter Deum, Divus Pe|trus
hoc loco parendum vult.
. 2. Ad quam Doctrinam Apostolicam
tam claram, tam facilem, tam omnium oculis
expositam,  paci publicae conservandae ab
omni parte necessariam, nunquam satis mirari
possum, neque Calvinum, neque Paraeum, ne
Plessiacum Mornaeum, (viros acri licet Ingenio 
alioqui perspicacissimos,) eo modo quo decebat
animum suum advertisse; sed usque adeo aut
caligasse ad tam divinum Scripturae Lumen, aut
dat oper Caecutiisse, ut affirmare non-dubita|verint
de popularibus Magistratibus, (nempe de

puris putis Subditis in Magistratu inferiore con|stitutis,)
eos ita ab ipso Deo Libertatis popu|laris
Tutores fieri, uti adversus ipsum Regem
(in hac viriliter asserend) etiam manu armat
grassari liceat.
. 3. Contra Cujusmodi Grassatores de
Regum jure edisserturo, videtur mihi Res tota
inde usque ab origine, non mod quoad Natu|ram,
verm etiam quoad Nomen,  quoad No|minis
rationem, petenda esse.
. 4. Et quia multum est Discriminis inter
Subjectum Adjunctum, de quorum debit con|venienti
incumbit mihi dispiciendum; Sepa|ratim
inprimis videndum habeo, quid sit Ius
quod ipsum quaeritur, deinde quid Reges de qui|bus
quaeritur. Ita postmodm conjunctim at
dilucid innoteseet, Quod Quatenus Adjun|ctum
Subjecto competat.
. 5. Ius, pro triplici Respectu secundum
quem ad Subjectum referri solet, trifariam fer
intelligitur. Si ad Personam referatur, est qui|dem
Qualitas moralis, personae competens, ad ali|quid
juste vel habendum vel agendum. Si refera|tur
ad ipsam Rem, Justitiae scilicet materiam,
Nihil aliud san videtur qum quod est Iustum
significare,  Naturae Societatum ratione utentium

non repugnat. Si ad cujuslibet virtutis materiam
spectat, eodem redit qu Ipsa Lex, ut statuatur
esse Actuum moralium Regula, non ad illud dun|taxat
quod Iustum dicimus, verm etiam ad
Illud quod Rectum, obligans. Jus, priori modo
acceptum, Potestas passim appellatur. Quae ita
differt  Potentia, ut illa moraliter, de jure, haec
de facto, Physiologice, apud Authores usurpetur.
Illa graec , haec  nuncupatur. Vis qua|liscunque
Potentia dicitur; Potestas non item,
nisi legitim exeratur. Penes Tyrannos abs
Titulo saepe summa regnandi Potentia manet.
(Cujus furfuris erat Cromwellus nostras, Hu|mani
generis Propudium post homines natos
iniquissimum.) Potestas ver non competit nisi
legitimis Magistratibus; qui utcunque exercitio
Tyranni sint, cast tamen sanctque apud Sub|ditos
quoscun haberi debent, quippe qui nu|minis
sunt Vicarii optimo jure constituti. Adsit
mod Possessor justus, de Personae injustiti
nulla nobis lis erit. Qui effraenem sine Titulo
Potentiam habent, Deo tantm permittente; Illis
saepe resisti nequit. Sed qui legitimam Potesta|tem,
Deo caelits constituente; Illis nunquam
resisti debet. Eaque propter Beatus Paulus Pon|tifici
Maximo conviciatus per Imprudentiam,

Veniam illic aucupatur Ignorantiae suae con|cedendam,
(Act. 25, 5.) Nesciebam (inquit)
Fratres Pontificem esse Maximum. scriptum est enim,
Principi Populi tui non maledices. Ac si dixisset,
Magistratibus etiam injustis summam deberi re|verentiam;
nec ex ore tantm Illam, sed  ex
animo deferendam.
. 6. Quod qu claris elucescat, transeamus
evestigi ab Adjuncto ad subjectum: A Iure sc.
quod quaeritur, ad ipsum Regem de quo quaeritur.
. 7. Nomen Regis Regendo, ut Nomen
Principis primas ferendo fluxit. Illo Imperii
Summitatem, hoc Ordinis Primatum, utroque
Regis Privilegium simulque Officium indigi|tante;
Ita ips Etymologi comparatum est,
ut auditis etiam Titulis quibus per leges insigni|untur,
statim  Muneris Mercedis Memo|ria
Regibus refricetur. Sive enim per Caput
totius corporis politici, (quemadmodumJud. 11. 8. Iep|tha
Gileaditis,) sive etiam per ipsum Verticem,
partem Capitis sublimiorem, (ut Tropus iste
explicatur ab ExpositoribusDeut. 33. 20 Esa. 3. 17. Septuaginta,) sive
per ClypeosPsal. 47. 9. Terrae, sive per TerraePsal. 82. 5. Fundamenta,
sive per Annulos sigillares, (utHagg. 2. 23. Zerubbabel
Iehovah,) sive perJer. 51. 25. Montes, sive perIsa. 3. 7. Medicos,
sive per PopuliNum. 27. 17 Pastores, sive demum per2 Reg. 13. 5. Sal|vatores,

qui prims tenent in Magistratu descri|bi
solent; eorum aut Dignitas, quoad Originem,
aut Auctoritas, quoad Potentiam, aut utilitas, quoad
officium, nec obscur quidem nec invenust Au|dientium
animis instillantur. Rex denique 
Regendo vel ideo fluxit, quia Deo solo minor
Regendi Ius habet quicquid nomine Subditorum
venire solet. Et quicquid uspiam Titulorum in
Sacris Literis ei ascribitur, videtur prorss ex
industri ad id inventum, ut solum supra se De|um
Rex habere significetur.
. 8. Liquet autem ex Iure Regni, quod in
Libro Samuelis legendum prostat, Regibus legum
Violationem sine ullo apud Homines supplicio
cedere.1 Sam. 8. 10, 11, c. ad vers. 19. Unde crimine vacare dicuntur Reges,
(Quod inter Juris nostratis placita agnoscunt fa|cil
Juris Confulti,) non perinde ac si reapse inson|tes
sint, sed ex eo qud rerum  se gestaru~ rationi
reddendae non sint obnoxii; at eo saltem sensu so|luti
legibus, in quantum  Caus unquam dicend
(quantumvis Rei) liberantur. Rex ver dicitur,
cui Subditi vel primarii fidem jurant, cujus Ima|ginem
nummus praefert, cujus legibus omnes parent
 cujus Judiciis ad neminem provocatur, penes que~
est  non solummod , sive Iudiciaria,
verm  , sive Legislativa; vel (qud

eodem fer redit,) Potestas  (Nam
Par in Parem non habet condendi leges Potestatem;
ut solius sit Regis, Jus ipsum dare, uniuscujus que
ver Judicis, Jus datum dicere.) Unde   Rex
 antiquits vocabatur, ob hanc potissi|mm
rationem, qud etiamsi secundum leges
imperitare teneatur, put in foro Conscientiae, In
for tamen humano ita legibus absolvitur,  ipse
sibi suisque in Legem cedit, ut impun quidlibet
faciendi Ius quoddam habeat. Solus Ille dicen|dus
Rex, cui competit Majestas; Quae ab om|nibus
aliis Titulis inferiori Magistratui compe|tentibus,
(utpote  in se complectens,)
immane quantum discriminatur. Nihil autem
Majestati tam proprium est, qum ,
(id est,)  nemine pendere, nemini esse obnoxi|um,
 nemine posse judicari. Ben igitur Rex
Otanes apud Herodotum dicebatur .
Ben etiam Xiphilinus, ,
(aliter enim , id est supremus
Dominatus, nequaquam esset.) sed optim om|nium
Cassiodorus hanc rem expressit. Causa Re|giae
potestatis supernis solis est applicanda Iudiciis;
quandoquidem e Coelo petita est,  soli Coelo debet
Innocentiam. Tantm abest ut Regnum habeat
qui Potestati qualicunque rationem reddere obli|gatur,

ut , apud Pausaniam
opponantur. Solus Ille Rex est (ipso fatente
Iunio Bruto) cujus amplissima censetur Potestas,
aut qui Supremus est Gubernator, quemadmodum
Junius Tremellius complusculis Locis inter|pretantur.
Supremus autem est Gubernator, cu|jus
Potestas Gubernandi praecipu vertitur 
versatur, in condendis legibus, iisdemque tollendis
cum opus fuerit; in foederibus faciendis, Bello
 Pace decernendis; in vectigalibus ac Tributis ad
usum Publicum exigendis; in Magistratibus In|ferioribus
pro arbitratu suo creandis; in honoribus
Titulis prout voluerit conferendis; in Conciliis
Synedriis pro imperio indicendis; Et (quod rei est
Caput) in se suis quibuscunque, ut ut atroci|ter
delinquentibus,  Judiciis tamen Humanis
cm visum fuerit eximendis. Ut Rex reapse
non sit, sed tantummod , qui auctoritate
suadendi, non jubendi Potestate munitus est; aut
cujus Actus qualescunque alterius juri substi|tuuntur.
. 9. Cujus Rei veritatis Argumento esse
potest,  fidem facit, qud apud veteres La|tinos
ita Regnum distinguitur  Principatu, ut
Hic ab Illo immane quantum superetur. Cae|sar
enim narrat de quodam Gallo, qud prin|cipatum

Galliae obtinuisset, cm Regnum solum|mod
affectaret. Et Suetonius de Caligula Ser|monem
habens, affirmat parum abfuisse, quin
speciem Principatus in Regnum converteret.
Diciturque Maroboduus (apud Velleium Pater|culum)
non duntaxat Principatum, sed  ipsam
vim Regiam complexus animo. Et etiamsi apud
nonnullos ista vocabula adhibeantur ac si essent
, (Nam  Duces Lacedaemonii, quamvis
Ephoris Subjecti, Regis nomine gaudebant, pla|n
ut Vandali in Africa, Gothi in Hispania,
quorum Reges exauctorabantur quoties popu|lo
displicebant, Regnum habere prae se ferebant,
nimirum , ut mod dixi,  plan )
Ita tamen Aristoteles distinguendum existima|vit,
inter Regnum  ver dictum,  purum
putum Principatum, (qui apud Vandalos Go|thos
Lacones obtinebat, Regnique nomen men|tiebatur,) ti hunc inter,  Illum, species aliquot
interposuerit. Illi competit Principatus, qui
sub certis conditionibus in Dignitatem suam ad|sciscitur.
Unde  caut distinguendum est in|ter
Dignitatem, Ptestatem; Patrocinium inter,
 Imperium; in fide esse,  in Ditione. Ben
potest esse Princeps, in cujus fide est populus aut
Patrocinio: Solus autem Rex erit, sub cujus

pleno Imperio Ditione. Quocirca Carolus Ille
Quintus, ut ut summus Imperator, totius fer
Belgii non mins qum Hispaniae rever Rex
esset, Brabantinae tamen Provinciae non nisi Prin|ceps
Patronus censendus erat. Quippe qui
pactum cum e iniit, ut sibi nulla obsequii,
clientelae, ac obedientiae officia  populis defe|rantur,
quibus Ipse praestare nolit integra quae
solenni religione sposponderit. Sub cujusmo|di
conditione Regem suum Poloni eligunt, ut
quo die Rex ipse fidem suam non liberat, Po|pulus
illic universus  fide su liberetur. Illud
autem est Regnum latinissim sic dictum, cui
Tria illa competunt, quae Thucydides Civitati
quae ver sit Civitas impertivit; ut nimirm sit
. Id est, ut Legibus, Iu|diciis,
Magistratibus suis utatur. Unde 
Sophocli dicebatur , Straboni ver ,
Plutarcho deni .
. 10. Et quicquid uspiam de Regno, (quod
subjectum est commune hujusce Juris de quo agi|tur,)
ex Authoribus Antiquissimis exscribi po|test,
e pertinet  collimat, ut ipsius etiam
Regis (qui subjectum est proprium) Naturam ex|plicet.
Quippe cujus est, (Plutarcho Judice,)
 audit apud Ae|schylum;

 (quod eodem plan facit) ,
Dioni dicitur. Id ni fuerit,
profect Populus Rex Regum ubique Regnorum
vocandus erit; quin  omne genus Regimina
reapse erunt Popularia. Nam Populi Liberi
qui ver sit Liber, Regis propr sic dicti, e|adem
plan est ratio. Libertas autem civilis sine
summo Imperio non solummod non constat, sed
 concipi non potest. Ut Rex rever sit manci|pium,
sine Imperii Summitate, quibuscunque
demm Titulis per contumelias  ludibria
gaudere soleat.
. 11. Qui diligenter observarunt, qud Re|gibus
Hebraeis verbera saepe infligerentur, si eas
Leges violssent quae de Regis officio manebant
scriptae; (qui tamen Reges quin in plerisque
summo jure imperaverint, dubitari quidem nefas
magnus Grotius arbitrabatur, inquantum Popu|lus
iste Regem sibi dari efflagitaverant, Qualem
habebant vicinae Gentes, quae, quum essent
Orientales, addicte admodumGrot. de Iure Belli  Pacis, lib. 1. c. 3. Sect. 20. regnabantur;) fa|tentur
simul qud su sponte, atque in sig|num
Poenitentiae ejusmodi verbera suscipie|bant;
nec  Lictore caedebantur, sed ab eo quem
vellent, eoque modo quo vellent,  sic  Paenis
coactivis immunes erant. Nec quicquam offi|cit

Majestati vel Dictatoris absolutissimi, si iis
Legibus obtemperet, quarum Ipse  Sanctor,
 Vindex est; vel si ea supplicia tulerit, quae
sciens volensque Ipse sibi irrogaverat. Satis
autem ostendit Samuel, in Jure Regum descri|bendo,
adversus Regum Injurias nullam in Po|pulo
Potestatem relictam esse. Quod rect
Veteres collegerunt, ex eo quod David affatus
Deum, (etiam post alias at alias  se illatas,
non tantm Bathshebae, Uriae, sed  omnibus
Subditis Injurias,) Soli Tibi peccavi, dixisse dici|tur,
Psal. 51. 4. Nempe ad Regum Ius summum
 Illud spectat, (si vocabuli Rigore velimus
uti,) summam Subditis Injuriam inferre posse,
nec iniqua tantm facere, sed facienda etiam prae|cipere.
Ita tamen ut nomen Iuris non ad Iusti|tiam
Praeceptorum referri debeat, sed ad solam
Praecipientis Impunitatem. Nec ita Impunitas in|telligitur,
quasi Regibus supplicium omnin nul|lum,
sed quasi nullum nisi Deo legitim queat
irrogari. Cm omria Illis licere dicimus, Nihil
aliud intelligimus, qum omnia Illis impune ce|dere;
satisque ad Paenam censendum esse, qud
Deum in Coelis Ultorem habent.
. 12. Incommoda autem objicientibus quae
hinc sequuntur aut sequi possunt, si ad Injurias

impun inferendas Ius regium extendatur; In
promptu habeo respondendum, Nullam for|mam
Politiae absque Incommodis apud mortales
vel fingi posse; Nullos hominum in Terris ab
omni parte beatos esse; Illum statum praeferen|dum,
non qui malis omnin nullis, sed qui mi|nimis
urgetur. Minus autem Incommodorum
constat esse sequuturum, si omnia uni licere de|tur,
qum si ratio actionum reddenda sit. Nam
si Reges etiam in seculo pro Tribunalibus hu|manis
sistendi essent, nunquam Domus Reg|natrices
in tuto essent permansurae; Ipsa Regna
Resque Publicae mox deinde convellerentur, si
iis ipsis qui subduntur Jus regnandi subderetur
cum ipso Rege. Nemo ver inficias iverit, Pub|licam
Pacem  Quietem quovis pretio redi|mendam.
At neque Quies sine Armis, neque
Arma sine stipendiis,Tacit. Hist. 4. neque stipendia sine Tri|butis,
nec Tributa sine Regis Imperio summo,
sive  haberi queunt. Et qui summum
Imperium habet, non potest non patere multo|rum
Odiis. Unde securitas Imperantis est omni
modo munienda; Et summus ubique Guber|nator
perinde  esse debet, atque  apud
Graecos, qui etiam in Praeliis flagrantissimis,
atque ab hostibus infensissimis, ut sanct semper
haberetur in more erat.
. 13. Sed  praeterquam qud Incommoda
neque solvunt Argumentum neque conficiunt,
Jus regium non ex eo quod His aut Illis videtur
optimum, sed solm ex ejus voluntate unde ip|sum
Jus oritur, est metiendum. Voluntas au|tem
Dei in verbo suo manifestatur; unde Regis
Jus summum impun quidibet faciendi irrefra|gabilibus
Argumentis firmari possit. E. G.
1 Sam. 8. 11, c. Eccles. 8. 4. Rom. 13. 2, 4, 5,
6, 7.  1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20, 21.
. 14. Nec quicquam in eo derogatur Divini
Verbi Testimoniis, qud Ethnicorum Cory|phaei
in eandem ubique sententiam eunt. Seneca
Bruto errorem exprobrat,Sen. de Be|nef. l. 2. c. 20. graviter in eum cen|suram
agit, qud Regis Nomen extimuerit,
cm optimus status Civitatis sub Rege sit. Ne|que
enim omnin quaeritur, An sit serviendum,
sed potis utri duorum, Regi scilicet an Plebi ser|vire
praestet; uni soli, an Universis. Omne
Tyrannidis Exercitium per se est malum,Cic. de Legi|bus lib. 3. (inquit
Cicero,) sed eatenus est ferendum, immo etiam 
praeferendum, quatenus Bonum quod in eo quaesitum
est sine isto malo non haberemus. Et vel Incom|moda
cum Commodis sunt amplectenda, vel
haec cum illis mittenda sunt. Unde Cappadoces
apud Strabonem, cm oblata  Romanis Liber|tas

esset Popularis, oblatam vald noluerunt, sub Rege
vitam praeferentes.Strab. lib. 2. mihi p. 540. .
Ac si nulla sine Rege genuina
Libertas haberi posset, quia nc ulla sine Rege Salus ex|istit
Diuturna. Sicut autem Potestas Regia sub se reli|quas
complectitur, Patriam scilicet,  Herilem, Ita in
Res singulorum majus est Dominium Regis ad Bonum
commune promovendum, qum Dominorum singula|rium,
ad Bonum proprium;  unusquisque Reipublicae,
ad usus publicos, long magis obligatur qum Creditori; (ut
habet Regula Juris-Prudentium.) Cujus Regulae ratio
est, (uti ex Ethicis Aristotelicis videtur nihi colligendum)
 Unde
Plinius ad Trajanum, Regis est quicquid est omnium. Et
Philo Judaeus  explicatis aliquant id ipsum
asserit. .
. 15. Et si ita se Res habeat, ut quicquid pretiosi
apud Subditos custoditur, eorum qui regnant magis sit,
qum Possidentium; Et in Regno rect sic dicto,Tacit. l. 8. Vnus|imperitet
nullis jam exceptionibus, non precario regnandi jure;
Si de privatis judicare ad Magistratus pertineat inferio|res,
de Magistratibus illis ad Principem, de Principe ver
ad solum Deum; Si qui ver Rex est non duntaxat ex
legibus, verum etiam in Leges Imperium habeat; nec
aliter constet Regale Regimen, nisi sui plan sit Juris,
ipsumque  Ipsi maneat inviolatum; exinde
statim conficitur, ( consequenti quidem ineluctabli,)
Quod Magistratus Inferiores, ut ut in unum coeuntes,
Populique Universi gerentes vicem,   Romano etiam
Pontifice quomodolibet animati, Regem tamen non pos|sunt
sine crimine Capitali Armis aggredi, aut per Dei

saltem leges ei litem intendere, aut quocunque demum
praetextu quicquam Illi intentare.
. 16. Quod ex Praemissis Consectarium, etiamsi ex
Praemissis sit usque adeo luculentum, ut vehementer sit
ignarus qui illud nescit, deplorati plan ingenii qui non
agnoscit; Quinimm pluribus Testimoniis  sacr Pagin
expromptis, pluribus etiam seculorum apud Histoticos
exemplis, pluribus denique Sapientm  Sanctorum
Martyriis comprobetur, qum ut hodi in Dubium vo|cari
debeat; quia tamen hoc vitium praesentis seculi
videatur, ut nihil sit tam firmum quod non convellitur,
nihil tam sanctum quod non facil violatur, nihil de|nique
tam certum quod non voeatur in controversiam;
non solummod non inutilis, sed  apprim necessaria
videri poterit, tam conspicui Axiomatis in tant Luce
Elucidatio.
. 17. Quod etiamsi cum bono Deo in animo habe|am
effectum dare; impraesentiarum tamen hoc facere,
neque per vestram mihi licebit (Dilecti Fratres) Patien|tiam,
nec per Tempus huic Penso ex consuetudine prae|stitutum,
nec per tremenda illa mysteria quae adhuc re|stant
percipienda. Quorum idoneae Perceptioni qu
fructuosis velificemini,
Gratia Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, Dilectio Patris,
 Communicatio Spirits Sancti sit cum omnibus vobis
in Secula Seculorum.
FINIS.








THE
PURIFICATION
OF OUR
LADY,
AND
PRESENTATION
OF OUR
LORD.
A
SERMON
Preached before the
KING At WHITE-HALL
upon Candlemas Day, 1661.







LUKE 2. 22.
And when the Dayes of her Purification according
to the Law of Moses, were accomplished, they
brought him to Ierusalem to present him to the
Lord.

. 1. VPon the Feast of the Nativity, our
Lord himself was a Present. Upon
the Feast of the Epiphanie, He was Presented.
And now on the Feast of Purification, He pur|posely
comes to Present Himself.
He was a Guift sent at Christmas, from God
to Men. At Twelftide as God, he is said to have
received Guifts of Men. And now at Candlemas,
as Man, he is a Guift unto God for the Sins of
Men. At the 16 verse of this Chapter, the Ru|ral
Votaries from the Fold did find him weeping
in his Cratch. At the 21 verse we find him bleed|ing
in His Cradle. But in the words of this
Text, we find Him smiling (as we may guess)

in his Mothers Armes. She devoutly carrying
Him, and her Devotion carrying Her, and the
Law of Moses carrying Both, at once that Shee
may be Purified, and He presented unto the
Lord.
. 2. I have desir'd so much the rather, in
the choise of this Text, to take advise with the
Rubrick, and the Gospel appointed for the Day,
Because we have hardly escap'd an Age of so
much ignorance in the Canons, and Disobedience
to the Commands of our English Church, that
unless the old custome be now reviv'd, the Peo|ple
of England (like the Italian Priest,) will be
in danger of disputing in time to come, whether
the Rubrick be Fish or Flesh; and be as apt to
be in doubt, as the Man in Poggius, whether
the Pentecost were a Man or a Woman. Again I
choose so much the rather, to do the work of
each day on the day it self, because the Festivals
of the Church being consider'd in conjunction,
do comprehend the Fundamentals of Christian
Faith. And so a Pertinent discourse upon each
of Them, will (when the Calendar is expir'd) be|come
a Body of Divinity.
. 3. I shall therefore make hast to the due
Solemnity of the Day; and by premising its

several Names, shall give a guess at some part
of its Nature too. 'Tis call'd the Feast of Pu|rification,
from the Pure Virgins being cleans'd
from her Mosaical Impurity. The word Impuri|ty
being us'd by such a Scriptural Catachresis, as
only to signifie the yoke, or the obligation, which
by the ordinance of Moses was fasten'd on her.
'Tis call'd the Feast of Presentation, from our
Lords condescension to be presented unto the
Lord. It might have been called the Feast of
Ransome, because no sooner was he presented
and given to God, but he was presently bought
back with a Piece of Silver. 'Twas commonly
call'd Hypapante throughout the Churches of
the East, from the Interview and meeting be|twixt
our Saviour and good old Simeon, (v. 28.)
Candlemas it was call'd, or the Feast of Lights,
because of a Custome still retein'd in the Church
of Rome, though worthily cast off by the Church
of England; for that of old it was the Day
wherein they consecrated Candles, and that in
honour to the Idol which was commonly call'd
Februa. A Goddess feign'd to be propitious to
pregnant Women in their Child-births; and
therefore allow'd to have the Priviledge of
giving a Name to this Month, as well as the

mode of Solemnizing this very Day.
. 4. From whence (by the way) 'twill not
be useless to observe, that the purifying of Wo|men
after the Agonies of their Child-birth, is a
thing common to us of Christendom, not only
with the Iews, but the Gentiles too; and may
be matter of contention to the Malice or Igno|rance
of a Sect, which is either so stupid as not
to know, or else so obstinate as not to acknowledge,
or at least so over peevish as not to admit of a
consideration, That the very same custome in se|veral
Places, may receive its Beginning from
God and Belial; though not observed in the
sam, but in a contrary manner; not with the
same, but with a contrary mind; nor at all to
the same, but to a contrary end.  (saith
Gregory Nazianzen) . The Iew keeps
Holy-Day, but according to the Letter. 
The Gentile keeps Holy-Day, but according to
the Flesh. , The Christian also keeps
Holy-Day, but according to the Spirit.
. 5. Let us Rejoyce then on This Day, be|cause
it is the Day which the Lord hath made. And
again let us rejoyce, even because it is the Day
which hath made the Lord. I mean hath made
him, of a Lord, to become a Servant; hath made

him, of a God, to become a Votary; hath made
him of a Giver become a Guift. The Lord him|self,
on this Day, having been brought unto Ieru|salem,
to be presented unto the Lord.
. 6. And as the Text does thus instruct us
to the Solemnity of the Day; so the double
Solemnity of the Day does teach us how to
divide the Text; or rather the Text divides it
self into these two Generals.
The Purification of our Lady, and the Pre|sentation
of our Lord. For each of which com|pellations,
we have not only Custome, but Reason
too. For as Christ in the Greek does import a
Lord, so Mary in the Hebrew is known to signifie
a Lady. And it is obvious to infer, That She
may well be our Lady, who was the Mother
of our Lord.
In both these Generals put together, there
are seven Particulars to be observ'd.
First the Actions, which are express'd; ,
they brought,  they presented. Next the
Agents, which are imply'd; namely the Rela|tions
and Friends of Christ. They brought, and
They presented. Thirdly the Subject, ,
they brought Him. Fourthly the Place; ,
to Ierusalem. Fifthly the End; ,

to present him unto the Lord. Sixtly the Time,
, when the dayes were accomplished
wherein the Mother was to be purifyed. Last of
all the Obligation and Inducement unto the whole;
and that is , the Law of Moses.
To go no farther than the two Generals,
were too little for the Text; And yet to insist
on each Particular, would be as certainly too
much for the Time allow'd. And therefore I shall
pitch on a Middle course; so extending the Ge|nerals,
and so contracting the Particulars, as
to wind them up together into these four
Bottomes.
The Purification of the Parent, at once a
Maid and a Mother too.
The presentation of her Son, at once pre|sented
unto the Lord, and the Lord presented.
Next the Circumstances or Adjuncts of
Time and Place, wherewith these Actions
were to be cloath'd.
Lastly the Rule of the Actions and Adjuncts
too, unto which they both are to be conform'd.
. 1. I must premise, touching the first, the
Purification of the Virgin, (the first in Order,
though not in Dignity, and perhaps to be pre|fer'd
for giving the Title unto the Day,) That a

legal Cleansing or Purification must needs imply
and presuppose a legal Impurity and Pollution;
for which the Mother being deliver'd, and the
Babe newly Born,Levit. c. 12. and c. 15. did stand condemn'd by the
Law to a kind of Excommunication, to wit an
absolute Exclusion, during the time of their
uncleanness, as well from the Touch of a pri|vate
Person, as from an Interest and share in the
Publick Meetings. First from the Touch of a
private Person, The Mother, like her Babe, if
She brought forth a Son, was no longer exclu|ded
then until the eighth Day; And no longer,
if a Daughter, than till the fourteenth. But from
the publick and solemn Meetings the prohibi|tion
was more severe; for if she brought forth
a Son, she was excluded for 40 dayes; if a
Daughter, for seventy four. Again the Infant,
if put to Nurse, remain'd unclean but for a
Month; but continuing with the Mother, the
legal uncleanness continued also.
. 2. Now this imputative uncleannesse may
seem to be an Adambration of that. Philo. Original
Vitiosity, with which our Nature was corrupted
by the Sin of the first Adam, and was by con|sequence
to be purified by the Innocence of the
second. For as the legal uncleanesse was not so

null'd upon the 8 Day, as to exempt the persons
cleans'd from being purified on the 40;. Iambli|cus. Aristoteli vero dicitur . (with|out
which later purification they were not to
enter into the Sanedrim, and sure much lesse into
the Temple;) we may say in like manner of ori|ginal
Sin, It hath taken so deep a Root in the
posterity of Adam, that however it were re|mitted
both in the Iewish Circumcision, and
Christian Baptisme, yet its Reliques and Dreggs
doe so stick in Both, as to exclude us from the
Communion fellow-membership with the Saints,
(supposing we live to a riper Age,) untill we
are purified by Repentance in the Blood of the
Lamb, wherof the legal purification was but an
Embleme. And this may prompt us to give a
Reason, why at the time of Purification there
was to be offer'd unto the Lord, either a Lamb
and a Pigeon, (that is, if the Parents were rich
enough,) or else (in case they were not,) a pair
of Turtles or Pigeons without a Lamb. The
one for an Holocaust, the other for a Sin|offering.
The first to signify their gratitude, the
second their Repentance. The one was to acknow|ledge
the special Blessing of the Delivery; and
the other was to expiate the Sullage of it.
. 3. Lord! how filthy and impure is the life

of man, the purest part of whose Life, which is
his Birth, can make his Mother stand in need
of a Purification? That we are sprung out of the
Dust, shew's the unworthiness of our Nature;
but that we derive it from our Parents, doth
speak its guilt too. 'Tis true the Soul of man
is a pretious Treasure; But he hath it (saith
St. Paul) in an earthen Vessel;2 Cor. 4. 7. which is suffici|ently
ignoble, in regard of the matter of which
'twas made; but in regard of the Mould where|in
'twas cast, (or of the Conduit through which
deriv'd,) it is not only ignoble, but most unclean
too. If men will glory in their Extraction, let
them first make it appear that they are born
from above; let them prove they are regenerate,
and born again;Joh. 1. 13. not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. ,
(as St. Paul speaks out of the Poet,) that in|deed
they are the offspring, and Sons of God.
For , This (saithChysoft. in Genes. Homil. 23. Chryso|stome)
is the noblest kind of Genealogie. And
so the Bereans were , not only nobler, but
better born, than the noblest Jewes of Thessalonica,
Act. 17. 11. Gregory NazianzenGreg. Naz. Orat. 28. forbids us to
make a Boast of our Progeniters, unless we think
it was for nothing, that the Virgin here was pu|rified,

and Christ presented; or that our Mothers
once were Churched, and we Baptiz'd. No, it
rather becomes us (with holy Iob) that we say
to Corruption, Thou art our Father; and to the
Worm, thou art our Mother. Or that we go be|yond
Iob,Nihil aliud est homo qum sperma foeti|dum, saccus strcorum, ci|bus vermium. post hominem vermis, post vermem feor sic in non bo|minem ver tur omnis ho|mo. Bernard|de Anima. c. 3. p. 1051. in saying to Iniquity, Thou art our
Brother; and to Uncleanness, Thou art our Sister,
For let our other Relations be what they will,
we cannot possibly deny that Sin and We were
born Twins, if we take David to be Orthodox
in what he saith of our shape, and Conception too;
that the one was in Sin, and the other in Ini|quity.
. 4. Lord! how strange a thing it is, that
any man should grow proud? And yet how
hard a thing it is, to meet with a man who is
truly humble?Quid superbis homo, atten|dens quod fu|isti vle se|men, sanguis coagulacus in utero? unde superbit, cujus conceptio Cul|pa, Nasci pae|na, labor vita, necesse mori? Id. ibid. Our understandings indeed are
dark, our wills disobedient, our hearts decitful,
our passions eminently perverse; But, which
makes us most miserable, we are so senseless of
our being so, That our special Impellents to
Humiliation are common Incentives unto our
Pride. We are apt to glory in our Infirmities, (if
I may use St. Pauls words, not only without,
but against his meaning,) and to take honour unto
our selves from the justest matter of mortifica|tion.

'Tis not the knowledge of what we were,
nor the remembrance of what we shall be; 'Tis
not the baseness of a Conception, nor the unlove|liness
of a Grave; 'Tis not the gastliness of
Death, nor yet the dreadfulness of Iudgment,
that can subdue our exalted Thoughts to an
humble sense of our unworthiness. But apt we
are to be transported, with a complacency in our
selves, and a contempt of others, although we
cannot but be convinc'd, (at least in our lucida
Intervalla, or godly Fits,) That we are wretched,
and poor, and blind, and naked.
. 5. Clemens Romanus (I remember) in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, could think of no
fitter spell, wherewith to lay, or exorcize, the
Devil of Arrogance, or Ambition, than this so
seasonable a Topick from whence I argue. Are
we indanger'd by a  from the froth and va|nity
of our minds, which only raiseth us (as it
did Lucifer, and the other morning Stars,) to an
higher Fall? . Let
us reflect (saith the Father) upon the stuff which
we were made of; and. Clem. Rom. in Ep. ad Cor. p. 50. set the contumelies before
us, through which we passed into the world. I
am truly so far of that Father's mind, that had
we but patience enough to meditate on our original,

and our End;Si diligenter consideresquid per os  na|res, caereros Corporis mea|tus egrediatur vilius Ster|quilinium nun. quam vidisi attende, homo, quid fuisti ante ortum, quid abortu ad occasum, quid eris post hac vitam. Bernardus ubi supr from what we came, and whether
'tis that we are tending; would we contem|plate
on our Features in that impartial Mirroir
of a skeleton; and instead of a fawning Glass,
see our selves drawn unto the life in an hollow
Cranion; I am inclinable to infer we should be
higher in Gods eyes, (which regarded not the
high, but the low estate of his Hand-maid,) after
the rate of our being viler, and more contemp|tible
in our own. And even by minding higher
Things than now we doe, we should lesse be
highminded than now we are. Then let us not
stand at too great a distance from the most de|spicable
Person for whom Christ dyed; (no
not so much as from the man, who bids us
stand farther off, for he is holyer than we;) since
we are equally descended from the very same
Eve; and so, by Her, from the very same Adam;
and so, by Him, from the very same Earth.
Suppose a Potter of the same clay shall make
a washpott, and a Basin, intending That for the
Kitchen, and This especially for the Closet; shall
the Basin say to the washpot, I am better than Thou?
There may indeed be a great, but there cannot
be any intrinsick difference; as wholly depending
upon the Will, and (by That) upon the usage

of Him that owns them. In this they certainly
agree, that they consist not of a different, but of
the same kind of Dirt; and being broken both in
pieces, are equally cast unto the Dunghil. That
all were equal in the womb, is contended by Philo,
. Philo. the Learned Iew. That all were equal in the
Laver of their Regeneration, Gregorie Nazianzen
does argue with exprobration, asTingebantur olim eodem lavacro pueri, senes, divites, pauperes, viri,  mulieres; unde Greg. Nazian. ob|jurgat opulen|os, quos pude|bat cum tenu|ibus simul tingi. B. Rhe|nanus in Ter|tullian. de Coron. Mill. cap. 3. Beatus Rhenanus
does well observe. And so 'twas rationally or|dain'd
by the Law of Moses, That both the
poorest and the richest, the meanest and the most
honorable, the Virgin mother herselfe and her purer
Babe, (however different they might be in all
the Circumstances of Life,) should be equally
rated, as well at their Births, as at their Burials.
And though the Emperour Leo, Sirnam'd Isau|rus,
had rather the Power than the Authority
to put an excize upon women's child Births,
making every man pay for his being Born; Yet
'twas righteously provided under the legal Di|pensation,
(because by commission from God Him|self,)
that all the masculine children which were
withall the First-born, should pay the same
kind of Custom at their entrance into the world,
and discharge the same Debt at their Exit too.
Perhaps to teach us This Lesson, amongst some

others, that the difference of Degrees in the Sons
of men, although indeed 'tis of divine, yet it is
not of natural, but of positive Institution. For
though God puts them asunder as far as the
Zenith is from the Nadir, fixing a King upon the
Throne, and casting a Rebel into the Dungeon,
(which is enough to stop the Mouths of all our
levelling Fanaticks, whether the Adamites a|broad,
or the Anabaptists at home,) yet all men
by Nature are no less than twice levell'd; before
they come into their Cradle, and when they go in|to
their Grave.
. 6. But though this is the Lesson which we
are taught by that Law, by which the mother
after her child-Birth was to be purifi'd in the
Temple; Yet it may easily be demanded, how
the Law of purification could reach the Virgin.
For was shee not chaster than the Turtles shee
came to offer? was shee not her selfe a living
Temple; and very much purer than the Temple
to which shee went for a Purification? Can there
be any cleaner Flame, than what stream's forth
from a Virgin Taper? would we not wonder at
such a Chymist, as should use his Alembick
to cleanse Elixirs? And probably laugh at that
Goldsmith, who should refine his metals beyond

their Quintessence? To purifie a Virgin, may
seem a Soloecisme as great, as for a man to wash
Water. And to purifie such a Virgin, as had
been happily impraegn'd by the Spirit of purity,
is just like washing the clearest water, as it newly
glide's forth from the crystal Spring; not so much
as deflowr'd by the embraces of the River, much
lesse by being mixt with the Brackish Ocean. Its
true indeed shee was a Mother, but by so much
the more a Maid too. Shee was deliver'd of a
Son, but of such a Son, as was the wisdom of the
Father. Shee lay in of an Infant, but such an
Infant, as was The Word. Shee encompassed a
man, but such a man, as was Emanuel. Shee
brought forth a child, but such a strange child,
as had the Goverment on his shoulders; A child
whose name was called wonderful, Counsellour, the
mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, Isa. 9. 16. And being deliver'd of such
an Infant, such a child, such a manchild as This;
How could That which made her pure, make
her need a Purification? Or (to give this obje|ction
its utmost strength) Admit that Marie
in her Person mightstand in need of being puri|fied,
(though not in regard to the Babe shee bare,
Yet at least to the Parents of which she was

born;) must therefore the Author of her Pu|ritie
submit himselfe to have a sare in her
Purification? must Christ himself become the
Subject, as well as the Maker of tha Law?
For so the greatest number of Copyes agree
to have him; reading  (not 
but)  the dayes (not of her, but) of their
Purification. So reads the oldest and best of
Manuscripts, which 'tis our happiness to pos|sess
in our English Archives. So readsHomil. 14. and 18. Origen
out of choice, whose matchless pains in compa|ring
Manuscripts might make him the abler to
choose aright. So reads Erasmus, and Zegerus,
Laurentius, and De Dieu. And by the stream of
such strong Authority, the Judgment of Beza
is carried down; And so is the Arabick Transla|tion,
which seems to follow the Vulgar Latin, as
well in This, as in other Things. Nay so reads
the Syriack, which is in order of time before
the Arabick, from which our English Translators
do seem to have render'd it in the singular. Now
that Mary should be Purified, there is a rea|son
more obvious. Because though her self was
a Mother-Maid, in so much that a Child-Birth
which defiled other Women, may well be said to
have cleansed Her, ( so her real Purification was

coetaneous with her delivery;) yet we know she
was the Daughter of a Conjugal Bed, and so the
subject of an Original, though not an Actual Vi|tiosity.
Albeit the Greek Fathers are wont to
call her [] the Mother of God, yet did they
not make her, by That, a Goddess; (as some in
the world are bold to do, by the Rapine and Sa|criledge
of their Devotion, whilst they supplicate
God the Son for the Merits of his Mother, or
pray unto the Mother to lay her commands upon
her Son.) The Guilt of Adam did adhere to her
righteous Soul, although it could not mix with
it; And so she wanted at least a legal, if not a
literal Purification. But how so derogating a Rite
should be competent to her Son, who was not
meerly a Son of Adam; may seem at least to be
a Quere which should not pass unresolv'd.
. 7. But This was don (saith Aquinas) for
our Instruction; That we may carry our selves
with meeknesse, as we have Christ for an Example.
paying Obedience from without us to publick
Sanctions, where none from within us is strictly
due. Every Christian (like Christ Himself) is
to be actively Obedient in many things, though
not as necessary, yet as conventent; though not
for conscience, yet for the benefit of conformity;

though not for private, yet for publick satis|faction;
though not to avoyd Sin in Himself,
yet not so much as to occasion it in other men.
But however this Reason may passe for good,
methinks 'twere easy to give a better. To wit
that our Saviour being laden with the Iniquity
of us all, (to use the words of the Prophet Esay)
was in all our behalfes to stand in need of a
purification. Being made Sin for us, (as St. Paul
speaks to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5, 2.) and at last
numbred with the Transgressors, and so made
subject to the Levitical, as well as the Moral
Law of Moses, (born as he was, of a Iewish
parent, a branch sprung forth from the Root
of Iesse,) He was first to fulfil, and then to abro|gate
the law of Rites; or rather to abrogate,
whilst he fulfil'd it. And this may help us to
give a Reason, (besides the Poverty of his Pa|rents,)
why they offered not a Lamb, but a pair
of Doves. For what needed the Type, where
the Antitype was present? What place could
there be for a Lamb out of the Fold, when be|hold
the Lamb of God that came down from
Heaven? The Lamb to expiate for our Souls, as
well as the Shepherd to direct them.
. 8. The Thought of which should sve

to fill us, not with Gratitude only and Love, but
even with wonder and admiration, That the
Lawgiver himself would be obedient unto the
Law, thereby to free us from the Law as the
strength of Sin; and so to free us from Sin, as the
sting of Death; and so to free us from Death, as
'tis the Victory of Hell. That the Holy of Ho|lies,
and King of Kings, would meekly take up|on
him the Form as well of a sinner as of a ser|vant;
and become legally unclean, whereby to
take away from us our great uncleanness; for
according to the Hebraisme by which the Hel|lenisticks
are wont to speak, nothing worse can
be meant by the legal uncleanness of a Iew, than
that external obligation to the performance of a
Duty, which by an arbitrary Law is incumbent
on him. And to This our blessed Saviour with|out
the least stain of guilt did submit himself,
not at all for himself, but for Us alone. For Us
it was that he descended from out the Bosom of
the Father; for Us he poured out himself, so far
forth as to be emptid of all his Glory, that we
might drink of his Fulness, Grace for Grace.
For Us it was that he was cloyster'd in Marie's
Womb; for Us that he was folded in Marie's
Armes; for Us that he was put upon several

Iournies, whilst yet he could not either Ponitur pro . nam addu|cendi verbum ponimus in eo qui pedibus eat: id quod de Christo in e aetate dici non pterat. Castalio in locum. go, or
with ease be carryed; To wit from Nazareth
to Bethleem, and from Bethleem to Ierusalem,
and that upon more accounts than one, not only
to be purified, but presented unto the Lord.
 This (as I said in the Beginning) was the se|cond
Action of the Day, and so deserves the second
Place in the consideration of the Text.
. 1. To give you the History of the Action
from that which gave it its Original, I must
goe back to take my Rise from as farr as
Exodus.Exod. 12. Where after Sundry dismal miracles
for the freeing of Israel out of Aegypt, the last
and greatest was shewn at midnight. When the
sword of the Lord did cut off all the first-born
among the Children of the Egyptians, from the
first-born of Pharoah that sate on his throne,Verse 29. to the
first-born of the Captive that lay in the dungeon. But
the first-born of Israel being miraculously pre|serv'd,
Chap. 13. Vers. 15. were immediately claimed by their
preserver. who besides the common Interest which
he had in them as his Creatures,Exod. 1. 22. did farher devote
them unto Himself by a peculiar right of Re|demption
too.Num. 8. 18. And though by way of Commu|tation

He took the Levites unto Himself, (in
stead of all the first born of the Children of Israel,)
Yet were not the Levites so full a Ransome,Num. 18. 16.
but that they were farther to be ransom'd by
the summ of five Shekels.
. 2. Now put all this together, and it will
prove an Adumbration of the holy Child Iesus;
who, though the Lord, and the Redeemer, was
yet presented unto the Lord, and Redeemed this
Day with a piece of Silver. For He was sure
the Fist-born, who is expressed so in Scripture by
way of Eminence, and whom the First-born of
Israel were but intended to represent. He pre|sented
Himself as our Elder Brother, (and so
again the first-born,) to redeem us from the
Fury of the Destroying Angel. He, as the First-born,
orPsal. 2. 8. Heir of all things, was presented
this day to receive his right of Primogeniture,
by claiming the Heathen for his Inheritance, and
the uttermost part of the earth for his possession.
He again was the first-born, who presented
Himself unto as many as would receive him,
that he might give them power to be the Sons of
God.Joh. 1. 12. To sum up all in a word, He is call'd
the First-Born of every Creature (Col. 1. 15.)
who was begotten of the Father before all

Time; And the first-born of his Mother, brought
forth into the world in the fulness of Time. He
was again the first-born by vertue of his office,
as Mediator. The first that was born of a pure
Virgin; the first that ever was born without the
least stain of Sin; the first and last that was
born both God and Man. Many wayes the
first-born, he was brought on this day to be
presented unto the Lord, not as a Servant only,
or Sacrifice, but as a King, and a Priest too,
on whom his Brethren depended for Life and
Fortune; so to claim his own Right, and so to
communicate it to Us, that whether Paul, or
Apollo, whether Cephas, or the World, whether
life or Death, whether things present or things to
come; All might be ours, as we are Christ's, as
Christ is God's.
. 3. From the whole History of the Action,
(so farr at least as our Lord was concerned
in it,) it will be easy enough to gather These
usefull Considerations.
. 4. First that the Dayes being accom|plish't,
when both the Mother and her Babe
might have the freedom to goe abroad; The
first Journy they took, was not to Nazareth,

but Ierusalem. She brought Him to God's
House before her own. Implying this Caveat
to Christian Parents, that they suffer not the
Devil to take the first Hansel of their Children;
but acquaint them with God in their very Non|age;
and so present them unto Him by a Reli|gious
Education.1 Sam. 2. That they devote them to his
Service, even as early as Hannah devoted Sa|muel.
That their enmity to Sin be as soon be|spoken,
as the ChildAnnorum ferm novem, altaribus ad|motus, tactis Sacris jureju|rando adactus ab Amilcare, se quum pri|mum posset, Hostem fore Populo Roma|no. Liv. l. 21. cap. 1. Hanibal at the Altar was
bespoken by his Father to hate the Romans.
That they suffer them not to lisp in the Language
of Egypt, but (as Children put to Nurse in the
Land of Goshen) make them Suck in good man|ners
as soon as Milk. That they permit them
not to enter within the Breath of the Prophane,
from whose unavory communication (like the
New-landed Spaniard,) they can many times
Swear, when they cannot speak. That they put
so fit a difference betwixt themselves and Brute-Beasts,
as to become unto their children, not
only carnal, but spiritual Parents; and so beget
them to God by a second Birth, as not to afford
them any reason to Curse their first. This is the
Use we are to make of our first Consideration,
the Mother's seasoning of her Babe, not at Na|zareth,
but Ierusalem.
. 5. Secondly let us consider, That as of all
the Iewish off-spring, not the Females, but the
Males were to be offer'd unto the Lord; (as it
were intimating unto us, that They alone may
expect to be admitted into God's Presence,
who Captivate the Lusts of the effeminate Flesh,
by the masculine power of a controuling spirit;)
so of all the Males too, none but the best, or the
first-born were set a part for God's Portion. For
when I say the first-born, I mean the Might of
the Parents,Gen. 49. 3. and the beginning of their strength,
the excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of
Power, as Iacob said of his Eldest Son Reuben.
They were not then like the Parents of our last
and worst Times, who when their children are
Blind, or Crooked, or (in a word) nothing worth,
do fly for refuge to the Temple, and make them
Deodates. God is little beholding to such a
Parent, who when his Son is too dull for either
the Shop, or the Exchange, does straight present
him unto the Lord, by devoting him to serve in
his dreadful House, and (as a Minister) to wait
at his holy Table; Does give him over to the
Pulpit, because too old for the Grammar School;
And if he cannot Write or Read, does therefore
teach him to Pray extempore. As if to the office

of a Workman who needeth not to be asham'd, there
were nothing required but lungs and Impudence.
From the beginning (I am sure) it was not so.
For Kings and Princes in time of Yore were
thought most proper to be the Priests. And
when the Priesthood was Entail'd on the Tribe of
Levi, it was by way of Prerogative, and in reward
of a special Service. The Best by Pedegree, by
Sex, by Primogeniture, They that were every
way the Best, and the Choisest Persons, were set
apart in the Beginning for the peculiar Service
of the most High.
. 6. From whence 'tis obvious to infer,
That as of the fruit of a man's Body, so by con|sequence
of the Fruit of his Labour too, of the
fruit of his Substance, and of the fruit of his
Soul, of every thing that he calls His, He is not
to offer up to God, but the best, and choisest.
We must not sacrifice to Pleasure with the
strength and Beauty of our Age, and think that
God will be content with a noysome Carkass;
(like the false Votary in the Apologue, who vow'd
to consecrate unto Iupiter, Half of the All that
he went to find, and presently finding a Bagg of
Nuts, made no doubt but he should bravely
perform his Vow, by giving the shells unto his

God, and taking the Kernels unto Himself;)
This were at best to forsake the world, because
the world forsakes Us; And only to keep our
Baptismal Vow, because we know not any longer
which way to break it. Will God accept of
our Presenting our selves unto him, not (as
Christ on this Day,) when newly come into the
world, But (as the Clinicks of old,) at our going
out? Will he accept of our coming, when we
come to him but in a Fright? not of choise, but
necessity? not at all as to our best, but rather as
to our last, and our only Refuge? Will he re|ceive
us when we shall choose him as the ;
not as the greatest Good Thing, but the
lesser Evil? not as better and more desirable than
the Injoyments of the Earth, but as preferrable
at least to the Pains of Hell? It cannot possibly
be our vertue, to be forsaken of our Sins, or
rather bereaved of our strength whereby to be
vigorously Sinfull, and without which we can
no longer be sturdy Sinners. So again, (in pro|portion
to this Discourse,) 'Tis not enought that
we present him with the Labour of our Lipps,
and that a little towards Night, to make our Time
the more supportable; (which is to make our bet|ter
Actions a meer Divertisement to our

worse;) But we must Sacrifice to our God,
the very best of our Day, which is our Morning;
the very best of our Years, which is our Youth;
the very best of our Body, which is our Heart;
the very best of our Being, which is our Soul.
Our Body must be the Temple, our Heart the
Altar, our Sincerity the Priest, our Devotion the
Fire, our blessed Saviour must be the God, and
our Soul the Sacrifice.
. 7. But then withal (like a sacrifice) it
must be pure, and unpolluted; pure, as the Vir|gin,
who was this Day Purified; And unpolluted,
as the Babe, who was presented this day in the
holy Place. And yet because we cannot (other
wayes) be purified as the Virgin, much less per|fect
as the Babe, (who yet hath commanded us to
be perfect, even as our Father in Heaven is perfect,
Mat. 5. ult. and to purifie our selves, as Himself
is pure, 1 Joh. 3. 3.) Because, I say, we cannot
otherwise be pure and perfect, Let us do like
the Virgin, (as well this day, as from this day
forwards,) Take the Babe into our Hearts, as
she now did into her Armes; And so together
with our Saviour, present our selves unto the
Lord. For as the Man that was condemn'd by
the Roman Senate, procured Love as well as Par|don,

by representing the Scars in his naked Bo|some,
which were the Monuments of his Suf|ferings
for the honour and Service of his Coun|try;
so to obtein at once our Pardon and Accep|tance
also at Gods Tribunal, not only Pardon of
our Sins, but Acceptance of our Persons, we must
recount the many sufferings of our Elder Brother
in our behalf;Heb. 2. 17.  3. 11. pleading the Scars and the Blood|shed
sustein'd by the Captain of our Salvation. To
such objections as may be made by an Injur'd
Iustice, we must present an injur'd Iesus as our
only Answer and Apologie. To every Arrow
levell'd at us by God's Displeasure, we have but
Christ and Him Crucified for our Shield or Helmet
to intercept it. Though with our Prayers and
our Tears (our only warrantable Weapons) we
humbly venture to contend with the Lord of
Hosts, hoping the Pungency of our sorrow will
make him yield; (yield I mean to his own Re|sentment,)
yet may we not hope to prevaile up|on
him, unless we stand behind Christ, and (as
the Virgin this Day,) hold him up as our Buckler,
our only Armour of Defence, against Himself
(if need be) as our Injur'd Iudge too. For (that
I may shew by an experiment how as a Buckler
he must be weilded,) be our misdeeds never so

numerous, they are no more than his Merits.
Though he will come to be our Iudge, He is
first our Advocate, who, before he can censure,
will plead our Cause. Are our Sins of deep die?
his Blood was Crimson, in which our sins being
washed, will be as wool. Are they swell'd into a
Deluge? That stream can drown them. Are
they damning and mortiferous? Those wounds
can bury them. He was a Fountain, for our
sakes dry; a Fountain of water, for our sakes
thirsty; a Fountain of living water, for our sakes
dead. And shall we suffer by the Sins, for which
he suffer'd? no blessed Lord, Though thou
canst not but perceive them as they lie open in
our Souls, yet being hid in his Grave thou wilt
not see them; or though thou canst not but see
them with the Eye of thine Omniscience, yet
with that of thy Iustice we hope thou wilt not;
or though thou canst not but in Iustice detest
our sins, yet in Mercy be thou pleas'd to forgive
the sinners.
. 8. Thus the Feast of Presentation is to be
celebrated by us throughout the year. The holy
child Iesus must still be brought into the Temple,
And All he suffer'd in our behalf be still pre|sented
unto the Lord. We must present him unto

God, that is to say, unto himself, even as often
as we go into the House of God; comprecating
nothing, but for his sake; deprecating nothing,
but for his Merits; presenting nothing to be ac|cepted,
but in his Name and Mediation. No
nor so much as in his Name may we adventure
to present him, until we are purified by the Gos|pel,
as Mary was under the Law. This as fitly
prepares for a cleansing week, as that week does
for Lent, or that Lent for Easter. We (I say)
must be purified from all kind of filthiness of flsh
and spirit, (2 Cor. 7. 1.) before our Saviour
(wirh effect) can be thus presented. But purified
with Mary, we cannot be, unless with Mary in
the Text, we live in obedience to Laws establish'd,
although the matter they are made of be ante|cedently
indifferent, and subject to diverse Excep|tions
too. Such as the Time, and the Place,
wherein the Duties of the Text were to be
punctually perform'd. The Time is here imply'd
to be the end of the Dayes of their Purification;
the Place is expressed to be Ierusalem. And
the Rule of Conformity, The Law of Moses. Of
which last parts of the Division of the Text, I
shall speak very briefly, and in Conjunction.
. 1. Had the Parents of this Child been of 
the humour of our Times, and only consulted
with Flesh and Blood, They had not stood on
the Punctillio's ofClement Romano ta|men Judice,  Clem. Rom. in Ep. ad Cor. pag. 53. Time and Place; but very
much rather upon the Equity of a most rational
Disobedience. What? must the work of Puri|fication
be tyed precisely to a Day? Or must
not the holy Child Iesus be either presented, or
redeem'd, until he hath punctually attain'd the
fortieth day after his Birth? May we not stay a
little longer, until the wayes and the weather are
more inviting? or may we not go a little sooner,
before the Noise of a Messias awake the Iealousie
of a sleeping, but furious Tyrant? Or may we
not huddle it up at Home, to save a very tender
Mother, and her more tender Babe, at once the
Hardship and the Risque of so long a Iourny? shall
we confine the Omnipresent within the Walls of
Ierusalem? or think Ubiquity it self can be pen't
up within a Temple? or believe there can be
Holiness in a consecrated Fabrick of Wood and
Stones? Admit Ierusalem is the greatest, yet
(since the Birth of the Messias) Bethleem sure is
not the least among the Cities of Iudah. And
when the Antient of Days becomes the Babe to
be presented, It may be fitter that the Temple

should come to Him, or at least that his Presence
should make a Temple. (Just as the Presence of
the King (wheresoever he is) does create a Court,
whereas the Pallace of the Court cannot either
lessen or raise the King.) Besides; God regards
not the Ceremony, but the meer substance of our
Devotion. It matters not so much either when,
or where, as how affected we come before him.
An humble soul is the Temple that He delights in.
A broken Heart the best Altar whereon to Sacri|fice.
And the best Sacrifice we can bring is a
contrite Spirit. Or if this will not serve; yet
may not the Ceremonies required be don at Beth|leem
at the present, and repeated at Ierusalem at
times of leisure and convenience? Can a very
good work be don too often? or the discharge of
a Duty begun too soon?
. 2. This had been to chop Logick just
like Naaman the Syrian, in the second of Kings,
and the fifth Chapter: where commanded by
Elisha to wash himself in the River Iordan, and
that precisely seven Times, whereby to be clean|sed
of his Leprosie, (ver. 10.) He, instead of being
thankful, began (saith the Text) to be very wroth,
(ver. 11.) It seem'd to Him a strange thing, that
he could not be clean, unless he would be super|stitious.

He expected that the Prophet should
have come out to him in Person, and calling on the
name of the Lord his God, should have struck his
hand over the Place, and so have recover'd him of
his Leprosie. What? (saith he in the next verse)
Are not Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus,
better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash
in them, and be clean? Thus did the Wisdom of
Elisha seem light as Folly, whilst weigh'd in the
scales of that Syrian Fool. But though he pre|sently
went away, not obedient, but in a Rage,
(ver. 12.) Yet his Servants said That (ver. 13.)
which turn'd his Rage into Obedience. My Fa|ther,
if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
wouldst thou not have don it? how much rather when
he saith unto thee, wash, and be clean? whereupon
he was cured, (but observe in what order,) first
of his Folly and Disobedience, and immediately
after of his Disease too.
. 3. Let us now apply this to certain Secta|ries
here at home, who often indeavour in their
Discourses to shew the fitness, the lawfulness,
and many times the moral Necessity of their be|ing
Schismatical and Disobedient. I shall give
but one Instance, because I want Time to insist
on many; And in the office of Confession, be|cause

it is amongst Christians a kind of Gospel-Purification.
The Duty of Confession from the
Penitent to the Priest, hath been commanded
by the Church in the purest Times of Antiquity;
and however misus'd by the Church of Rome,
hath been reform'd, and not abolish'd by this of
England. Now some Male-Contents there were,
who thought our Church not clean enough, un|less
they might sweep away the Pavement; And
amongst many other things, their Stomacks
rose against Confession. Will not God (say they)
be pleas'd with the acknowledgment of the Heart,
but must That of the Mouth be required also?
Or can we not make it in our Clossets, but they
must have it in the Church too? Must we powre
out our Souls into the Ear of the Priest? Or
can he loose us from our Sins, who is bound and
manicl'd in his own? But I would say to such
an English or Scotish Naaman, no other thing than
was said by the Syrian Servant. My Brother,
or my Sister; suppose our Mother the Church of
England, had bid thee do some great thing, wouldst
thou not cheerfully have don it without Dispute?
How much rather when she saith, wash and be clean?
That is, confess, and be forgiven? vouchsafe to
write after the Copy, which the Virgin and her

Babe in this Text have set thee. Who did not
(as they might, upon better pretensions than
thou canst bring,) alledge the Priviledge of their
Purity, or the natural Indifference of what was
commanded by the Law, whereby to withhold
their obedience from it. They did not think much
to present their Turtles, because Themselves were
the chaster and more innocent Paire. He who
thought it no Robbery to be equal with God,
thought it also no dishonour to be equal with Man;
And would be obedient to the Law, how much
soever he were above it. , as
. Clem. Rom. in Ep. ad Cor. p. 53. 54. Clemens Romanus does well observe to my pur|pose.
The Sacrifices of God were not any where
to be offer'd, but precisely at Ierusalem; nor
any where at Ierusalem, but in the Temple; no
nor any where in the Temple, but at the Altar;
each of which places, notwithstanding, was an|tecedently
Indifferent; and so far only good, as
'twas commanded, not commanded for being good.
'Tis in the Power at this day of God's Vicegerents
upon Earth, to limit the Time, and the Place, yea
the manner also, and measure, I say not of private,
but publick Duties. And by how much a thing
is the more indifferent in its use, it should the
rather cease to be so, when by legal Authority it

shall be turn'd into a Law. Since of Laws that
are humane, the only fit Subjects are things in|different.
Nor can we solidly object the seem|ing
difference of Authority, in things indifferent
under the Law, and things indifferent under the
Gospel; whereof the former were commanded
by God himself, the later only by his Vicegerents.
For even These under the Gospel are at least me|diately
commanded by God himself; as being
commanded by that Authority which God hath
commanded us to obey. And let us distinguish
how we can, betwixt a Divine, and a Humane
Law; we must acknowledge the Truth of this
Proposition, That Disobedience to the second
Table, is as bad as Disobedience against the first.
He Rebel's against God, who withholds his
Obedience from God's Vicegerent. And as there
is indeed a Time, to obey God rather than man;
so is there also as fit a Time, to obey God by obey|ing
Man. Which if the Sons of disobedience
would but unpassionately consider, they would
not make their Duties difficult, by calling them
humane Impositions; nor cast about for expedients
whereby to legitimate such a Sin, as is compar'd
by God himself to the Sin of Witchcraft.
. 4. Then let us imitate our Saviour,Dies Purifica|tionis, id est, Dies quibus se continuer at domi; Impu|ritatem simu|lans, ne legis Transgressio|nis accusare|tur. Vatablus in locum. in
that Example of his Meekness we this day Ce|lebrate.
Who rather than seem a Non-conformist,
or a contemner of the Law, (whereof the matter
was but indifferent, until established by lawful
and just Authority,) Impuritatem simulabat, (as
learned Vatablus Interprets,) thought fit to
counterfeit an Impurity he could not possibly con|tract,
and made as if he had been unclean, (as a
man born of a woman,) that he might yield unto
a Law which did least concern him; unless a Law
for Purification was not impertinent to a Lamb,
whose happy Priviledge it was, to be pure and
spotless.
. 5. It was according to such a Law, as was
not Moral, but Ceremonial, that the Prophecy of
Haggai was now accomplish'd; when by the
Presence and Presentation of God Incarnate, the
Glory of the later Temple did far exceed that of the
former. It was according to such a Law, that the
offering of the Temple which was this day presen|ted,
was more immense than the Temple which
circumscrib'd him. It was according to such a
Law, that the Transcendency of the Gift which
was this day given, was at once adequate to the
goodness, and to the greatness of the Receiver.

To sum up all in a word, it was according to
such a Law, that our Blessed Redeemer was
pleas'd himself to be Redeem'd; The great Re|deemer
of the world, to be Redeem'd by a Country
Maid; And the Redeemer of the world by
the dear purchase of his Blood, to be cheaply
Redeemed by a Maid, for a little Silver.
Now to Him who this Day became obedient unto
the Law which was Ceremonial, that he might free
us from being Slaves to the Law of Sin by Disobe|dience;
And was presented unto the Lord under
the Form of a Sinner, so to present us unto himself
without the least stain of sin; To the only wise God
our Saviour, who came on purpose to Redeem us
from all Iniquity, and to purifie to himself a pecu|liar
People; be ascribed by us, and by all the world,
Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this Day for|wards
for evermore.
FINIS.







A
SERMON
PREACHED
UPON
Act-Sunday-Morning
AT
St. MARIES CHURCH
IN
OXFORD
JULY 10. MDCLXIV,
Touching the Usefulness and Necessity of Humane
Learning, together with its Insufficiency
without the Help of the Divine.







ACT. 2. 4.
And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and
began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit
gave them utterance.

. 1. IF we look upon the Text as that does
look upon the Context, we shall find in
it a Fitness for the Solemnity of the Time.
Not as if the Time of our Oxford Act were
also the Time of our English Pentecost, (for such
we know it is not,) But only in as much as this
Hebrew Pentecost does in many things resemble
our English Act. For
. 2. All the Order of the Apostles were now
assembled at Hierusalem, which in the latitude
of its Importance implies three Things; not the
Monarchy only, and Church, but University too
of Israel.Psal. 122. 4. Thither went up the Tribes, not to the
Sanedrim only, but to the Temple.Psal. 48. 2. There's
the Church. On the Northside lyeth the City of

the Great King. There's the Monarchy. And
what in the 87 Psalm we commonly render the
Gates of Sion, The Psal. 87. 2. Targum reads the Gates of
the Schools. Now the Schools of the Prophets,
whereof there were in Hierusalem not so few as
fourQuas Scho|las fuisse Hie|rosolymis, po|sterioribus Iudaicae Poli|tiae Tempori|bus, ultra Quadringen|tas Rabbini volunt. Mon|tacut. in Ori|gin. Eccles. Par. 1. Sect. 8. pag. 87. hundred (at least as the Rabbins do make
report) in the later Times of the Iewish Politie,
And theDeut. 16. 18.  more than once in the
Septuagint; These infer the University. There it
was that The Apostles were Altogether in an
Assembly, at once to receive, and to shew their
Parts; to become not only Licensed, but Gifted
Preachers; to be no longer rude Inceptors, (for
they were hitherto nothing else,) but Learned
Doctors in Divinity; at once to be qualified with
Ability, and to do the Exercise for their Degree.
. 3. Never was there any Exercise so well
and laudably perform'd. For every one of these
Inceptors was even fill'd with the holy Ghost. Every
one spake as the Oracles of God.1 Pet. 4. 11. Every one was
so great a Linguist, (not only such a Polyglot, but
such a Pantiglot in his speaking,) that Atheneus
his Galen was but an Infant in comparison.
Every one was a Theopneust, and had the Privi|lege
to speak through a Door of Utterance, which
was Divinely open'd to him by the Third Person

in the Trinity. To understand how they spake,
we stand in need of the Greek to explain the
English. For they spake (saith the Text)
, not , but , after the
measure that they were prompted by the ever
blessed Paraclete, (as well without, as within the
Veile,) not to speak as other men, words of va|nity
and lightness, but to speak Apophthegmes,
and Cubes, as heretofore with lesse reason 'twas
said of Socrates.
. 4. And in proportion to their Exercise
which was so eminently good, we find their Au|ditorie
too was extremely great. Never was
there such a Concourse of Spectators and Hear|ers
at any Act, or Comitia, before, or after. For
there were present at this Assembly, both Iews,
and Proselytes; And of these last, of every na|tion
under Heaven, (v. 5.) which though spoken
by an Hyperbole, a very ordinary figure amongst
the Hebrews, (for no man certainly will say
there were French, or English, Scotch, or Irish,
which yet at that Time were of some of the Na|tions
under Heaven;) Yet Parthians, Medes, and
Elamites, and some who dwelt in Mesopotamia,
Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, in Phrygia, and
Pamphylia, in Egypt, and Libya, (about Cyrene,)

Cretes, and Arabians, and strangers of Rome, we
are certain were a part of that mighty Con|course,
which flock't about the New Doctors,
and heard them speak to their Amazement in
their several Languages and Dialects, the tre|mendous
and wonderful works of God, (v. 11.)
. 5. And yet I say these Apostles were but
Inceptors in Divinity. They did all at this Assem|bly
no more then celebrate their Commencement.
For though their Master gave them a Call whilst
he was yet upon the Earth, yet to execute their
Calling, He did not give them Qualifications till
he ascended into Heaven. (Eph. 4. 10. 11.) He
who commission'd them to go, and to teach ll Na|tions,
(Mat. 28. 18.) did also commission them
to tarry, and not depart from Hierusalem, but with
meeknesse there wait for the promise of the Father,
(Act. 1, 4.) St. Iohn is positive, and dogmatical,
That the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that
Iesus was not yet glorified. (Ioh. 7, 39.) And 'tis
as evident from St. Luke (Act. 1, 5,) that till this
Actus Comitialis, or Solemn Assembly at Hierusa|lem,
they had not been baptiz'd with the Holy Ghost.
From whence it follow's, That if they had only
had an eye unto their mission, and Commission, and
taken their Journeys thereupon into the several

Quarters of the world, they had shew'd them|selves
Zealous, but Indiscreet too; And their
Preaching might have been good, but ineffectual.
For all the world (except their Country-men) had
been Barbarians unto Them, and They Barbarians
to all the world, had they only spoken Syriac, as
hitherto they had don. If their Toungs had not
been cloven into all kinds of Dialect, how could
their Sound have gon out into all Lands, and their
words unto the Ends of the Earth? How many
men's Souls were to be heal'd, by their miracu|lous
Ability to heal their Bodys? How could the
Scholars have repeated whatsoever the Master had
said unto them, (he having not written, nor they
taken Notes,) but that the Spirit was now by
miracle to bring all things to their Remembrance.
(Ioh. 14, 26.) So that besides the holy Function
unto which they were admitted some weeks
before, there was an absolute Necessity they
should have Qualities to discharge it. Graces
they had before, for the Sanctification of Them|selves;
But now it was that they had Gifts,
for the Edification also of others. They had before
a kind of Thummim, sett by God upon their
Hearts; But not 'till now had they the Urim,
divinely sitting upon their Heads too.
. 6. And though I know there are not
wanting many Enthusiasts here at home, (not to
speak ofV. Frid. Baldwin. de Cas. Cons. l. 4. c 2. Cas. 9. p. 690. 691. Ex|cus. Francof. 1654. Carolostadius, his Brother Gabriel, and
the chief Schoolmaster of Wittenberg, by name
Thomas More, who dehorted all People from
the study of Languages and Arts, alledging that
they were all to be taught of God; nor to insist on
those Franciscans, who made unlearnednesse a
Profession, and did not take a little pride in being
call'd Fratres Ignorantiae; nor to mention those
Popes of Rome, some of which were such haters
of human Learning, as to esteeme the study of it
a mark of Heresy; no nor Iulian the Apostate,
who to destroy the Kingdome of Christ by so much
a more compendious Ruin, employ'd his vast Im|periall
power in shutting up Academyes Schools;)
Though, Isay, besides These, whom I discover
from abroad, There are not wanting here at
home, who love to argue against the Needful|nesse
of our Schooles and Universities, even from
this very Scripture which lye's before us; who
would blow down our Colleges with the violence
of this wind, And with the Fire of these
Tongues would burn them up too; yet by as
happy a Violentum as any Logician can desire,
the first does serve but to establish, and the se|cond

to refine them. For had the Apostles been
bred at Athens, or in the Schools at Hierusalem,
and got these Toungs by Education; God had
not been at the expense of so great a miracle to
inspire them. But as the miracle was us'd to
supply the Defects of Art and Nature, And to
fill up what was wanting of Education and In|dustry
in Christ's Apostles; So in these later
Times of the Christian Church, the Defect of
that miracle is supplied by all These; I mean
by Industry, and Art, and Academical Education.
'Tis true indeed, that If real miracles were as
rise, and as much in fashion, amongst the Fathers
and Sons of the Church of England, as lying
wonders are wont to be amongst the Practicers
of Rome, we might declare as great an En|mity
to publick Nuseries ofValen. Weigel. Postill. Part. 1. p. 195. part. 2. p. 79. learning, as Weigelius
of Wittenberg, and Monsieur Pharell ofNonne Pa|ssim  publi|c claabat Pharellus, omnes huma|nas Disipli|nas esse Inven|ta Diaboli? Erasm: Epist 59. ad Fra|tres German. Infer.  Fri|siae Orient. mihi p. 2127. Geneva,
(and I may add Pope Paul the second,) are truly
reported to have don. But finding That, by
experience, to be but , (as Diodorus
Siculus spake deridingly of Hell,) we may up|hold
our Universityes by the very same strength,
by which the Subtilest Enthusiasts would pull
them down. It being a very cogent Argument
not only for the usefullnesse, but for the absolute

Necessity of Publick Schools, (especially to as
many as are to be Preachers of the Gospel,) that
the Apostles want of Breeding in such Seminaries
of Learning as we enjoy, was from Heaven to be
supplied by such miraculous Endowments as here
we read of. As what we have not by Infusion,
we must laboriously acquire; so what the Apostles
had not acquir'd, the very Wisdom of God the
Father thought fit to give them by Infusion.
Nor durst they think that they had compe|tent,
much lesse sufficient Qualifications, for
the preaching of the Gospel throughout the
the world, vntill they had heard a sound from
Heaven, as of a mighty rushing Wind, which fil'd
the House where they were sitting; Nor vntil there
had appeared cloven Tongues like as of Fire, which
also sat upon each of them; Nor till they all had
been fill'd with the holy-Ghost, and been enabled to
speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance.
. 7. The Text perhaps might be divided
into almost as many Parts, as there were Lan|guages
and Tongues for the Subject of it. Parts,
enough to entertain, if not to tyre a Congrega|tion;
enough to direct, and distract Attention.
But I shall mention only those, which will be

sufficient to acquaint you with its whole rational
Importance. As
First the Persons here endow'd, who were a
Dozen of illiterate and obscure Galileans, grown
in the twinkling of an eye, Learned Professors of
Divinity. And so by consequence in propriety
of Academical speech, we cannot say that they
were made, but created Doctors. At once the
first and the greatest that ever were in the Chri|stian
world. For
Here is secondly the Measure according to
which they were indow'd. They were not sea|son'd
only, as others, or as themselves a little be|fore,
(when their great Master breath'd upon
them, and bid them receive the Holy Ghost, Joh.
20, 22;) But now , they were fill'd. And
fill'd they were in such sort, that we shall see
by and by how they overflow'd. Nor were they
fill'd more ordess, as their Persons or their Parts
were more or less to be rever'd in the eyes of
men; For
Here is thirdly the Equality and Universality
of its Extent; which was not only unto Peter,
who was the first of this Assembly, (as 'twere the
Senior of the Act,) no nor onely to Iames and
Iohn, the sons of Zebedee and of Thunder, who

lately disputed between themselves, which of them
should be the greatest; But without any Partia|lity,
either to the Qualities, or Years of men,
, they All were filled. Nor were
they filled with a Vapour or wind of Doctrine,
which commonly comes from another spirit,
(even the spirit which is now working in all the chil|dren
of Disobedience,) nor with a zeal without
knowledge, or with a knowledge which puffeth up,
as being apt to ferment in the minds of men;)
For
Here follows in the fourth place the excel|lent
nature of the endowment; it was ,
they all were fill'd with the Holy Ghost.
Which is not so properly and literally, as Me|tonymically
spoken. Not exclusively of his Per|son,
but more especially of his Power. Nor
exclusively of his Graces, but more especially
of his Gifts, (for so in distress of better English,
I am contented to speak the difference, as the
Hellenisticks do, by calling them .)
Fifthly the Primary Effect, shewing the Ver|tue
of the Descent of the Holy Ghost, very par|ticularly
express'd in the Gift of Tongues, ,
they began to speak; that is, to propagate
the Gospel throughout the world. They be|gan

to be Enthusiasts in the literal sense.Mark 16, 17 For
they spake with such Tongues as they never
learnt. With other Tongues, saith St. Luke; with
new Tongues, saith Saint Mark; with many
Tongues, saith the Syriac. Where 'tis not Leshon
ve Leshon, with a Tongue and a Tongue, (such as
Hypocrites in Religion are wont to speak with,)
butIn Syro est, Incipiebant loqui  lingu lingu. He|braismus ad|modam fami|liaris. Gualt|perius in Lo cum. Beleshon Leshon, with a Tongue a Tongue;
which according to the Syriacism by which 'tis
spoken, does only signify the Dividedness, not
the Doubleness of the Tongue. And yet they were
not , such as took it of themselves; nor
did they speak out of their Memories, much less
out of their Inventions. For
Here is Sixthly the Principle (and I may also
say the Prompter) from which they spake, be|cause
they spake , as the spirit gave
them utterance. Not as utterance is oppos'd
either to stammering, or dumnesse, as if 'twere an|swer'd
in the Greek by nothing more than
: For
Seventhly and lastly, the Spirit gave them
, that is, to speak the most important and
pithy Periods. To speak as Stewards of the My|steries
of the living God. To speak as men to
whose Trust was committed the word of Reconci|liation.

To speak as Angels whose Lips were
made conservatories of knowledge; and who had
Tongues that had been touched with aIsa. 6. 6. 7. Coal from
Gods Altar. So that here the  is of too
rich a signification, to be express't by the Po|verty
of English words. As many Tongues as
they had, they wanted one more, to express the
hid Treasures of those they had. There are
three things at least, which are secretly couch'd
in the . Wisdom, Zeal, and Elocution. for
we observe in the Context, both a Wind, and a
Fire, and also , a multitude of clo|ven
divided Tongues. Tongues, not in, but upon
their Heads. And truly each of these three hath
such a mystical signification, as seems to have
a clear prospect upon the . For first
of all they had such a wind, as to inspire them
with Wisdom: They had secondly such a Fire,
as to inflame them with Zeal: And they had
thirdly such Tongues, as to indue them with ut|terance:
more than which may be possibly, but
less than which cannot be meant by their mira|culous
way of speaking, , not
as the Flesh, but as the spirit gave them utterance.
. 8. Thus at last I have put an end to the
tedious beginning of my Design. A beginning

made up of three preparatory Ingredients, The
Accommodation, the Explication, and the Division
of the Text. The several links of that chain,
whereof the use is both to guide and to tye your
Attention to my Discourse. But the Particu|lars
being too many to be dispatch'd in one Ser|mon,
(unless that one be as long as many,) I shall
not proportion my Meditations unto the Ful|ness
of the Text, (from which there flow's to us
a Sea of matter,) But to the scantness of the
Time which is allow'd for this Service.
. 1. And first for the Persons here indow'd,
I must not speak of them in Thesi, either at ran|dome,
or at large; (for that's no more than may
be don on any other Piece of Scripture wherein
the Apostles are barely mention'd;) But I must
handle them in Hypothesi, in as much as they re|late
to the Text and Context. As they relate unto
the Text, they cannot be pertinently consider'd,
unless in one or more of these three Notions;
either as fill'd with the Holy Ghost, or as speaking
with other Tongues, or else as speaking after the
measure that the Spirit gave them utterance. But
in reference to the Context, they may be perti|nently
consider'd as they relate to the three em|blemes

the Wind, and the Fire, and the ap|pearance
of cloven Tongues. The first referring
unto their wisdom, the second unto their Zeal,
and the third to their gift of utterance.
. 2. And indeed it was but reason that their
Tongues should be so many, when both their
Wisdom and their Zeal were so amazingly great.
, they were not only sprinkl'd,
or overshadow'd, but rinst, and fill'd with the
Holy Ghost. In an immediate suit of which,
their understandings were so inlightned with the
knowledge of holy mysteries, And their Affecti|ons
so inflam'd with a desire to make them known,
that all the Languages in the world were hardly
enough for their Interpreters. There were then
Confer v. 9. 10, 11.  Gen. 27. 44. ubi LXX. eandem vocem in eun|dem sensum adhibent. sojourning at Ierusalem of every Nation under
Heaven, (v. 5.) The Apostles were but Twelve,
and each of them aE quisque propinquior erat Gentium Dispersioni. Gallilaei enim dicuntur . Joseph. l. 1. c. 4. indeque Galilaea Gentium dicta. Galilean, (v. 7.) And yet
there were some of every Nation who heard them
speak in their native Idiom, (v. 8.) There was
neither Speech nor Language, but their voices were
heard amongst them, (Psal. 19. 3.) A thing so ad|mirably
strange, that they who knew it by Ex|perience
could not imagine it to be True. They
had ears to hear, but not hearts to believe, much
less Heads to comprehend it. For more amaz'd

with the volubility, than instructed with the
sense, They imputed the glibness of their
Tongues to the meer giddiness of their Brains.
And whilst some in an Extasie began to ask what
it meant, (v. 12.) others answer'd in a mockery,
that they were full of new Wine, (v. 13.) Where|as
indeed Themselves were drunk, though not
with Wine, at least with wonder. For no sooner
had St. Peter Preach'd them all into Sobrietie,Isa. 29. 9.
but they were pricked in their Hearts; and by
Faith coupl'd with Fear, their Heart brake forth
into this earnest Erotesis, Men and Brethren,
what shall we do? (v. 37.) whereupon they were
instructed, and Baptiz'd even by Thousands.
(verse 41.)
. 3. O the depth of the Riches, both of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How insearch|able
are his doings, and his ways past finding out?
How many years do we toyle to get a Language
or two? Yea how many Suns do we outsit, and
how many Moons do we outwatch too, in learning
the Rudiments but of one? At what an ex|pense
of Time and Labour, and (I may add) of
mony too, what with Tutorage, and Books, and
other Instruments of Learning, in Country
Schools, and Universities, are we fain to get

knowledge like Children weaned from the milk,
(to use the phrase of the Prophet Esay,) by
taking line upon line,Isa. 28. 9, 10. precept upon precept, here
a little and there a little, and keeping our Studies
for this little, till we look paler than our Lamps?
whilst these simple Country Folkes, who knew
no more just now than their Mother Tongue, are
on a suddain started up so many orderly Babels.
Our Blessed Saviour sent them to School, (Act.
1. 4.) The Holy Ghost became their Teacher, (in
the words of my Text.) And of this Teacher
they were so full, that they were perfect in their
Lesson before they learnt it. As having had, not
an acquir'd, but an infus'd habit of speaking.
Nor was the miracle of divided or cloven Tongues
for the confounding of the Builders, (like that at
Babel,) But by a variety of Languages to make
an Unity of Hearts. 'Tis true indeed, these
Builders of Bethel, like those of Babel, were
scatter'd far and wide over the face of the earth;
But for as different an end, as were the Models
of their Building. To-wit that They and their
Successors might bring in the Heathen for Christs
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
his Possession.Id ibid. St. Peter (for example) did stout|ly
Preach him up in Pontus, Bythinia, Galatia,

Cappadocia, and at last in Rome also. St. Iames
in Spain. St. Iohn at Ephesus.Euseb. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 15. St. Paul at
Antioch. And indeed in most places from Ie|rusalem
to Illyricum.De Regno Christi qua|quaversus ex|tenso, consule Tertul. con|tra Judaeos cap. 7. mihi pag. 97. St. Mark in Egypt. St.
Thomas in Parthia. St. Andrew in Tartary. St.
Matthias in Colchis. Philip the Deacon (by the
Eunuch) in Ethiopia Superior. Thaddaeus in Edessa.
And Ioseph of Arimathea planted the Gospel
here in England. Then after the Times of the
Apostles, Palladius Planted it in Scotland. St.
Patrick in Ireland. St. Augustin in Saxony. St.
Severine in Austria. Meinardus in Livonia. Pope
Hadrian in Norway. And Ausuirius in Denmark.
. 4. Now had all this been don by a like
number of Athenian or Roman Orators, such as
Pericles and Demosthenes, Hortensuis and Cicero,
who could first stir up Tempests in their Audi|tors
Passions, and then allay them into a Calm
too, as if the hearts of the Hearers were in the
Orators hands; And all this by the Inchant|ment
of a few curled Metaphors, a few glittering
Rhetorications, a few Musical , an insinu|ating
Harmony of Voice and Gesture, which had
wrought their Souls into their Ears, and there
had tickl'd them to an Assent; This indeed had
been a wonder, but not a miracle; and might have

redounded unto the Glory, not so much of the
Author, as of the Instruments. Who might pos|sibly
have ariv'd too (like that Eloquent ,
Act. 12, 23,) at the meagre satisfaction
of being admir'd into Destruction; of being kill'd
by Caresses and Commendations, of being tickl'd,
and eaten up, both with the pleasantness, and the
pain, of Applause, and Worms.
. 5. But that Twelve despised Villagers
drawn by the pencill of St. Chrysostome in
the liveliest colours of humane Basenesse, a Ken|nell
of clownish, illiterate, ill bred Idiots, a Crue
of Vagabunds in Cuerpo, without House or Home
(as we say in English,) so farr from being fur|nisht
with two Coats a piece, that all the twelve
renowned Doctors were not worth one paire of
shoes, ,Chrysostom. Hoil. 3. in Epist. ad Cor.  in Psal. 46.
(So St. Chrysostom run's on in
his Cariere of railing Rhetorick, at least in the
the accompt of a loathsome world, which
thinks it worse to be a Beggar, than in a State of
Damnation;) I say, that a Dozen of such Igna|ro's,
eminent only for their Ignoblenesse, and all
of Galilee from whence ariseth no Prophet, with a
seriously-majestick Simplicity of words, and a
controwling Sanctity of Actions, should by the

sound of the one open the Ears of all the world,
and by the Light of the other inform their Eyes
too; That they should really be able to turn the
World upside down, (as the Iewes of Thessalonica
did fitly word it, Act: 17, 6,) That they should
break-down the Idols, and silence the Oracles,
and raze the Temples, and Level the Altars, and
even sacrifice the Priests, and preach down the
Poets, and Dispute down the Errors, and live
down the Vices, and undeifie the Gods of the
Heathen world; That they should conquer
without a force, and irresistibly winn the most
peevish Natures, not only to part with their
oldest Customs and Religions, But to exchange
them for a Beleif, that He was a Saviour,
who had been crucified; and He Immortal,
who had dyed; and He a God who had suffer'd;
and He an Innocent who had suffer'd between
the Vilest Malefactors; Nay farther yet, that
they should throughly convince the richest, and
the proudest, and the most sensual sort of men,
that even the Yoak of Christ was pleasant, his
Burden strengthing, and to be hang'd upon the
Crosse a Degree of Honour; That their Enemies
were to be lov'd, and Themselves hated; That
* Poverty, Disgrace, and Death itselfe, were not

only the Lot and Portion,Vtilitas max|im homini Des asserit. Symachus ad versus Chri|stianos apud Prudentium. but the Desirables and
Pleasures of the very bestmen; I say that this
should be brought about by Twelve of the plain|est
Country-People, four whereof were clearly
Fishermen, and one a Publican, and the rest in all
appearance no whit better than their Mates,
every one a Galilean, and so contemptible for
his Country, as well as for his Calling; shew's
convincingly to the world, however ignorant,
or obdurate, that by how much the baser the
meanes were, by so much the greater was the
miracle. The great Deformity of the Instruments
was a Foyle unto the Agent. This very stumbling
Block had a Vertue whereby to keep men from
falling. If our modern Lay-Preachers who do
pretend to Inspiration, could shew but one of
of those many Apostolical Gifts, and make us
see their new Light by letting us hear some new
Tongues too, (I mean such Tongues as they never
studied,) 'Twere pity but Both our Universities
should rise up to them in fear and Reverence;
And we should certainly be as ready to kisse
their Feet, as now we are to shake the Dust
from off our own,Luke 9. 5. for a Testimony against them.
The Case with Them would be much the
same, that here it was with the new Apo|stles;

the very snare and the Scandal of whose
Rusticity, shew'd he Divinity of the Influx by
which they acted. Never did Omnipotence appear
so glorious and Triumphant, as then when it was
perfected in so much weaknesse. How did they
thunder, with their Doctrins? and how did they
lighten, with their miracles? How did they soften
mens Hearts by promises, as by gentle showers?
And how controul them by Threats, as by
mighty Winds? You may see, in this Chapter,
the Effects of all four; of their miracles, their
Doctrins, their Promises, and their Threats. The
People marvell'd at the first, v, 7. They were
Heart-struck at the Second, v, 37. They rejoyced
at the third, v, 41. And fear came upon them at
the fourth, v, 43. It could not be by a common
power, that Paul a Prisoner at the Barr, was
able to fright the grim Iudge, who sat at Liberty
on the Bentch: when having reason'd to him a
while concerning Temperance, and Righteousness,
and Iudgement to come, it presently follows, that
Faelix trembl'd. Who though a very stout Hea|then,
was yet but one, and so not worthy to be
nam'd, whilst we are speaking of the Energie
which God had put into the preaching of these
Apostles. For the Apostle St. Peter, through

the Conviction of the Spirit who open'd the Ears
and the Hearts of men, did convert at one Ser|mon
Act. 2. 41. three thousand Souls, andAct. 4. 4. five thousand at
another.
. 6. Lord! the different Effects of Preach|ing
in those Times and These! one Sermon was
then sufficient for the Conversion of many Thou|sands.
But how well were it now, if a Thousand
Sermons might be effectual for the Conversion
of any One? when did you ever see an Audito|rie
so affected with a Sermon, as not to be able
to contein from crying out in a kind of extasie,
(like the Disciples in this Chapter,) Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? who goes now adayes
to the Casuist, for the searching and launcing and
cleansing of a Conscience, which even Gasp's for
a little ease from the acute sense it hath of a
Sinfull Plethorie? Is it that in a Kingdom all
the Consciences of men are so clear and calme?
Or that there are heardly any Consciences in a
whole Kingdom to be troubled? Is it because
there are no scruples of tender Souls to be re|solv'd?
Or rather because the Souls of men
are seldome so tender as to be scrupl'd? let them
that commonly hear Sermons, but are not pricked
in their Hearts, (like the men in this Chapter

who heard St. Peter,) be allow'd to be the
Iudges (as well as Partyes) in the Case; whe|ther
their Consciences are so clean, as not to need
being rub'd; or else so callous, as not to feel.
. 7. If we impartially consider, that since
the most of mens Devotion hath been thrust up
into the Pulpit, and that they have placed their
publick worship, not in their Hearts, and Knees,
but in their Eares, and Elbowes; posting up and
down from one Sermon to another, (and po|ssibly
too with as much Superstition,) as the
Votaries of Rome to the several Reliques of
their Saints; thinking God is best serv'd, when
they goe farthest to a Sermon, (as the Pilgrims
of Rome to an holy Sepulchre;) And giving ac|compt
when they come home, not of the Ser|mon,
but of the Man; as if their haunting of
the Church were not to learn, but censure; to
take large Notes of his Look, and Gesture, not so
much observing what, as how he taught them;
(perhaps offended with his memorie, because
too short; perhaps with his Periods, because too
long; perhaps they stumble at his Youth, and then
they say he does but prate; perhaps at his Age,
and then they listen as to a Doatard; If he is
plain, he preaches slovenly: And if he is solid,

he preaches ; If he is not plain, he is too
Witty; and if not solid, he is too light; If he is
illiterate, he is not fitt for so great a calling; And
if he is learned, he is as little fitt for so plain a
people; Is the Sermon very excellent? then he prea|ches
Himselfe; Or is it but ordinary? they can
read as good at home;) I say whoever shall but
consider, that since the Businesse of Religion has
commonly been at this pass, the Brains of men
bave been busied, but their Lives have not been
better'd; And the frequency of Preaching hath
made more Preachers, not more Christians than
heretofore; As he will find a prodigious Diffe|rence,
both in the Preaching and Hearing the
word of God, betwixt what it was when
Christianity was in its Cradle, And what it is at
this Instant whilst it is going into its Grave, So
he will find the guilty Cause of so great a diffe|rence,
to be partly in Them that do Preach the
Word, and partly in Them that do hear it Prea|ch't.
So far they are from being fill'd with the
Holy Ghost, that all the former do not speak with
other Tongues, nor do the later all hear with other
Ears than they were wont. The former do not
all speak, as the Spirit gives them utterance, nor
the later all hear, as the Spirit gives them At|tention.

They will both be now concern'd in the
Applicatorie part of my undertaking, But the Sons
of the Prophets in speciall manner. Which, as 'tis
the next Task incumbent on me to be perfor|m'd,
so I purpose to perform it by seven such
steps of Consideration, as will arise without
violence from the peculiar subject of my
Discourse.
First then let us consider, to what measure
of Perfection men may possible arrive in a state
of Frailty.The Appli|cation. The Apostles were but men, and yet
were fill'd with the holy Ghost. And arguing (as
we may) ab Actu ad potentiam, I think we ought
at least to ayme at the same perfection. I am sure
St. Paul pray'd for no lesser blessing on his E|phesians,
than that they might be fill'd with the
Fulnesse of God; and  with All the
Fulnesse. (Eph. 3, 19.) which cannot signifie lesse
than being perfected and advanc't to the highest
pitch of Christianity, which God in Christ can
exact of so frail a Nature. And whatsoever we
may pray for, we must indeavour to attain too.
Not contenting our selves, that we are mettle
good enough for an Iron Age; that we are Chri|stians
well to passe, as the world goes good e|nough
to serve turn; or no worse than other men,

who are without peradventure in a savable state;
or perhaps that we are better than a great num|ber
of our Neighbours, who never dye, or are
buried, but in sure and certain hope of a Resurre|ction.
And yet how many are thus witty, in
smoothing out their way to eternal Ruin? How
many do please themselves to Hell, with a san|guin
Belief they are sure of Heaven? And live
as if they were afraid, to be any whit better
than they must needs? whereas it is not only the
Interest, but the strict Duty of a Christian, to
pant and presse after Perfection; never to think he
is good enough, until he is as good as Grace can
make him; not to cleanse himself only from all
kind of filthiness of flesh and Spirit, but withal
to perfect holinesse in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
We must not Grow in grace only, but we must
never leave growing until we come to a perfect man,
to the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of
Christ. (Eph. 4. 17.) This is to be fill'd with the
holy Ghost, and inwardly to be fill'd with his
saving Graces; not, as They in my Text, with
his outward Gifts. Those indeed we neither
have, nor are bound to hope for.
 And yet although we fall short of that other

fulnesse,2 Cor. 12. 13. we have been all made to drink of the
very same Spirit, in that sense also; And to that
very end was he powred out, Ioel. 2, 28. Or if we
have not; we must never leave thirsting, untill
we have, we of the Clergy (I am sure) should
have received of his Fulnesse, and ,
Grace for Grace;Joh. 1. 16. (that is to say in plainer terms)
in proportion to his Goodnesse and mercy to|wards
us. For to Us it was said at our Ordina|tion,
Receive the Holy Ghost. And therefore woe
be to Us, of all men living, if we make it not
appear that we have receiv'd him. Not only,
as the Laity, in his Sanctifying Graces; But, in
as much as we are Teachers, in his edifying Gifts
too. Not a good Living, or a great Dignity, or
a Scholasticall Degree; which are indeed a kind
of Gifts, but they doe not edifie. Noe, the Gifts
which we must have, to prove our receiving
the Holy Ghost, (and that we were not made
Priests meerly to qualify us for wealth, to hold
Preferments by that Title, that is to say, by
that Name,) I say the Edifying Gifts which
should distinguish us from the Laity, and shew
the Divinity of our Function, are to be some
of that Catalogue which Saint Paul gave to
his Corinthians.1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. If not the greatest in the Cata|logue,

the gift of Healing, and working Miracles,
yet at least the gift of Prophesie, that is, of Prea|ching
and applying the word of God. Or if not
the word of Wisdom, which is the gift of speaking
Mysteries, yet at least the word of Knowledge,
which is the gift of understanding and unfolding
them to others. A Gift we must have, whereby
to demonstrate that we are Gifts. For He that
ascended up on high, and led Captivity Captive, is
immediately said to have given Gifts unto men.
And then it follows by way of Instance, that
He gave some Apostles; some Prophets; some
Evangelists; some Pastors and Doctors. Not Do|ctors
by an Antiphrasis, non docendo, (that's an
ill Derivation,) much less Pastors tondendo,
(for that is worse,) no nor Pastors pascendo, as
it is a Verb Neuter, (that's worst of all;) But
Pastors pascendo, as it is a Verb Active. For
none were then allow'd the Priviledge to sheer
the Sheep, who could not prove they had the
Gift, as well to feed, as to defend them. And
the reason of it is render'd by the Great Doctor
of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12. 7. The manifestation of
the Spirit, is given to every man to profit withal;
, to that which is of some Benefit and Ad|vantage
to the Church. That is it by which the

Spirit does manifest himself to be in Pastors and
Teachers. And therefore they that are in Orders
without a Gift, a kind of Lay-Priests, or Secu|lar
Pastors, qualified for Sine Cures, but nothing
else, As having no Gift at all, or none at least
, none that tend's, and is employ'd to
the use and benefit of the Church, (like Talents
hid within the Earth,) are suspected not to come
from the Spirit of God.
It was not so with our Apostles; who having 
here received Talents, did immediately negotiate
and Traffick with them. No sooner were they
fill'd with the Holy Ghost, but (as it follows in
the Text) they began to Speak. And accordingly
when 'tis said by the Bishop to the Priest in his
Ordination, Receive the Holy Ghost, it presently
follows in the charge, Be thou a faithful Dis|penser
of the Word of God and his holy Sacraments.
Then follows a Prayer for all the Persons who
are Ordain'd, That the word spoken by their mouths
may have such success, as that it may never be spo|ken
in vain. Now (not to reflect on any person
in Authority, whose time is taken up in greater,
and no less necessary Employments,) what have
those men to shew, for their having received the
Holy Ghost, who come so far short of the 

in the close, as that they fail of the  in the
beginning of my Text? so very far from being
diligent or frequent Preachers of the Word, that
(to their Amendment be it spoken) they seem to
be careful Concealers of it. Is this toJer. 23. 28. Preach the
Word faithfully, or to2 Tim. 2. 15 divide the Word rightly,
or to deal asIbid. a Workman that needeth not to be
asham'd? Is this to press, and to be2 Tim. 4. 2. instant, in
season, out of season, or to rebuke and exhort with
all long suffering? Is this toVers. 5. watch in all things,
to do the work of an Evangelist, and to make full
proof of the Ministery? Is this to1 Tim. 5. 17 labour in the
Word and Doctrine, and so to be worthy of double
honour? Is this to give our selves6 Act. 6. 4. continually to
the Ministry of the Word, to beRom. 12. 11 fervant in spirit,
or to2 Tim. 1. 6. stir up the gift of God which is in us by the
laying on of the Bishops Hands? when the Harvest
is plenteous, and the Labourers are few, The Lord
of the Harvest is to be pray'd, not that He will
send forth Idle Truants, but painful Labourers
into his Harvest, (Mark 9. 37, 38.) And in the
Day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Iesus Christ, it will perhaps be more tolerable
for a gifted Lay Brother, who adventures to be
busy in another mans Calling; than for a giftless
Ecclesiastick, who chooseth rather to injoy, than

to use his own. When God shall call us to a
reckoning, not only for our Evil, but Idle
Lives, not only for our injurious, but idle words,
a strict accompt is to be made of our Silence
too. For the Prophet'sIsa. 56. 10. Dumb Dogs which
cannot bark, are the Apostle's Dumb Teachers
who cannot speak. And they that are Dumb ones
in the tenth verse, are also greedy ones in the ele|venth;
whereby tis intimated unto us, that such
as deserve not the least Revenues, are hardly
satisfied with the greatest. Wo to me (saith the
1 Cor. 9. 16. Apostle) if I Preach not the Gospel. And wo to
me (saith theIsa. 6. 5. Prophet) because I Preach not the
Law. Because I am a man of unclean Lips, (that
is, in the Judgment of Learned Grotius,) be|cause
I have not dar'd to speak against the Ini|quities
of the Mighty. I have either been so lazy,
as not to speak in my Course, or else so cowardly,
and so base, as to speak Placentia. But the Apo|stles
in my Text were not lyable to either.2 Cor. 5. 14. The
Love of Christ did so constrein them, (as St. Paul
speaks to the Corinthians,) that they long'd to be
deliver'd, like a Woman in Travel. (and to that
the word  does very properly allude.) They
were not able to hold their Peace, though Death
it self lay before them with all its grim Train.
 And yet they did not turn Preachers without
Ability for the work; As appears by the Order
wherein the Narrative is express't. For first they
were fill'd with the Holy Ghost, And then it fol|lows
in the Text, They began to speak. There
are that speak whilst they are empty, and that
as well of Inspiration, as human Learning. Such
Sermons do proceed from a private spirit, and so
at best they are but words, and such words are but
wind, in proportion to the Spirit that gives them
utterance. When windy Vessels give Vent, we know
their Spirit cannot fill them, unless with Wind.
But These were fill'd with another Spirit, a Spirit
proving what he was by his miraculous Indowments.
For as our Saviour foretold, that he would give
them a Mouth, and Wisdom, (not a Mouth only,
but Wisdom too,) and so much wisdom in such a
Mouth, as their Adversaries should not be able to
resist, (Luk. 21, 15,) So here in answer to that
Prophecy, They did not only begin to speak, but
they spake with Tongues. And with such Tongues
too, as were the Instruments of Wisdom, as
well as Knowledge. And yet that Knowledge is
another important Requisite to make a Profes|sor
of Divinity, (and such you know is every Do|ctor,)
or a publick Preacher of the Gospel, (which

every Doctor is not,) may appear by the Curse
of the Foolish Shepherd,Zech. 11. 17. whose Right Eye was dar|kned,
(that is to say, as the most learned do In|terpret,)
who had not the Knowledge of human
Learning; And as evident it is, by what the Pro|phet
Isaiah spake, at once of himself, and our
blessed Saviour; The Lord God hath given me the
Tongue of the Learned. And to what end hath he gi|ven
it? to the end that I should know how to speak
a word in season to him that is weary. (Isa. 50, 4.)
This indeed should be the end of all our eloquence
and Learning, (not the venting such things as
smell of nothing but study, and Affectation, but)
The Glory of God, and the good of Men. Of the
first I shall speak in its proper place. And here
observe touching the Second, That as Isaiah,
after Moses, was the most Learned and the most
eloquent of all the Prophets, so his best use of
both, was to speak a word in Season to any Soul
that should want it in any kind. And this is
certainly the Trade we are all to drive, because
for this end especially we were bound over unto
the Muses, and serv'd Apprentiships in the Schools,
that we might duly serve God by being eminently
useful to all our Neighbours. As by instructing the
Ignorant, by admonishing the negligent, by reproving

the guilty, by counselling the doubtfull, by com|forting
the Afflicted, and by giving good example
to each of These; which way soever our Learning
lies, and whatsoever our skill in the Tongues may
be, we must put a right Byass and Bent upon it;
we must study to make it serve, and not to rule
us; And we must study to make it serve, not for
ornament, but use; And, but that there is use som|times
of Ornament, not for an Ornament to our
selves, but the use of others. In a word, if we are
sharers of any good parts, whether natural, or ac|quir'd,
we must not think them good enough, until
the use and the end have made them eminently
better. That is, until they are employed, (as by
God they are intrusted,) for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edifying of the Body of Christ, (Eph. 4. 11.)
 But then for the bringing of this about, it is not
enough that we speak with Tongues, no nor with
fiery Tongues neither, nor yet with fiery cloven
Tongues, unless they are cleft and set on fire by
the Spirit of Unity, and Truth. For it is many
times don by the Spirit of Error, and Division.
There are Tongues that are cloven even by him
that is known by his cloven Feet. And there are
Tongues set on fire,James 3. 6. not from Heaven, but of Hell.

such is the cloven and fiery Tongue, wherewith a
man does bless God, and either Curse, or belie his
Neighbour. (v. 9.) Nor is such a Tongue better'd
by skill in Arabick, or Hebrew, in Coptick, or Sy|riack,
in Greek or Latin; but the more it is cloven,
'tis still the worse; because by so much the abler
to set on fireJam. 3. 6. the Course of Nature. 'Tis never e|nough
to be deplor'd, (and in this place especi|ally,)
That since the Iesuits and their Apes
have made use of their Tongues to conceal their
meanings, (which by God were intended to lay
them open,) a sadder confusion hath been made
of the distinctest Languages and Tongues, than
that which was given for a Defeat at the Tower
of Babel. St. Iames does put such a stresse upon
it, as if on the Tip of a mans Tongue stood all
Religion. For let his Almes be never so great,
his Fastings never so many, his Prayers never so
long, and other Actions never so specious, yet
if he bridleth not his Tongue from injurious Ca|lumnies
and falshoods, He is a man either of
none, or a vain Religion. (Iam. 1. 26.) The
reason of which is very evident. For a lye stand|ing
singly, is Breach of Truth; and joyn'd to
witnesse, is Breach of Iustice; and referring to
Neighbour, is Breach of Charity. And by the

Breach of all three, down goes Religion. If it
is flatly contumelious, (or but by way of obtrecta|tion,)
it is not nakedly a lye, but an arrant slan|der;
which, if maliciously committed, and so
committed by a Person whose knowledge is great,
and his Calling sacred, makes the Top of that
Ladder, whereupon so many thousands have
climb'd to Ruin.
 Now for the Cure of this in some, and for
the Prevention of it in others, presse we our
selves to an Improvement of the next observa|ble
in the Text. For the Apostles, being fill'd
with the holy Ghost, did not only begin to speak,
and to speak with Tongues, but , with
other Tongues. I mean not only in the literal,
but moral sense of that word. For St. Peter
who had spoken with a Tongue of Tergiversa|tion,
by denying and forswearing his master Christ,
did now at last begin to speak with another
Tongue; a Tongue that honour'd him, and own'd
him, and preach't him up toMath. 16. 15. every Creature.
This alone was the change that enrich't his mouth.
Not his wonderful Ability to speak in all sorts
of Language, but his Preaching of the Gospell in
every one. Many Gracelesse men have Tongues
wherewith they speak as they are prompted by

learned Heads, But His was prompted by an
honest and Zealous Heart too. There are that
come to the University, who without either study,
or Inspiration, do learn to speak with other
Tongues; Yet I cannot say with more, much
lesse with better, but with Tongues much worse
than they did before. Nor is there any where
so sad, and so deplorable a Spectacle, as that
which sometimes appeares in this House of
Prayer; when in the solemnest Assembly of all the
Year, a Son of God shall be so transform'd into
the absolute Guise of a Son of Belial, as to de|spise
his own Soul, in the defiling of Himselfe and
the House of God, by an applauded Defamati|on
of his Superiours; by subjecting them to the
Contumelies and Asperities of his Tongue, which
is not only theJam. 3. 8. Ibid. v. 6. unruliest, but in that case also,
theJam. 3. 8. Ibid. v. 6. filthiest member of his Body. In such a
place as this is, It were to be wish't that men
would speak with other Tongues than those
are; even with Tongues which may demonstrate,
if not that they are fill'd, yet at least that
they are Season'd, and not quite void of the
Holy Ghost. And here I cannot, I dare not
forbear to say, (to as many as fear God, and
are afraid to fear men in this Congregation,)

That when a Cato shall have been able to keep
a Zanie more in awe on a Heathen Theatre, than
many Doctors now can in a Christian Church;
when under one and the same Roof, Dagon is
coupl'd with the Ark, Iehovah with Mercury,
The Pulpit with the Stage, and Divinity with
Prophaneness; It will become as many of us,
as are not only Followers, but Embassadours of
Christ, even to imitate his Example, who beat
the Hucksters out of the Temple, by our well
meant Indeavours to whip the Scoffers out of the
Church. And if He used a Rod of Cords, well
may we use one of Scorpions. Because Propha|nesse
in a Christian is very much worse than in
a Iew; and This withall a worse Prophanenesse.
Such scandalous Sins as are but chargable to
others, are in reason to be punish't with greater
pungency in Us; In as much as being Priests, we
have received the holy Ghost; So that we Sin,
when we Sin, against greater Light, and against
greater Obligations to cease from Sinning. We
do the Devil greater Service by the Impurity of
our Lives, than we can possibly do God by our
purest Doctrins. When secular Jews were muti|neers
against the King and the Priest, (for Moses
and Aaron were nothing else,) God Almighty

was so patient, as to punish them by Degrees.
But when Corah and the rest of the holy Tribe
began to speak against their Governours, the
Earth could no longer indure to bear them; The
Heavens could no longer indure their sight; and
Hell could no longer sustein their Absence.
Then let all of this Place, which was intended by
God and our pious Founders, for a Nursery of
Vertue, as well as Learning, addict Themselves,
and prevail with others, to speak henceforward
with other Tongues than they were wont. Let
them that have spoken either with wanton, or
slanderous Tongues, now speak with Tongues
that are modest, and void of malice. For if Luther,
and Melancthon,Nonne Melan|cthon aliquan|do damnavit Scholas pub|licas? nonne Lutherus to|tam Philoso|phiam Aristo|telicam voca|vit Diabolica~? nonne idem scripsit omnes scientias spe|culativas esse peccata, c. Erasm. Epist. 59. p. 212. who were men of great Learn|ing,
and Academically bred, were yet provo'kt
into an Enmity to publick Academies and Schools,
meerly in hatred to the Corruptions continuing in
them uncontroul'd; How much more will They
be tempted to greater Enmity than others,
who cannot distinguish the Abuse from the use
of Things? we know that many Persons of
Honour do send their Sons to this place, not to
learn a little Logick with a great measure of Pro|phannesse,
and so to go the more Learnedly, not
the lesse surely to destruction; not to Swear or

talk loosely in Greek and Latin, (for of that
there is enough in their Mother Tongue,) But to
speak modestly, and fitly, and (without dispa|ragement
be it spoken,) religiously too upon all
occasions; to gather Siens as well as Fruit from
the Tree of knowledge, and ingraft them into the
stock of the Tree of Life. The University can
make us but learned Fools, (as Petrarch word's
it,) in case we speak only with other Tongues,
and not as the Spirit does give us utterance.
 Which to the end that we may do, we are
to speak of such things, as the Spirit can delight
to assist us in. The Apostles themselves, in their
common Talk, had but an usual and common Assi|stance
too; which yet may be called not impro|perly
the Assistance of the spirit. But when the
Assistance was extraordinary, Then they could
speak of nothing lower, than of the glorious and
wonderful works of God, (v. 12.) That indeed
should be the subject of all our publick Dis|courses
and Undertakings. Not a pitiful osten|tation
of a little unsanctified Wit, or Learning;
not a deplorable Ability to speak of things Sacred
like a Buffon, to purchase the lamentable Re|pute
of being a Drolling Ecclesiastick, by being

ingeniously Scurrilous, and very pleasantly pro|phane;
Things expressed in Holy Writ byEph. 5. 3, 4, 6.
foolish Talking and Iesting, , which
are both branded in the same stile, with Forni|cation,
and uncleannesse, and other things not to be
nam'd, by reason of which (saith the Apostle)
the wrath of God cometh upon the Children of Dis|obedience.
No, In all our solemn meetings, e|specially
Then when we tread in God's Courts,
we ought to speak , so as not to disgrace,
but adorn the Gospel. We must use all our
Learning, and Elocution (if we have any,) as the
Apostles here did their miraculous gift of Tongues;
not to gratifie the Itch of ungracious men, but
to trumpet out the wonderfull works of God. That
they who cannot indure to think we can be e|minently
worthy, may yet be forced to confesse
we are serious Christians. And since St. Iames
is very positive, that he who offendeth not in word
is a perfect man, let us contend and reach forth
towards this perfection; still indeavouring to
to speak with the best Tongues we have, if not as
men fill'd with the holy Ghost, yet at least like
them that speak as the Spirit gives them utterance.
That so when other mens Tongues shall be
employ'd in crying out for a Drop of water, im|portuning

the mountains to fall upon them, (to hide
them from the face of Him that sitteth upon the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,) Our
Tongues may joyn in Consort with the divine
Choir of Angels; with the Congregation of the first-Born
whose names are written in heaven; and with
the Soules of just men made perfect; Singing Ho|sannahs,
and Hallelujas, to him that sitteth upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever more.
FINIS.







The Primitive Rule of Reformation:
Delivered in a
SERMON
BEFORE
His MAIESTY at WHITEHALL,
Feb: 1. 1662.
IN
Vindication of Our CHVRCH
Against the
NOVELTIES of ROME.
Published by His Majesties special Command.
The Ninth Edition.




TO THE
High and Mighty Monarch
Charles the II.
By the Grace of God, KING of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
Most Gratious and Dread Soveraign,
_THat which never had been ex|pos'd
unto a wittily-mista|king
and crooked world,
but in a dutiful submission
to Your Command; may at least for This,
if for no other reason, be justly offer'd to
Your Protection. And this is don with
a steady, though humble confidence of
successe; because THE DEFENDER
OF THE FAITHIude 3. which was once
deliver'd unto the Saints, cannot pos|sibly
chuse but be so to Him, who does ear|nestly

contend for the very same, be|cause
for no other Faith than That
which was from the Beginning. If
for This I have contended with as much
earnestness from the Pulpit, as The
Romanists from the Presse do contend
against it; I have not only theIude 2. 3. Exhor|tation
and Authority of a Text, but the
Exigence of the Time to excuse me in it.
Now as the Romans in the Time of
the second Punick War, could not
think of a fitter way for the driving of
Hannibal out of Italy, than Scipio's
marching with an Army out of Italy into
Afrique, giving Hannibal a Necessity
to go from Rome, for the raising of the
Siege which was laid to Carthage; So
could I not think of a fitter Course to dis|appoint
the Pontificians in their At|tempts
on Our Church, than thus by ma|king
it their Task to view the Infirmities

of their Own. To which effect I was exci|ted
to spend my self, and to be spent,
(If I may speak in the phrase of our Great
Apostle,2 Cor. 12. 15.) not from an arrogant Opinion
of any sufficiency in my self, (who am
one of the Least among the Regular Sons
of the Church of England,) But as relying
on the sufficiency of the Cause I took in
hand,  especially on the Help of the All|sufficient,1 Cor. 1. 27.
who often loves to make use of
the weakest Instruments, to effect the
bringing down of the strongest Holds. Cor. 10. 4.
I suppose my Discourse, however inno|cent
in it self, will yet be likely to meet with
many, not onely learned, and subtil, but
Restless enemies; Men of pleasant Insi|nuations,
and very plausible Snares;
nay, such as are apt (where they have
Power) toEo san loco Haereses sunt, ut non tam arte  Industri, qum Alexan|dri gladio, ea|rum Gordius Nodus dissolvi posse, quasique Herculis clav feriendae, qum Apollinis Lyr mitigandae vi|deantur, Staple|ton, in Epist. De|dic. operis de Iustif. sub finem. confute their Opponents
by Fire and Faggot. But when I consider
how well my Margin does lend Protecti|on

to my Text, (for I reckon that my
Citations, which I could not with Pru|dence
represent out of a Pulpit, are the
usefullest part of my whole Performance,
because the Evidence and Warrant
of all the rest;) I cannot fearfully appre|hend,
what Wit or Language (or ill
us'd Learning) can do against it, so far
forth as it is arm'd with Notoriety of
Fact in its Vindication; and hath the
published Confessions of those their
Ablest Hyperaspistae, who cannot cer|tainly
by them of their own perswasion,
with honor, or safety, be contradicted.
If they are guilty in their Writings,
it is rather their own, than their Readers
Fault; Nor is it their Readers, but
Their misfortune, if they are found So to
be by their own Concessions. Nor can
they rationally be angry at their Rea|der's
Necessity to believe them; especi|ally

when they write with so becoming a
proof of Impartiality, as that by which
they asperse and accuse Themselves. If
it finally shall apear, They areLuke 19. 22. con|demn'd
out of their mouthes, (as Go|liah's
Head was cut off by David, not
with David's,1 Sam. 17. 51. but with Goliah's own
Sword,) and that I am not so severe in
taking Notice of their Confessions, as
They have been unto Themselves in the
Printing of them, (for I cannot be said to
have revealed any secrets, by meerly
shewing before the Sun, what They
have sent into the Light,) I think, how|ever
They may have Appetite, They
cannot have Reason to complain.
I have intreated of many Subjects
within the Compass of an hour, on each of
which it would be easie to spend a year.
But I have spoken most at large of the Su|premacy
of the Pope; as well because it

is a Point wherein the Honor and Safe|ty
of Your Majesties Dominions are
most concern'd, as because it is the
chief, if not only Hinge, (I haveEtenim de qu re agitur cm de Prima|tu Pontiicis a|gitur? brevissi|m dicam, de Summ rei Chri|stianae, id enim quaeritur, debe atne Ecclesia diutius consistere, an ver dissolvi, concidere. Bellarm. in Praef. ad libros de Sum. Pontif. Tom 1. p. 586. Edit. In|golstad. 1590.
Bellarmine's assertion for what I say,)
on which does hang the whole stress of
the Papal Fabrick.
If herein, as I have obey'd, I shall also
be found to have serv'd Your Majesty,
The sole discharge of my Duty will be
abundantly my Reward; because I am
not more by Conscience and Obligati|on
of Gratitude, than by the Volun|tary
Bent and Inclination of my
Soul,
Your Majesties most devo|ted
and most Dutiful
Subject and Chaplain,
THOMAS PIERCE.






MATTH. XIX. 8.
.
But from the beginning it was not so.

_THere are but very few
things either so little, or
so great, whether in Art,
or Nature, whether in
Politie, or Religion, which
are not willing to take
advantage from the meer
credit of their Antiquity.
First for Art; Any part of Philosophy penn'd
by Hermes Trismegistus, any Script of Geogra|phy
bearing the name of Anaximander, any
Musicall Composition sung by Amphion to his
Harp, any piece of the Mathematicks said to be

writ by Zoroastres, any Relique of Carved
worke from inpir'd Bezalel, or any remnant
of Embroidery from the Theopneust Aoliab,Exod. 35. 30, 34.
would at least for the honor of being reckon'd
to be the first, be also reckon'd to be the best of
any Antiquarie's Keimelia.
And as it is in the Things of Art, so is it
also in those of Nature. How do the Gentle|men
of Venice delight themselves in their Anti|quity?
and yet they travel for their Original,
no farther back then the siege of Troy. Where|as
the Arcadians derive their Pedigree even
from Iupiter and Calisto, and will needs have
their Nation exceed the Moon in Seniority.
Nay, though Aegypt (in the Judgment of. Diodo. Sic. lib. 1. p. 6. Edit. H. Ste. 1559. Di|odorus
the Sieleote) hath better pretensions
than any other, yet the Barbarians as well as
Greeks have still affected a Primogeniture. Nay
so far has this Ambition transported soe, that
they will needs have been begun from before
the Protoplast, as it were itching to be as old as
the Iulian period, 764 years before the begin|ning
of the World. Thus Antiquity hath been
courted in Art and Nature.
If in the third place we come to Politie, we
shall find Customs gaining Reverence from the

sole merit of their Duration. And as a Custom
by meer Continuance does wear it self into a
Law; so the more aged a Law is grown, the
lesse 'tis liable to a Repeal; by how much the
more it is stricken in years, by so much the less
it is decrepit: And that for this reason, because
the longer it endures, the more it inclines to its
perfection; that is to say, its immortality.
Last of all for Religion, the Case is clear out
of Tertullian.Tertl. adversus Marcio. l. 4. c. 5. p. 406. Edit. Pamel. 1597. Id verius quod prius, id prius quod
ab initio. That Religion was the truest, which
was the first; and that the first, which was from
the beginning.. And as He against Marcion, so
Iustin Martyr against the Grecians, did prove
the Divinity of the Pentateuch from the Anti|quity
of its writer. The Iewes enjoy'd the first
Lawgiver. Iust. Mart. . p. 9. Edit. Lutet. 1615. by the Confession of the Gentiles.
Moses preached the God of Abraham, whilst
Thales Milesius was yet unborn. Nor was it a
thing to be imagin'd, that God should suffer
the Devil to have a Chappl in the world, before
himself had any Church. And thenceId teneamus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus credi|tum est: quod ita demum fit, si se|quamur Univer|salitatm, Anti|quitatem, Con|sensionem. Vin. Lir. adv. Haer, c. 3. perot. Vincen|tius
Lirinensis, to prove the Truth of any Do|ctrine,
or the Legality of a Practice, does argue
the Case from a Threefold Topick; The Univer|sality,
the Consent, and the Antiquity of a Tra|diion.

Which Rule if we apply unto the scope of
this Text, as it stands in relation unto the Con|text,
we shall have more to say for it, than for
most Constitutions, divine, or human. For That
of Marriage is almost as old as Nature. There
was no sooner one man, but God divided him
into two; And then no sooner were there
two, but he united them into one. This is
That sacred Institution which was made with
Mankind in a state of Innocence; the very
Ground and Foundation of all both sacred and
civil Government. It was by sending back
the Pharisees to the most venerable Antiquiy,Math. 5. 31, 32.
that our Lord here asserted the Law of wedlock,
against the old Custom of their Divorce. Whilst
they had made themselves drunk with their
muddy streams, He directed them to the Foun|tain,
to drink themselves into sobriety. They insi|sted
altogether on the Mosaical Dispensation;
But He endeavour'd to reform them by the
most Primitive Institution. They alledged a
Custom, but He a Law. They a Permission, and
that from Moses; But He a Precept, and that
from God. They did reckon from afarr off,
But not, as He, from the Beginning.
In that one Question of the Pharisees,Verse 7. Why
did Moses command us to give her a writing of
Divorce, and to put her away? they put a Fal|lacy
upon Christ, call'd Plurium Interrogatio|num.
For Moses onely Permitted them to put her
away; but Commanded them (if they did) to give
her a writing of Divorce. And accordingly their
Fallacy is detected by Christ in his Answer to
them. Moses (did not command, but meerly)
Verse 8. suffer'd you in your Custom of making un|justifiable
Divorcements. , he per|mitted,
that is to say, he did not punish it; not
allowing it as good, but winking at it as the lesser
of two great evils. He suffer'd it to be safe
in foro Soli; could not secure you from the
Guilt, for which ye must answer in foro Po|li.
And why did he suffer, what he could not
Approve? Not for the softnesse of your heads,
which made you ignorant of your Duties; but
for the hardnesse of your hearts, which made you
resolute not to do them: ye were so barba|rous
and brutish upon every slight Cause, (or
Occasion rather,) that if ye might not put her
away, ye would use her worse. Ye would ma|ny
times beat, and sometimes murder, some|times
bury her alive, by bringing another into

her ed. So that the Liberty of Divorce, how|ever
a poyson in it self, was (through the hard|ness
of your hearts) permitted to you for an An|tidote.
But from the beginning it was not so.
And ye must put a wide difference betwixt
an Indulgence of Man, and a Law of God. To
state the controversie aright, ye must com|pare
the first Precept with your customary Pra|ctice;
not reckoning as far as from Moses onely,
but as far as from Adam too; ye must not one|ly
look forwards, from the year of the Creation
2400. but also backwards from thence, unto the
year of the Creation. The way to understand
the Husband's Duty towards the Wife, (and
so to Reform, as not to Innovate,) is to consider
the words of God when he made the Wife out
of the Husband. ForGen. 1. 27. Matth. 19. 4. He that made them at
the beginning made them Male and Female, and
said,Gen. 2. 24. Matth. 19. 5. For this cause shall a man leave Father,
and Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and
they twain shall be one Flesh. What therefore God
hath joyn'd together, let not man put asunder. The
Antecedent command was from God the Father;
the command in the sequel from God the Son.
And though the Practice of the Iewes had been
contrariant to them both, by a Prescription al|most

as old as two thousand years; yet as old as
it was, 'twas but an overgrown Innovation. For
, from the beginning it was
not so.
Thus our Saviour being sent to Reform the
Iewes, made known the Rule of his Reformati|on.
And the Lesson which it affords us is (in my
poor judgment) of great Importance For when
the Doctrine or Discipline of our Church esta|blisht
here in England shall be attempted by the
Corruptions of ModernRomana Eccle|sia se non tam matrem exhibet als quam No|vercam. Sedent in e Scribae  Pharisaei, c. Johan. Sarisbu|riensis (ad Pa|pam Hadria|num 4.) in Po|lycratic. l. 6. c. 24. Pharisees, who shall as|sert
against Us, (as these here did against our Sa|viour,) either their forreign Superstitions, (to say
no worse,) or their domestick Profanations, (to
say no more;) we cannot better deal with
Them, than as our Saviour here dealt with the
ancient Pharisees; that is, we cannot better put
them to shame and silence, than by demonstra|ting
the Novelty and base extraction of Their
Pretensions, whilst we evince at the same in|stant
the Sacred Antiquity of our own. When
they obtrude their Revelations, or teach for Do|ctrines
of God the meer commandments of men,
we must aske them every one, how they read in
the beginning. We may not draw out of their
Ditches, be the Currents never so long, whilst

we have waters of our own of a nobler Taste,
which we an easily trace back to the crystal
spring.
And first of all it concern's us to marke the
Emphasi, which our Ancient of dayes thought
fit to put on the Beginning; that no inferior An|tiquity
may be in danger to deceive us. For
there is hardly any Heresie or Usurpation in the
Church, which may not truly pretend to some
great Antiquity, though not so old as the Old
man, much lesse as the Old Serpent.Epiph. Haer. 75. p. 904. Tom. 1. Ed. Petav. August. de Hae|res. Tom. 5. pag. 25. Edit. Basil. 1542. The
Disciplinarians may fetch theirs from as far as
the Heretick Arius; who wanting merit to
advance him from a Presbyter to a Bishop,
wanted not arrogance and envy to lesen the
Bishop into a Presbyter. But His Antiquity
is a Iunior, as well to that of the Anabaptists,
as to that of the Socinians. For theAugust. contra Donat. Tom. 7. l. 2. p. 396. Edit. Basil. Ana|baptists
may boast they are as old as Agrippi|nus;
and theEpiph. Haer. 6. 2. p. 513. Socinians as Sabellius. TheAugust. Tom. 6. Haer. 54 p. 25. Edit Basil 1542. Soli|idians
and Antinomians are come as far as from
Enomius. TheIren. lib. 1. cap. 24 p. 79. Excus. 1570. Ranters from Carpocrates.
TheEuseb. l. 3. c. 33. p. 80. Colon. Albrogum 1612. Millenaries from Papias. The Irre|spectiveIren. l. 1. cap 10. p. 48 c. Epih. Haer. 66. pag. 617. Id. de duobus principiis pag. 625. 642. 676. Reprobatarians from Simon Magus,
and the Manichees. The Pontificians (like the
Mahumetans) have such a Rhapsody of Religion,

a Religion so compounded of several Errors and
Corruptions, (which yet are blended with
many Doctrines most sound, and Orthodox,) that
to find out the age of their several Ingredients,
it will be necessary to ake into several Times
too.
THe great Palladium of the Conclave, the
famous point of Infallibility, (which
if you take away from them, down goes their
Troy, it being absolutely impossible that the
learned Members of such a Church should glib|ly
swallow so many Errors, unless by swal|lowing
this first, That she cannot Erre;) I say,
the point of Infallibility (which is a very old
Article of their very new Creed, a Creed not
perfected by its Composers, until the Council
at Trent,) we cannot better derive than from
the Scholars ofIren. Adver. Haeret. l. 1. c. 9. p. 44. c. Ed. Basil. p. 25. Marcus in Irenaeus, or from
the Gnosticks in, Epih. Tom. 1. l.  Haer. 26. p. 91. . Idem ibid. Haer. 27. p. 102. Epiphanius. They had their
Purgatory fromNote, That Bellarmine having boasted (Lib. 1. de Purgatorio, c. 11. p. 1841. Edit. Ingolst d. A. D. 1590.) That all the Antients, both Greek and Latine, from the very time of the Apostles, did constantly affirm the doctrine of Purgatory, could not give an older in|stance, than in Origen, and Tertullian, c. 6. (for S. Clement, and S. Den are both supposititious, and therefore reckon'd as good as none,) but by recourse unto the Heathens, c. 2.  7. p. 1778. 1824. Origen, (one of the best in|deed
in one kind, but in another one of the

worst of our antient Writers; not onely an He|retick,
but an Haeresiarcha,) or at the farthest
from Tertullian, who had it from no better
Authour, than theHoc etiam Paracletus (i. e. Montanus) fre|quentissim commendavit, c. Tert. de Anim, cap. ult. See Bellarmine contradicted by the Romanists themselves. E. G. Roffens. contr. Lutherum, art. 18. fol. 111. c. Antverp. 1523. Polydor. Virg. Inv. Rer. lib. 8. c. 1. p. 84. Edit. Basil. 154. Suarez in Aquin. par. 3 q. 59. art. 6. Disp. 52. . 2. Mogunt. 1604. p. 625. 1. Thomas ex Al|biis East-Saxo|num de Medio Animarum statu, per totum libr. speciatim De|mens. 9. p. 369, 370, 371. Arch-Heretick Montanus.
Nor does Bellarmine mend the matter, by de|riving
it as far as from Virgil's Aeneid, and
from Tully in his Tale of the Dream of Scipio,
and farther yet from Plato's Gorgias; unlesse
he thinks that an Heathen is any whit fiter
than an Heretick, to give Advantage to a point
of the RomanBel|larm. ubi supr, p. 1840. Faith. Their Denial of
Marriage to all that enter into the Priesthood,
is dated by themselves but from PopeLiquet item, in orientali  occidentali Ecclesi, usque ad tempus prohibitionis  Calixto factae, Sacerdotum conjugia licia fisse. Maximil. 2. apud Thuan. l. 36. p. 305, 306. Ca|lixtus.
TheirAnte Lateranense Concilium Transubstantiatio non fait dogma Fidei. Scot. in 4. Sent. Dist. 11. q. 3. Transubstantiation is from
the Lateran Council. TheirNegare non possumus, etiam in Ecclesia Latina fuisse usum utrisque speciei,  usque ad tem|pora S. Thomae durasse. Vasq. in 3. Dip. 216. c. 3. n. 38. Half-Communi|on
is no older than since the times of Aqui|nas;
unlesse they will own it from the Mani|chees,
to give it the credit of more Antiquity.
Their publick praying before the people in
an unknown Tongue, may be fetcht indeed as
far as from Gregory the Great. Their Invoca|tion

of Saints departed is no doubt an aged Er|ror,
though not so aged as they would have it
for the gaining of honour to the Invention; be|cause
St Austin doesSu loco  ordine homines Dei nominan|tur, non tamen  Sacerdote qui sacrificat invo|cantur August, de Civitate Dei l. 22. c. 10. pag. 1335. Edit. Basil 1542. denie it to have been in
his dayes. And (not to be endless in the begin|ning
of such a limited Discourse, as must not
presume to exceed an hour;) though in so
fruitful a field of matter, 'tis very difficult not to
be endlesse;)Phocas ira|tus Cyriaco E|piscopo Constan|tinopolitano, ad|judicavit Titu|lum Oecumenici Pontifici Roma|no soli. Baro|nius ad A. C. 606. p. 198. The Universal Superintendency
or Supremacy of the Pope hath been a visible
usurpation ever since Boniface the Third. And
so our Adversaries of Rome have more to plead
for Their Errours then all the rest, because the
rest were but as Mushroms in their severall
times, soon starting up, and as soon cut down;
whereas the Errours of Rome do enjoy the pre|tense
of Duration too.
But touching each of those Errors, (I mean
the Errors of their Practice, as well as Iudg|ment,)
we can say with our Saviour in his pre|sent
Correption of the Pharisees, (whose Er|ror
was older and more authentick, that is, by
Moses his permission had more appearance of
Authority, and more to be pleaded in its excuse,
than those we find in the Church of Rome,)
that from the beginning it was not so; and we

care not whence they come, unlesse they come
from the Beginning.
Indeed in matters of meer Indifference which
are brought into the Government or outward
Discipline of the Church, every Church has the
Liberty to make her own Constitutions; not
asking leave of her Sisters, much lesse her
Children; onely they must not be reputed as
things without which there is no Salvation, nor
be obtruded upon the People amongst the
Articles of their Faith. We are to look upon
nothing so, but as it comes to us from the Begin|ning.
And this has ever been the Rule (I mean
the warrantable Rule) whereby to improve or
reform a Church. When Esdras was intent
on the re-building of the Temple, he sent not to
Ephesus, much lesse to Rome; he did not imi|tate
Diana's Temple, nor enquire into the
Rituals of Numa Pompilius; but had recourse
for a Temple, to that of Solomon, and for a
Ritual, to that of Moses, as having both been
prescribed by God himself. And yet we know
the Prophet Haggai made the people steep
their Ioy in a showr of Tears, by representing
how much the Copy had faln short of the Origi|nal.

The holy Prophets in the Old Testament,
shewing the way to a Reformation, advis'd the
Princes and the people to ask after the old
paths, and walk therein, as being the only good
way for the finding of rest unto their soules, Jer.
6. 16. The Prophet Isaiah sought to regulate
what was amisse amongst the Iewes, by bid|ding
them have recourse unto the Law and the
Testimony should not a people seek unto their God?
If any speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 19, 20. And ac|cordingly
their Kings, who took a care to re|form
abuses, are in this solemn style commen|ded
for it, That they walked in the wayes of their
Father David; that is, reform'd what was a|miss
by what had been from the Beginning.
So St. Paul in the New Testament, setting
right what was crooked about the Supper of the
Lord in the Church of Corinth, laid his line to
that Rule which he was sure he had receiv'd
from the Lord Himself, 1 Cor. 11. 23. And
thus our Saviour in my Text, finding the
Pharisees very fond of a vitious practice, which
supported it self by an old Tradition, and had
something of Moses to give it countenance in the
world, (though indeed no more than a bare

permission,) could not think of a better way
to make them sensible of their Error, (and such
an Error as was their Sin too,) than by shew|ing
them the great and important difference,
betwixt an Old, and a Primitive Custom; and
that however their breach of Wedlock had been
without check from the daies of yore, yet 'twas
for This to be reform'd, that 'twas not so from the
Beginning.
In a most dutifull conformity to which
example, our Reformers here in England
(of happy memory) having discver'd in
every part of the Church of Rome, not
onely horrible Corruptions in point of Pra|ctice,
but hideous Errors in point of Dctrine
and that in matters of Faith too, (
find an occasion to shew anon) and having
found by what degrees the several Errors
and Corruptions were slily brought into the
Church, as well as the several times and seasons
wherein the Novelties received their birth and
breeding; and presently after taking notice,
that in the Council of Trent the Roman Par|tisans
were not afraid to makeVide Con|cil. Trident. Sess. 13. Can. 2, 3 Sess. 21. Can. 1, 2. 3. Sess. 22. Can. 3, 5, 6, 8, 9. Sess. 23. Can. 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9. Sess. 25. c. quam confer cum Bul Pii Quarti. Edit. Bin. pag. 444. Tom. 9. New Ar|ticles
of Faith, whilst the Sacrifice of the Mass,
the Doctrine of Purgatory, the Invocation of

Saints, the Worship of Images, and the like,
were commanded to be embraced under pain of
damnation, (as it were in contempt of the Apo|stles
denutiation, Gal. 1. 8. by which that
practice of those Conspirators made them lia|ble
to a curse;) and farther yet, that in the
Canon of the Fourth Session of that Council, the
Roman Church was made to differ as well
from her ancient and purer self, as from all other
Churches besides her self, in that there were
many meerly human (I do not say profane)
Writings, and many unwritten Traditions also,
not only decreed to be ofNec non ipsas Traditio|nes, tum ad fidem tum ad mores pertinentes, tan|quam vel ore te|nus  Christo, vel  Spiritu Sancto dictatas pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit ac vene|ratur (haec San|cta Synodus.) Trident. Conc. Sess. 4. sub Pa|lo 3. Bin. Tom. 9. d. 354. equal Authority with
the Scriptures, but with the addition of an
Siquis libros ipsos integros,pro sacris  Canonicis non susceperit,  Traditiones prae|dictas sciens contempserit, A|nathema sit. ib. Anathema to all that should not so receive
them: This (I say) being consider'd and laid
to heart by our Reformers, (by our Kings, and
our Clergy and Laiety too, met together in
their greatest both Ecclesiastical and Civil Coun|cils,)
they did not consult with flesh and bloud,
or expect the Court of Rome should become
their Physician, which was indeed their great
Disease; but having recourse unto the Scrip|tures
and Primitive Fathers of the Church, they
consulted those Oracles how things stood from
the Beginning and only separating from Them,

whom they found to have been Separatists
from the primitive Church, they Therefore made
a Secession, that they might not partake of the
Roman Schism. And whilst they made a Se|cession
for fear of Schism; (which by no other
practice could be avoided,) they studiously
kept to the Golden mean; neither destroying
the Body out of hatred to the Ulcers with which
'twas spread, nor yet retaining any Ulcer in a
passionate dotage upon the Body.
One remarkable Infirmity it is obvious to
observe in the Popish Writers: they ever com|plain
we have left their Church; but never
shew us that Ita, as to which we have left the
Word of God, or the Apostles, or the yet-uncorrup|ted
and primitive Church, or the Four first
General Councils. We are so zealous for Antiqui|ty,
(provided it be but Antique Enough,) that
we never have despised a meer Tradition, which
we could track by sure footsteps from as far as
the times of the purest Christians. But this is
still their childish fallacy, (be it spoken to the
shame of their greatest Giants in Dispute, who
still vouchsafe to be guilty of it,) that they con|fidently
shut up the Church in Rome, as their
Seniors the Donatists once did in Africk; and

please to call it the Catholick Church, not for|mally,
but causally, (saith Cardinal Peron,) be|cause
forsooth That Particular doth infuse uni|versality
into all other Churches besides it
self. The learned Cardinal forgetting, (which
is often the effect of his very good memory,)
that the preaching of Christ was to begin at
, c. Theod. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 9. Concil. Constantinop. apud Baronium ad A. D. 382. suffragatur. Ierusalem. So it was in the Prophesie, (Isa. 2.
3. Mic. 4. 2.) and so in the completion, (Luke
24. 47.) Nor was it Rome, but Antioch, in
which the Disciples were first call'd Christians,
(Acts 11. 26.) At, apud Chrysoft. ad Populum Antiochen. Hom. 3. Tom. 6. Ed. Aeton. p. 474. Antioch therefore there was
a Church, before St Peter went thence to
Rome. Nay 'tis expresly affirm'd byTempore ut scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris absque ullo im|pedimentoradios suos in|dulget, id est praecepta sua Christus. Gildas in Epist. de Excid. Brit. Sect. 6. p. 1005. Edit Basil. 1555. Gildas,
(an Author very much revered by the Roma|nists
themselves,) that Christianity was in Bri|tain
in the latter time of Tiberius Caesar; some
while after whose death, 'tis known that
St Peter remain'd in Iewry. So that Rome
which pretends to be a Mother, can be no
more (at the best) then a Sister-Church, and
not the eldest Sister neither.
Neglecting therefore the pretended Uni|versality
of the Roman (that is to say, of a Par|ticular)
Church; let us compare her Innova|tions
with what we find from the Beginning.

For This I take to be the fittest and the most
profitable Vse, that we can make of the subject
we have in hand.
And first, consider we the Supremacy, or
Universal Pastorship of her Popes: which is in|deed
a very old, and somewhat a prosperous
Usurpation; an Usurpation which took its rise
from more than a thousand years ago. But
then, besides that it was sold by the Emperour
De Phoc caelits est di|ctum, , c. Cedrenus, p. 334. Phocas, at once an. Idem. p. 332. Vide Testimo|nia Anastasii,  pauli Diaconi, apud Baron ad A. C. 606. p. 198. Heretick, and a Re|gicide,
the Devillish Murderer of Mauritius,
(who was the , the Royal Image or
Type of our late Royal Martyr of Sacred Me|mory;)
I say, besides that it was sold by the
most execrable Phocas, that is to say, by the
greatest Villain in the world, excepting Cromwell,
and Pontius Pilate; and besides that it was
sold to ambitious Boniface the Third, whose
vile compliance with that Phocas was the bribe
or price with which he bought it; and besides
that it was don, not out of reverence to the
Pope, but inPhocas ira|tus Cyriaco, E|piscopo Con|stantinopolita|no adjudicavit Titulum Oecu|menici Pontifici Romano. Baron Annal. ad A. Ch. 606. displeasure to Cyriacus of Con|stantinople,
who (from IohnJohannes Constantinopoli|tanus sese hic efferens, se ubi|que Oecumeni|cum Patriar|cham nominavit. Idem ad A. C. 595. Tom. 8. p. 83.  84. his Predeces|sor)
usurpt the Title of Vniversal, before
any Pope had pretended to it; I say, besides, or
without all this, it is sufficient for us to say,

what our Saviour here said to the ancient Pha|risees,
That from the beginning it was not so. For
looking back to the Beginning, We find The
Wall of God's City had Twelve Foundations, and in
them were the names of the Twelve Apostles of the
Lamb. (Rev. 21. 14.) Paul was equal at least
to Peter, when he withstood him to the face, and
rebuked him in publick for his Dissimulation.
(Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.) Nay St Peter himself, (as
well as Iames and Iohn, who were his Peers,)
although he seemed to be a Pillar, yet perceiving the
Grace that was given to Paul, gave to Barnabas
and Paul the right hand of Fellowship. (Gal. 2. 9.)
And reason good: For St Peter was but One of
the many Apostles of the Iewes; whereas St Paul
was much more, the great Apostle of the Gen|tiles,
to whom the Iewes were no more than
as a River to an Ocean. Saint Peter was com|manded,
not to fleece, but toJohn 21. 15, 16, 17. feed the flock:
No was it ever once known that he did
lord it over Gods heritage, which himself had
so strictly forbid to others, 1 Pet. 5. 3. In
deed a Primacy of Order may very easily be
allow'd to the See of Rome: But for any One
Bishop to affect over his Brethren a supremacy
of Power, and Iurisdiction, is a most impu|dent

opposition both to the Letter and to the
Sense of our Saviour's precept, (Mar. 10. 42, 43.
44.) Ye know, that they who are accounted to rule
over the Gentiles, exercise lordship over them,
and their great ones exercise authority upon them.
But so shall it not be among you: But whosoever will
be great among you, shall be your Minister; and
whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be the
servant of all.
That the Apostles were every one of equall
power and authority, is the positive saying of
Cyprianus ait pari omnes inter se fuisse po|testate Apostolos; atque hoc idem fuisse alios quod Petrus fuit. Tra|ctat. 3. de Sim|plicitate Praela. toru~ (Ed. Colon 1544) p. 135. St Cyprian; Pari consortio praediti  honoris
 potestatis. And St Ierome is as expresse,
ThatSi Autori|tas quaeritur, Orbis major est Vrbe: ubicun|que fuerit Epis|copus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanii, ejus|dem Meriti, ejusdem est  Sacerdotii Po|tentia Divitia|rum,  Pauper|tatis Humilitas vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit, Caeterm omnes Apostolo|rum successores sunt. Hier. in Epi. ad Evagrium (ex Edit. Basil. 1565.) p. 329. sive Ex Edit Paris c. all Bishops, in all places, whether at
Rome, or at Eugubium, at Constantinople,
or at Rhegium, are of the very same merit, as
to the quality of their Office, how much soever
they may differ in point of Revenue or of En|dowments.
Nay, by the Canons of the Two first
Generall Councils, (Nice, and Constantinople,)
everyConcil. Nicae. Can. 6. . Ibid. Can. 7.  quae Antiochenae Ecclesiae servari his Canonibus praecipiuntur, eo pertinent, (inquit Justellus,) ut Episcopus Antiochenus praeferatur Me|tropolitanis omnibus in Orientali Dioecesi. Nihil Juris illi attributum in Caeteros Metropolitanos, praeter Honorem Ordinis, non autem ut Metropolitani omnes Dioeceseos Orientis ab eo jure singu|lari ordinarentur, ut Innocentii primi Epistola ad Alexandr. Episcopum asserere videtur, contra mentem Snodi Nicaenae, Justell. p. 7. ex Edit. Gulielmi Voelli, A. D. 1661. Patriarch and Bishop is appointed to

be chief in his proper Dioecese; as the Bishop
of Rome is the chief in His. And a strict, c. Conci. Constantinop. Oecumen. 2. Can. 2. Quid hic Canon sibi velit per [] Justellus explicat paul sueris ad Can. Conc. Nic. 6. nihil Juris nimirum Antiocheno attribu|endum in caeteros Metropolitanos, praeter Ordinem Honoris. in|junction
it laid on all, (the Bishop of Rome not
excepted,) that they presume not to meddle in
any Diocese but their own. And the chief
Primacies of Order were granted to Rome and
to Constantinople, not for their having been
the Sees of such or such an Apostle,Confer Iustinian. Nove. Constit. 131. cap. 2. cum Canone 3. Concilii Constant. but for
being the two Seats of the two great Empires.
Witness the famous Canon of the General Coun|cil
at Chalcedon,. Et paul post, c. Concil. Chalced. Can. penult. decreeing to the Bishop of
Constantinople an equality of Priviledges with
the Bishop of Rome; not for any other reason,
than its having the good hap to be one of the
two Imperial Cities. Nay, no longer ago before
Boniface the Third, (who was the first Bishop
of Rome that usurpt the Title of Vniversal,)
I say, no longer before Him than his next
immediate Predecessor Pope Gregory the Great,
(for I reckon Sabinian was but a Cypher,)

the horrible Pride of succeeding Popes was
stigmatiz'd by a Prolepsis; by way (not of
Prophecy, but) of Anticipation. ForQuis est iste qui contra Sta|tuta Evangeli|ca, contra Ca|nonum Decreta, novum sibi usur|pare nomen prae|sumit?No|vis  profanis vocabulis glori|antur.Absit  cor|dibus Christiano, rum nomen il. lud Blasphe|miae. Greg. Mag. 1. 3. Epist. 32. ad Mauriti|um Augustum. p. 734. Gregory
writing to Mauritius, the then-reigning Em|perour,
(and that in very many Epistles,)
touching the name of Universal, which the
Bishop of Constantinople had vainly taken unto
himself, call's it a wicked and proane and blas|phemous
Title a Title importing that theSed in hac ejus suprbi quid aliud nisi propinqua jam Antichristi esse tempora designa|tur? Idem ad Constantiam Augustam. Ep. 34 p. 737. confer. 1. 7. Epi. 69. Eusebio, aliisque, p. 902. times
of Antichrist were at hand; (little thinking that
Pope Boniface would presently after his de|cease
usurp the same, and prove the Pope to
be Antichrist by the confession of a Pope.) He
farther disputed against the Title by an Argu|ment
leading ad absurdum;Si unus Episcopus vocatur universalis, universa Ecclesia corruit, l. 6 Ep. 24. p. 822. Et rursussi illud nomen in e Ecclesi sibi quisquam arripuit, quod apud honorum omnium judicium fuit, Uni|versa ergo Ecclesia (quod absi)  statu suo corruit, quando Is qui appellatur Universalis cadit. Idem ad Eund. Epist. 32. p. 734. Universalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur, fatente Pap Pelagio secundo, apud Gratian. Decretal. p. 1. dist. 99. cap. 4. Quis autem illud pro indig|nitate rei stupeat, quod novam quandm indebitamque Potentiam tibi usurpando arrogas, c? Ita Papam aloquuntur Episcopi Germanici apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p. 47. That if any one
Bishop were Universal, there would by con|sequence
be a failing of the Vniversal Church,
upon the failing of such a Bishop. An Argu|ment,
ad homines, not easily to be answer'd,
whatsoever Infirmity it may labour with in
itself. And such an Argument is That, which

we bring against the Pope's pretended Head|ship.
For if the Pope is the Head of the Catho|lick
Church, then the Catholick Church must
be the Body of the Pope; because the Head and
the Body are the Relative and Correlative; and
being such, they are convertible in obliquo: And
then it followes unavoidably, That when
there is no Pope at all, (which is very often,)
the Catholick Church hath then no Head; and
when there are many Popes at once, (which
hath been sometimes the case,) then the Ca|tholick
Church must have at once many Heads;
and when the Pope is Heretical, (as by the
confession of the Papists he now and then is,)
the Catholick Church hath such an Head, as makes
her deserve to be beheaded.Multi Pon|tifices Romani errarunt; sicut Marcellinus, qui Idolis sacrifica|vit;  Liberius Papa, qui Aria|nis consensit;  Anastasius secundus propter Haeresis Cri|men repudiatus fuit ab Ecclesia:  alii etiam plurimi coatra Catholicam fi|dem tenuerunt; ut Joannes vi. gesimus secun|dus, qui asseruit, qud filius Dei sit Major Patre  Spiritu San|cto. Didacus Stella Tom. 2. in Luc. cap. 22. vers. 31. p. 280. col. 1. Edit. Ant. verp. A. D. 1593. Ad In|quisitionis Hi|spaniae decreta prorsus elima|tus,  summ fide . That Popes have
been Hereticks, and Heathens too, not only
by denying the Godhead of the Son, and by
lifting him up above the other two Persons,
but even by sacrificing to Idols, and a total
Apostasie from the Faith, is (a thing so clear
in the writings of Platina, and Onuphrius, that
'tis) the Confession of the most zealous, and
partial Asserters of their Supremacy. I know
that Stella, and those of the Spanish Inqui|sition,
do at once confesse this, and yet ad|here

to their Position,Ubi supr, verbis immedia|t subsequenti|bus. That (with his
Colledge of Cardinals) the Pope cannot err,
and is the Head of the Church. But St Hilary of
Poictiers was so offended, at Pope Liberius his
espousing the Arian Heresie, that he affirm'd
the true Church to have been Then onely in
France.Hilar. Pictav. de Synodis, p. 287.  paul postQui|dam ex vobis fir|missim fidei constanti intra communionem se meam continen+tes, se  caeteris extra Gallias abstinuerunt. Idem ib. p. 288. Edit Basil. A. C. 1535. Ex eo inter nos tantm Communio Do|minica
continetur. So ill success have they met
with, who have been Flatterers of the Pope,
or the Court of Rome.
To conclude this first instance in the fewest
words that I can use: Whosoever shall read
at large (vvhat I have time onely to hint) the
many Liberties and Exemptions of the Gallican
Church, and the published Confessions of Po|pish
Writers, for more than a thousand years to|gether,
touching the Papal Vsurpations, and
Right of Kings, put together by Goldastus in
three great Volumes; he vvill not be able to
deny, (let his present perswasion be vvhat it
vvill,) that the Supremacy of the Pope is but a
Prosperous Vsurpation, and hath This lying a|gainst
it, that 'twas not so from the beginning.
Secondly 'Tis true, that for several Ages,
the Church of Rome hath pretended to be Infal|lible;
as vvell Incapable of error, as not erroneous.

But from the beginning it was not so. For, (be|sides
that Infallibility is one of God's peculiar
and incommunicable Attributes,) where there is
not Omniscience, there must be Ignorance in part;
and where Ignorance is, there may be Error.
That Heresie is Error in point of Faith, and that
Novatianism is Heresie, all sides agree: And 'tis
agreed by the Champions of the Papacy it self,
(such asBaron. Tom. 2. An. 254. pag. 498.  503, 504. Baronius,Pamel. in Cyprian. Epist. 41. p. 47, 48. Pamelius, andPetav. in Epiphan. ad Haeres. 59. quae est Novatiano|rum, pag. 226. Peta|vius,)
that Rome it self was the Nest in which
Novatianism was hatcht; and not only so, but
that There it continued fromOnuph. in Notis ad Plat. in vit Corne. lii. pag. 26. Ed. Lovan. 1572. Vide Euseb. l. 6.  7. Cornelius to
Coelestine, which wants not much of two hun|dred
years. To passe by the Heresies of the
Donatists, and the Arians, (which strangely
prosper'd for a time, and spread themselves
over the world, the former over the West,
the later over the East, and as far as the Breast
of the Pope himself;) one would have thought
that the Tenet of Infallibility upon Earth had
been sufficiently prevented by the HeresieVide Bellar. Chronol. ad A. C. 132.  Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 39.
of the Chiliasts, wherewith the Primitive
Church her self (I mean the very Fathers of
the Primitive Church, for the two first Cen|turies
after Christ,) was not onely deceiv'd
by Papias, who was a Disciple of St Iohn,

but (for ought I yet learn) without the least
Contradiction afforded to it. Nay the whole
Church of God (in the opinion of St.Non po|test probari eum [i. e. Augusti|num] existimasse hc de Euchari|sti non agi, cum am multis locis aliis probet ex ho Johannis Testimonib, Eu|charistiam eti|am Infantibus esse Necessari|am; idque non ut opinionem suam, sed ut Fidei  Totius Ecclesiae Dogma: ad re|fellendos Pela|gianos dicat:  paul postMissam sacio Augustini Innocentii primi sententiam, quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus necesariam. Res jam ab Ecclesia,  Multorum seculorum usu,  Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata est, non solm necesariam illis non esse, sed ne decere quidem dai. (Sess. 21.  Can. 4.) Maldonat. (Excus. Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p. 717, 718, 719. Au|stin
and Pope Innocent the third, and for six hun|dred
years together, (ifNon po|test probari eum [i. e. Augusti|num] existimasse hc de Euchari|sti non agi, cum am multis locis aliis probet ex ho Johannis Testimonib, Eu|charistiam eti|am Infantibus esse Necessari|am; idque non ut opinionem suam, sed ut Fidei  Totius Ecclesiae Dogma: ad re|fellendos Pela|gianos dicat:  paul postMissam sacio Augustini Innocentii primi sententiam, quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus necessariam. Res jam ab Ecclesia,  Multorum seculorum usu,  Decreto Synodi Tridentinae explicata est, non solm necessariam illis non esse, sed ne decere quidem dai. (Sess. 21.  Can. 4.) Maldonat. (Excus. Mussiponti, A. C. 1596.) in Joh. 6. 53. p. 717, 718, 719. Maldonate the Iesuit
may be believ'd) thought the Sacrament of Eu|charist
to have been necessary to Infants, as well
as to men of the ripest Age: and yet (as Maldo|nate
confesseth at the very same time,) it was so
plain and so grosse an Error, that notwithstand|ing
St Austin did endeavour to confute the Pe|lagians
by it, as by a Doctrin of Faith, and of
the whole Church of God; yet the Council of Trent
was of a contrary mind, and did accordingly in
a Canon declare against it.
3. Pass we on to the Doctrine of Transub|stantiation,
which (if its Age may be measur'd
by the very first date of its Definition,) may
be allow'd to be as old as the LateranCujus corpus  sanguis in Sacramento al|taris sub specie|bus Panis  Vini veraciter continentur, transubstantiatis Pane in Cornus,  Vino in sanguinem, potestate divina. Conc. Later. c. 1. In Sy|naxivero Transubstantiationem definivit Ecclesia. Diu satis erat credere, sive sub Pa consecrato, sive quocunque modo adesse verum Corpus Christi. Erasm. Annot. in 1 Cor. 7. p. 472. Saltem ab annis 500 dogma Transubstantiationis sub Anathemate stabilitum, ut ait ipse Bellarminus de Eucharist. l. 3. c. 21. p. 759. Cujus etiam confessionem videre est, l. 3. c. 23. p. 766. Ed. Par. 1586. Council,

a Council held under Pope Innocent the
Third; since whom are somewhat more
then 400 years. But from the beginning it was
not so. For besides that our Saviour, just
as soon as he had said, This is my Blood, ex|plain'd
himself in the same Breath, by calling
it expresly the fruit of the Vine, and such as He
would drink new in the kingdom of God, (Mat. 26.
29. Mark 14. 15.) there needs no more to
make the Romanists even asham'd of that Do+ctrine,
than the Concession of Aquinas, and Bel|larmine's
Inference thereupon.Corpus Chri|sti non est o mo|do in hoc Sacra|mento sicut Cor|pus in loco, quod suis Dimensioni|bus loco commen|suratur; sed quo|dam speciali mo|do, qui est propri|us huic Sacra|mento. Unde di|cimus, quod Cor|pus Christi est in diversis altari|bus, non sicut in diversis locis, sed sicut in Sacra|mento. Nullo enim modo Corpus Christi est in hoc Sacrament localiter, quia si esset, divideretur  seipso Aquin. Oper Tom. 12 Sum. part. 3. q. 75. art. 1. ad 3. p. 232. col. 2.  q. 76 art. 3.  5. ex Edit. Antwerp. 1612. Aquinas so ar|gues,
as to imply it is Impossible, and imports
a Contradiction, for one body to be locally in
more places than one, and in all at once. But
Si non posset esse unum Corpus lolter in duobus locis, quia divideretur  sei pso, profecto nec esse posset Sacramentaliter eadem ratione. Bellar. de Eucharisti, lib. 3. c. 3. p. 511. Tom. 3. Controvers. ex Edit. Paris. A. C. 1620. Bellarmine (at this) is so very angry, that
in a kind of Revenge upon Aquinas, (though
held to be the Angelical Doctor,) he needs will
infer 'tis as Impossible, and equally implies a
Contradiction, for any one body at once to be
so much as Sacramentally in more Places than

one. And therefore it cannot now be won|der'd
concerning Transubstantiation, if so long
ago as in the time of Pope Nicolas the Second,
either the Novelty was not forg'd and hammer'd
out into the shape in which we find it, or not
at all understood by the Pope Himself. For one
of the two is very clear by the famousCoactus est Berengarius pub|lic pro fiteri, Panem  Vi|num, quae in al|tari ponuntur, post cosecratio|nem non solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum Corpus  San|guinem Domini nostri Jesu Chri|sti esse:  sen|sualiter non so|lm Sacramento, sed in veritate manibus sacerdo|tum tractari, frangi,  fidelium dentibus atteri. Coner Floriacens. Histor. fragmenta  P. Pi|thaeo edit. inter. Franc. Script. (Excus. Francof. A. C. 1596) p. 86. cum Lanfranc. lib. cont. Bereng.  Guitmund. de Sacram. l. 1.  Alger. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 19. Sub|mission
of Berengarius, wherewith he satisfied
theSigon. de Regno Ital. l. 9. A. 1059. p. 210. Synod then held at Rome, (and in which
were 113 Bishops,) though not at all unto a
Trans, but rather a Consubstantiation. Which
diversNisi san intelligas verba Berengarii, in majorem incides Haeresin, qum ipse habuit:  ideo omnia referas ad species ipsas, nam de Christi Corpore partes non facimus. Johan. Semeca Glossator in Gratian. de Consecrat. Dist. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius. Romanists themselves have not been
able not to Censure, though it was pen'd by a
A Cardinale, scil. Humberto Sylvae Candidae Episcopo. Guitmundusub. supra. Cardinal, and approved of by a Council, and
very glibly swallow'd down by the Pope himself.
4. 'Tis very true that their withholding
the Cup of blessing in the Lord's Supper from
the secular part of their Communicants, hath
been in practice little lesse then 400 years.
But from the beginning it was not so. For in our

Saviour's Institution we find it intended for
Concil. Constant. Acti|one 13. Can. 13. p. 880. In Ecclesi Latina 1000. amplius annis tenuit, ut tam Populo quam Clero in celebra|tione Missarum post mysteriorum consecrationem seorsum Corpus  seorsum San|guis Domini prae|beretur. Cassan. Consult. Artic. 22. Vasq. cap. . Disp. 216. c. 3. n. 38. Secundum antiquam Eccle|siae consuetudi|nem, omnes sicut communicabant Corpori, ita com|municabant  Sanguini, quod etiam adhuc in quibusdam Ec|clesiis seruatur. Jo. 6. Aquinasin Comment. Le|ctione 7. p. 42. col 1. Tom. 13. every Guest.  is the word, Drink ye
All of this Cup. (Mat. 26. 27.) And S. Paul to the
Corinthians (consisting most of Lay-men) speaks
as well of their drinking the mystical Blood, as
of their eating the Body of Christ. (1 Cor. 11.
26, 27, 28, 29.) Nay 'tis confest by learned Vas|quez,
(as well as by Cassander, and Aquinas
Himself) to be a Truth undeniable, That the
giving of both Elements in the Roman Church it
self, untill the time of Aquinas; did still conti|nue
to be in use.
5. The Church of Rome for several Ages
hath restrain'd the holy Scriptures from the
perusal of the People. But from the beginning
it was not so. For Hebrew to the Iews was the
Mother-Tongue, and in That 'twas read weekly
before the People. It pleased God the New
Testament should be first written in Greek, be|cause
a Tongue the most known to the Eastern
world. And to the end that this Candle might
not be hid under a Bushel, it was translated
by St Ierome into theSixt. Senens. Bibliothec. l. 4. p. 247. Ipse Hieron. in E|pist. ad Sophron. Tom. 3. Dalmatick Tongue, by
Bishop Vulphilas into theSocrat Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 33. Niceph. Hist. Eccle. lib. 11. c. 48. Bonav. Vulcan. in Prafat. de Liturg.  lingu Getarum. Gothick, by St Chry|sostom

intoRoccha in Bibliothec Va|tican. p. 155, 157. Armenian, by Athelstan into Sa|xon,
byAventin. Annal. lib. 4. p. 434. Methodius into Sclavonian, by Iacobus
de Voragine intoSixt. Senens: Bibl. l. 4. p. 255. col. 1. Italian, by Bede and Wiclef
intoVide Au|thoces citat. apud Brerew. Inqu. c. 26. English. And not to speak of the Syri|ack,
Aethiopick, Arabick, Persian, and Chaldee
Versions, (which were all for the use of the
common people of those Countries,) theConfer Blond. Ital. Illustrata, in Marchia Tar|bisin,  Tin. to de la Nobil|t di Verona, lib. 2. cap. 2. cum Hieronymi Tem|pribus apud Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. p. 104. Vulgar
Latine was then the Vulgar Language of the Ita|lians,
when the Old and New Testament were
turn'd into it.
6. The publick prayers of the Romanists
have been a very long time in an unknown
Tongue, (I mean unknown to the common people,)
even as long as from the times of Pope Grego|ry
the Great. But from the beginning it was not so.
For 'tis a scandalously opposite to the plain
sense of Scripture, as if it were done in a meer
despight to the 14th Chapter of the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, especially from the 13 to the
17. vers. Not to speak of what is said by the
. Origen. contra celsum (ex Edit. Hs|chelii, Augustae Vindelicorum, 1605.) lib 8. p. 414. Primitive Writers:Cm Aquinate  Lyr confer Cajetanum in 1 Cor. 14. p. 79. sententiae nostrae suffragantem. Ed. Paris 1532. Aquinas and Lyra do
both confess upon the place, that the common
Service of the Church in the Primitive times,
was in the common language too. And as the

Christians ofAngelus Roccha in Bibl. Vatic. p. 157. Dalmatia,Biblioth. Vet. atrum, Tom. 6. p. 654. Habassia,Petrus Bello|nius in Observ l. 3. cap. 12.  Vitriacus in Hist. Orient. cap. 79. p. 1095. Brocardus non nullibi in sua Descriptione Terrae Sanctae. Armenia,
Possevinus de Reb. Mosc. pl 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c. 12. Muscovia,Bapt Palat de rat. Scrib. An. Rocha Biblioth. Vatic. p. 162. Sclavonia,Possevinus de Reb. Mosc. pl 4. And. Thevetus Cos. l. 19. c. 12. Russia, and all the Re|formed
parts of Christendom, have the Ser|vice
of God in their vulgar Tongues, so hath
it been in divers Places byAventin. Annal. l. 4. Aeneas Sylvius in Hist. Bohem. cap. 13. p. 128. Concil. Bn: Tom. 3. p. 990. Vide etiam Decret. l. 1. Tit 31. cap. 14.  quicquid Authorum videre est in Brerew. Inqu. 26. Approbation first
had from the Pope himself.
7. Another instance may be given in their
Prohibiting of Marriage to men in Orders, which
is deriv'd by some from the thirdNempe  Papa Calixto, qui flo|ruit A. D. 220. Consule Thua|num, in l. 36. p. 305. Century
after Christ; byBishop Hall. 3. Epist. 2. Decad. others from the eighth; and
in the rigour that now it is, from Pope Gregory
the Seventh. But from the beginning it was not so.
For Priests were permitted to have wives, both
in the Old and New Testament; (as Maximilian
Ubi supra apud Thuanum, p. 305.  306. the Second did rightly urge against the Pope:)
And the blessed Apostles (many of them) were
married men: for so I gather fromEuseb l. 3. c. 13. Eusebius out
of Clemens Alexandrinus; and from theConstat Apo|stolos ipsos, pau|cis exceptis, con|juges habuisse. Ubi supra apud Thuanum. Letter
of Maximilian, who did not want the Advice
of the learnedst persons in all his Empire; and
from 1 Cor. 9. 5. where St Paul asserts his liber|ty
to carry a Wife along with him, as well as

Cephas. And 'tis the Doctrine of that Apostle,
that a Bishop may be an Husband, although he
may not be the Husband of more then One
Wife. (1 Tim. 3. 2. Tit. 1. 6.) Besides, the Marriage
of the Clergy was asserted byIbid. apud Thuanum. Paphnutius in
the Council at Nice; and even by one of those
, Ca|non. Apostol. 5. . Zonaras in Can. Apost. 5. p. 4. Edit. Pari. 1618. Canons which the Romanists themselves do
still avow for Apostolical. And the forbidding
men to marry (with Saturninus, and the Gno|sticks,)
is worthily call'd by God's Apostle,
The Doctrine of Devils, (1 Tim. 4. 1. 3.)Nubere  generate  Satana dicunt esse. Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 22. . Clem. Alex. Strom, l. 3.
8. I shall conclude with that Instance, to
which our Saviour in my Text does more
peculiarly allude; I mean the Liberty of Di|vorce
betwixt Man and Wife, for many more
Causes than the Cause of Fornication. For
so I find it isSiquis dix|erit Ecclesiam errre, cum ob multas Causas separationem in|ter conjuges quo|ad totum, seu quoad cohabta|tionem, ad cer|tum incertum. ve tempus, fieri posse decernit, Anathema sit. Conci. Trident. Sess. 24 Can. 8. p. 411. Edit. Bi. Tom. 9. Paris. decreed by the Church of Rome,
with an Anathema to all that shall contradict
it. But from the Beginning it was not so. For 'tis
as opposite to the will of our Blessed Saviour,
revealed to us without a Parable, (in the next

verse after my Text) as if they meant nothing
more, than the opening of a way to rebel a|gainst
him. For besides that in the Canon of
the Council at Trent, a Divorce quoad Torum / Torum
ob multas Causas was decreed to be just in
the Church of Rome, although our Lord had
twice confin'd it to the Sole Cause of Fornica|tion,
(Matth. 5. 32,  19. 9.) And besides that
the word Totum was constantly reteined in
Scil. (praeter Edit. jam nomi|natam) Edit. Col. Agrip. Tom. 4. part. 2. p. 332. Sum. Concil. Edit. Fra, Longii  Corio|lano, Antverp. A. C. 1623. p. 1024. Item Concil. General. Pauli Quinti Auctorit. Edit. Romae, A. C. 1628. Tom. 4. p. 273. four Editions, (particularly in That, which
had the Care and Command of Pope Paul the
Fifth,) Let it be granted that the Council did
mean no more, than a meer Sequestration from
Bed and Board, to endure for a certain or un|certain
time; and not an absolute Dissolution of
the Conjugal Knot; yet in the Judgment of
Chemnitius, yea and of Maldonat Himself,
(who was as learned a Iesuite as that Society
ever had,) it would be opposite (even so) to
the Law of Christ. ForSi ob aliam Causam qum ob Fornicationem dimiserit, quam|vis aliam non duxerit, maecha|tur; quia uxorem suam moechari facit. Maldonat. (excus. Mogunt. A. D. 1624.) in Matth. 199 p. 392. he who putteth away his
Wife for any Cause whatsoever, besides the Cause
of Fornication commits Adultery (saith the Ie|suit)
even for this very reason, because he makes
Her commit it, whom he unduly putteth away.
Atqui in Pontifici ill Separatione (nempe  Toro  Mensa, ad certum incer|tumve tempus,) Vinculum Con|jugii multis  variis modis sol|vitur  disrum|oitur. Nam ad Vinculum Ma|trimonii eti|ent hae senten|tiae. Et adhaere|b Uxori suae. Faciamus ei adjutorium quod sit coram ipso. Mulier non habet potestatem sui Corporis, sed vir. Iterum convenite, ne tenet vos Satan propter Incontinentiam vestram. Non sunt Duo, sed una Caro. Et ipsum Matrimonium defiitur, Individu vitae consuetudine. Haec vero vincula Conjugii in Potifici separatione, quoad Torum  Cohabitationem, solvuntur  di|rumuntur. Homines igitur, contra Decretum Divinitatis, separant, quod Deus conjunxit. Chemn. n Exam. Concil. Trident. (Excus. Genev. A. D. 1634.) p. 437.
Nay, Chemnitius saith farther; That the Papal
Separation from Bed and Board, is many wayes

a Dissolution of the Conjugal Tye. Nor does he
content himself to say, or affirm it only, but by a
Confluence of Scriptures does make it good, That
against the Command of our blessed Saviour
(in the verse but one before my Text,) That
which God hath joyn'd together, the men of Rome
do put asunder.
By these and many more Corruptions in
point of Practice and Doctrine too, which
were no more then Deviations from what had
been from the Beginning, and which the
learnedest Sons of the Church of Rome have
been forced to confess in their publick writings,
the awakened part of the Christian world were
compell'd to look out for a Reformation. That
there was in the See of Rome the most abomi|nable
Practice to be imagin'd, we have the
liberalVix ullum peccatum cogita|ri potest, (sola Haere si except) quo illa sedes turpiter maculata non fuerit, maxim ab An. 800.  infra. Staplet. Oper. Tom. 1. Cont. 1. q. 5. art 3. p 597. excus. Paris. 1620. Confession of zealous Stapleton himself;

and of those that have publisht theirConsule Ca|nonas Poeniten|tiales Romanos, Bedae, Rabani Mauri, c. cum notis Antonii Augustini, Ar|chepiscop Tar|raconensis, Ex|cus. Venetiis, 1584. Peniten|tials.
We have the published Complaints of
Armachanus, and Grostead, and Nicolas de Cle|mangis,
Iohn of Hus, and Ierome of Prague,
Chancellor Gerson, and Erasmus, and the Arch|bishop
of Spalato. Ludovicus Vives, and Cassan|der,
who are known to have died in the same
Communion, did yet impartially complain of some
Corruptions.Ludov. Vi|ves in S. August. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 27. Vives of their Feasts at the Ora|tories
of Martyrs, as being too much of kin unto
the Gentiles Parentalia, which in the judgment
ofParentati Mortuis species est Idololatriae, quoniam,  Ido|lolatria Parenta|tionis est species. Tertul. de Spe|ctac. c. 12. Tertullian made up a species of Idolatry. And
CaanderIta ut ad Summam ado|rationem, quae vel Paganis su simulacris exhiberi cosue. vit,  ad extre mam vanitatem quam Ethnic in suis simlacris exornandis admiserunt, nil  nostris reliqu factum esse videatur. Geo. Gassander in Consult de Imag.  Simulacris mihi pag. 175, 176. confesses plainly, that the Peoples
Adoration paid to Images and Statues, was
equal to the worst of the ancient Heathen.Thuan. l. 25. pag. 760, 761, c. So
the buying and selling of Papal Indulgences and
Pardons ('tis a little thing to say o Prefer|ments
too) was both confest and inveigh'd a|gainst
by Popish Bishops in Thuanus.
Now if with all their Corruptions in point of
Practice, which alone cannot justifie a People's
Separation from any Church, (though the Ca|thari
and the Donatists were heretofore of that
opinion,) we compare their Corruptions of

Doctrine too, and that in matter of Faith, (as
hath been shew'd,) Corruptions intrenching
on Fundamentals; it will appear that That door
which was open'd by Us in our first Reformers,
was not at all to introduce, but to let outDe Hildebran|do in haec verba sententiam ferunt Episcopi Germa|nici qui Conci. lio Wormatien|st intersuerunt. Dum profanis studes Novitati|bus, dum magis amplo qum boo nomine delect ris, dum iaudita Elatione dien|deris, velut qui|dam Signifer Schismatis, om|nia membra Ec|clesiae superba crudelitate  crudli superbia lacerasti: flam|masque Discor|diae quas in Ro|mana Ecclesia diris factionibus excitasti, per omnes Ecclesias Italiae, Galliae,  Hispaniae, furiali dementia sparsisti.Per gloriosa tua De|creta (quod sine lachrymis dici non potest) Chri|sti fer nome periit. Imperial. Statut.  Goi|dasto edit, Tom. 1. p. 47. Schism.
For the schism must needs be Theirs who give
the Cause of the Separation, not Theirs who
do but separate when Cause is given. Else S. Paul
had been to blame, in that he said to his Co|rinthians,
Come ye out from among them, and be
ye separate. (2 Cor. 6. 17.) The actual De|parture
indeed was Ours, but Theirs the causal,
(as our immortal Arch-Bishop does fitly
word it:) we left them indeed when they
thrust us out; (as they cannot but go whom
the Devil drives;) But in propriety of speech,
we left their Errors, rather then Them. Or if
a Secession was made from Them, 'twas in the
very same measure that They had made one
from Christ. Whereas They, by their Hostilities,
and their Excommunications, departed properly
from vs, not from any Errors detected in us.
And the wo is to Them by whom the offence co|meth,
(Matth. 18. 7.) not to Them to whom 'tis
given. If when England was in a Flame, by
Fire sent out of Italy, we did not abstein from

the quenching of it, until water might be drawn
from the River Tiber; it was because our own
Ocean could not only do it sooner, but better
too. That is to say (without a Figure,)
It did appear by the Concession of the most
learned Popish VVriters, that particular Nations
had still a power to purge themselves from
their corruptions, as well in the Church, as in
the State, without leave had from the See of
Rome; and that 'twas commonly put in pra|ctice
above a thousand years since.Ex eo quo Wil|lielmus Norman|niae Comes Ter|ram illam debel|lando sibi sube|git, Nemo in ea Episcopus, vel Abbas ante An|selmum factus est, qui non primo fuerit Homo Rgis, ac de manu illius Episcopats vel Abbaiae vestituram per dationem Virgae Pastoralis suscepit, c. Eadmerus Monach. Cant. in Praef. ad Hist. Nov. pag. 2. Sed nec ex eosolm temore mos hc obtinuit; Nam ante Normannorum etiam adveum hic , ut majorum Getium Antistites sacri, Episcopi nimirum  Caenobiachae (qui saltem in Clientela Regia)  Sacris Ecclesiarum Corportbus clecti, quin saepius etiam, spretis omin Corporum Sacrorum suffragiis, in Aula defignati, Annuli  Bacui Pasoralis, sive Pedi traditione, in Dignitatis Possessionem  Regibus nostris, jure avito nixis, miterentur. Joh. Selden. in uis ad Eadmer. Notis  Spicilegio, p. 142. Hujus rei exemplum videre est apud G. Malmes. buriensem de Gests Regum, lib. 2 cap 8. Quin  illud aliquanto vide dignius quod hoc in loco . Potifici Hildebrando Fiditatis Iuramentum,  Guilielmo Normanno, exigenti, Guliemum Regem espondisseFidelitatem facere non volo, quia nec ego pomisi, nec A neces|sores meos Antecessoibus tuis id fecisse comperio. Baron. Ad An. 1076. Guilielmus Rufus alle|gavit, Quod nullus Archiepiscopus aut Episcopus Regni sui, Curiae Romanae vel Papae subesset. Mtth. Paris. Hst. p. 25 Ed. t. 1094. Videsis etim Imperatores,  Peges Galliarum, jura sua asse|renes, apud Othonem Fisingensem, Sigibetum, cosque maxim Historicos qui Res Hnrici Quarti Imperatorts,  ejusdem nominis Primi Regis Anglorum conscripsere. aprimis vero Sgonium de Reg Ital. l. 4, 9, 10,  11. Baron. Tom. 11. A. C. 1077. Cherubinu Laert. in Bullarii Tom. 1. p. 16.  17. Bin. Concil. Tom. 3. part, 2. in Urbano, Calixto,  Paschali Secundis, Renatum Choppinum de Domanio Franciae. il. 2. tit. 1. sect. 6, c. Et de Sacra Politi, l. 1. tit. 7. Sect. 22,  23. ad haec, Theodor. Balsamon. Patriarch Antioch. in Concil. Chalced Can. 4. Joh. Naucl Chronograph. gener: 39.  H. Mutium Chron. German. 18. p. 162. c. It did
appeare that the Kings of England (at least as
much as those of Sicily,) were ever held to be
, and that by the Romanists themselves;

until by gaining from Henry the First, the
Investiture of Bishops, from Henry the Second,
an Exemption of the Clergy from Secular Courts,
and from easie King Iohn, an unworthy Sub|mission
to forreign Power; the Popes became
strong enough to call their strength the Law of
Iustice. And yet their Incroachments were still
oppos'd, by the most pious and the most learned
in every Age. Concerning which it were
easie to give a satisfactory account, if it were
comely for a Sermon to exceed the limits of an
hour. In a word, it did appear from the
Code and Novels of. c. Justin. Novel. Const, 131. c. 2. Vide etiam de mandatis Prin. cipum, Tit 4. Novel. 17. c. 7.  11. Iustinian, from the
 set out by the EmperourEvagr. l. 3. c. 14. in Mag. Biblioth. Vet. Patr. Tom 6. Part. 2. p. 655. Zeno, from
the practice ofSigon. de Reg. Ital. l. 4. ad A. C. 801.  Eginhart. in vit. Car. Mag.  Ba|ron. Annal. Tom. 9. ad A. C. 800 p. 42. ad A. C. 545.  To. 10. ad A. C. 845. p. 34. Excus. Colon. Agrip. 1609. Charles the Great, (which
may be judged by the Capitulars sent abroad
in his Name,) from the designs and Indeavours
of two late Emperors, Ferdinand the First,
and Maximilian the Second, from all the com|mended
Kings of Iudah, from the most pious
Christian Emperours as far as from Constan|tine
the Great, and from many Kings of England
inEdward the Confessor, Wi|liam 1. H. 3. Edw. . Edw. 2. Edw. 3 Rich. 2. Hen. 4. H. 5. H. 6 Edw 4. Rich 3 H. 7. H. 8. for all which at large, See Cokes Reports, par. 5. fol. 1. Caudrey's Case, or De Jure Regs Ecclesiastco. . Bal sam. in Conc. Carth. Can. 16. Popish times too; that the work of Refor|mation

belong'd especially to Them in their seve|ral
Kingdoms. And this is certain; that neither
Prescription on the Pope's side, nor Discontinu|ance
on the King's, could adde a Right unto the
one, or any way lessen it in the other. For it im|plies
a contradiction, that what is wrong should
grow right, by being prosperous for a longer, or
shorter season.
Had the Pope been contented with his
. Con|cil. Constanti|nop. Occum. 2. Cap. 3. . Justinian. Imp. Novel. Const. 131. c. 2. Primacy of Order, and not ambitiously af|fected
a Supremacy of Power, and over all other
Churches besides his own; we never had cast
off a Yoke, which had never been put upon our
Necks: And so 'tis plain that the Usurper did
make the Schism. If Sacrilege any where, or
Rebellion, did help reform Superstition; That
was the Fault of the Reformers, not at all of
the Reformation; nor of All Reformers neither.
For the most that was don by some, was to
write after the Copy which had been set them
in my Text, by the Blessed Reformer of all
the World; which was so to reform, as not to
innovate, and to accommodate their Religion
to what they found in the Beginning.
Nay, if I may speak an Important Truth,
(which being unpassionately considerd, and

universally laid to heart, might possibly tend
to the Peace of Christendom;) seeing it
was not so much the Church, as the Court of
Rome, which proudly trod upon Crowns and
Scepters, and made Decrees with aApostolic Potestate decla|ramus  defiui|mus,  ab omni|bus, judicari de|bere mandamus atque statuimus, decernentes ir|ritum  inane, si quid secus  quoquam qua|cunque Digni|tate, Auctorita|te,  Potestate praedito contige|rit judicari, Non obstantibus Constitutioni|bus Ordina|tionibus Apo|stolicis, Alisque in contrarium facientibus Qui buscunque. Vide Bullam Pii quarti, Concil. Bin. Edit. Paris. Tom. 9 p. 444. Licet Chstus post Caenam instituerit,  suis Discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie Pais  Vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, tamen hoc non obstante, c. Licet in Primitiv Ecclesi hujusmodi Sa|cramentum reciperetur  Filibus sub utrque specie; postea  couficientibus sub utr aque,   laicis tantummodo sub spcie Pnis suscipiatur. Concil. Constant. Bin. Tom. 3. part. 2. Sels. 13. p. 880. excus. Colon. Agrippinae, 1618. non ob|stante
to Apostolical Constitutions, or whatsoever
had been enacted by any Authority whatsoever,
(the commandments of Christ being not excepted;)
we originally departed with higher Degrees
of Indignation, from the Insolent Court, than
Church of Rome. Nor protested we so much
against the Church, (though against the
Church too,) as against the cruel Edict first
made atSpirae, Conventus ordinum Imperi celebratur, in quo Decre|tum factum est, ut Edictum  observaretur cotra Novatores,  omnia in integrum restituantur. Contra hoc Edictum solemnis fuit Protestatio, April. 16. A. D. 1529.  hinc ortum per|vulgatum illud nomen Protestantinm. Sethus Calvis. in Chron. ad A. C. 1529. p. 831. col. 2. Edit. Francof 1620. Lutherus imult Iohannem Saxoniae Septemvirum aliosque Principes Germanicos, protestari contra Decreta Ratisbonae  Spirae de Religione facta. Unde Nomen Protestantium cre|vit. Q de re consule Cluverium in Epitom. Hist. Mundi, ad A. C. 1529. p. 790. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1631. Worms, and after cruelly reinforced
at Spire and Ratisbone; for the confirming of
those (1) Corruptions from which the (2) Church
was to be cleans'd. To the (1) former we declard
a Vatinian Hatred; but to the (2) later of the

two we have the Charity to wish for a Recon|cilement.
That we who differ upon the way
in which we are walking towards Ierusalem,
may so look back on the beginning from
whence at first we set out, (and from which
our Accusers have foulely swerv'd, (as to agree
in our Arrival at the same Iourney's end.
But God forbid that our Love to the Peace
without, should ever tempt us to a loss of the
Peace within us. God forbid we should return
with the Dog to his vomit, or with the Sow in the
Hebrew Proverb (which is cited by St. Seter
in His Epistle,) to her wallowing in the mire.
When I wish a Reconcilement, I do not
mean by Our Compliance with any the least of
their Defilements, but by their Harmony with
Us in our being Clean.
On thisAb Ecclesia Romana non alio discessims ani|mo, qum ut, si corecta ad Pri|orem Ecclesiae formam redeat, os quoque ad Illam reverta. mur,  Commu|nionem cum Illa in suis porr Coetilus habea|mus. Zanch in Confess. Art. 19. de Ecclesi mi|litante Tom. 8. p. 540. Edit. 1595. Condition and Supposal; Our
Church is open to receive the bitterest Enemies
of our Church. Our Armes are open to embrace
them, with Love, and Honour. Our Hearts
and Souls are wide open in fervent Prayers and
Supplications to the God of Purity and of Peace,
that (in his own good time) he vvill bind up
the Breaches, and wipe off the stains, and raise
up the lapsed Reputation, of his divided, defiled,

disgraced Spouse; And all for the Glory, as vvell
as Merits, of the ever-blessed Bridegroom of all
our Soules,
To whom, vvith the Father, in the Unity of
the Spirit, be ascribed by Us, and by all the
VVorld
Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, and Power,
and VVisdome, and Thansgiving, from this time
forvvards for evermore.
FINIS.







A
PARAENESIS
TO THE
READER,
Touching the
SERMON
Going Before, and the
DISCOURSE
Which follows after of
ROMES
PRETENDED
INFALLIBILITY.






A Paraenesis to the Reader, touching the Sermon
going before, and the Discourse which follows
after of Rome's pretended Infallibility.
. 1. SInce the Time wherein this Sermon
was first commanded into the light, It
has been scoff't at by some, and easily rail'd at by
others, and by a third sort complain'd of, as the
Concause at least of a Persecution. But so far has
it been from being enfeebled, or refuted, that 'tis
more than I know if it has manfully been op|pos'd.
So that to Vindicate my Sermon, I need
no more than to Reprint it, (as I was told by an
Acute and Learned Prelate,) If aequal Readers
will but have patience both to examin what I
have said, and to compare it with the All that is
said against it. Which if they will not do Now,
whilst the Dispute is at the shortest, and whilst
they may do it with greatest Ease; how much
less would they have patience for such a due

examination, if an Inlargement of the Conten|tion
should make their Task the more tedious?
And if they will; All the stones which certain
Enemies have hurled at it in the Dark, will
(being happily laid together) make but a Mo|nument
of the Truth of that well-meant-Sermon.
That famous saying of Callimachus,
, I have found to be as True, as
it was long ago Notorious. And when Con|troversies
especially are improved into Volumes
both Great and Many, Men of Poverty can|not
buy, and men of Business cannot read them;
and even men of most leisure cannot so grasp
them as they ought, unless their Memories are
as strong as their Attentions are to be steady, and
the stock of their Patience as great as either.
This the oftner I observe, and the longer I lay
to heart, the more I am fixed in my choise, to
serve and satisfie my Readers (as far at least as
I am able) touching the Business I am about,
at the least expense possible of Time, and Mony.
For if my Essay is Convincing, It is the better
for being short; And if it is otherwise, 'twould
be the worse if it were longer.
. 2. If the Citations of my Sermon, in
which I was ingaged by just Autority, (by the

Dean of the Kings Chappel, for the Penning, 
Preaching, as well as by the King Himself, for
the Printing of it,) are but as free from all fraud
as I say they are, and as every willing Reader
has been enabled by me to prove with the least
pains possible, I have attain'd my whole end,
and my work is don. For as my end was to dis|cover
the real Novelty of the Doctrins, and the
depravednesse of the Practices, in which our
Church cannot joyn with the Church of Rome,
and which have made the Separation 'twixt
Us, and Them; So my work was to prove it
by the Confession of Themselves; I mean of such
as are their Learned'st and Partial'st Writers.
Who would not certainly have publish't the se|veral
Dates and Introductions of the New Articles
of theirVide For|mulam Pro|fessionis Fidei Catholicae  pio IV. decrea, apud Laerti|um cherubi|num in Bul|lario. Tom. 2. p. 129 E|dit. Rom. 1617. Qam confer cum Ca+nonibus Con|cil. Trident. ciatis in Con|cione de qu agitur, p. 13.  cumduabus Citationibus in ejusdem pa|gin 35. Faith, much lesse would they have
Printed the Scandalous Tenor of their Lives, had
they not thought them too clear, to be either
dissembled, or deny'd. If some are found to be so
passionately transported, as to affirm either
without, or against their own Knowledge, that
the Citations I insist on are false, or frivolous,
there needs no other vindication than my Affir|ming
them to be True, and Material also. And
this is ready to be attested by several Witnesses

of Fact who have made exact Searches, at my In|treaty.
. 3. Indeed there is one of my Citations,
(and but one that I know of,) which though as
innocent, and as exact, as any Citation ever was,
does seem to stand in some need of a Vidicati|on.
Not for the satifying or shaming a wilful
Papist, who for want of due Knowledge, or of
sufficient Ingenuity, shall at any time accuse
both It, and Me; But for the sake of some weak
and unwary Protestants, whose great unkind|nesse
to my Person has made them Maligners
of my Cause too; And who had rather their
own Religion should some way suffer, than that
a Person whom they envy should any way pro|sper
in its Defense. The one Citation I am to
vindicate is in the Sixt Page of my Sermon,See Joh. Sa|risbur. Poly|crat. Either printed at Leyden A. D. 1595. Or in Biblioth. Pa|tr. Colon. A|grip. 1622. p. 427. Col. 1. and
tis out of the Polycraticum of Iohannes Sarisbu|riensis,
(a learned Bishop who did flourish al|most
500 years ago,) l. 6. c. 24 p. 329. Edit,
Lugd. Bat. 1595. Where though 'tis granted
The Church of Rome was said to shew Her-self a
Step-Mother, and Scribes and Pharisees were also
said to sit in her; Yet I am branded with un|sincere
and unhansome dealing, because the
words were not spoken by the good Bishop to

the Pope, as from Himself, or as his own sense
and meaning, But as received from many others,
and which himself had heard spoken in divers
Provinces. To which I answer by these de|grees.
First that I never did once pretend the
words were spoken by the Bishop, much less
that they were spoken as his peculiar sense and
meaning. But having us'd the word Pharisees
in the Body of my Discourse, and apply'd it to
the men of the Roman Church, I only noted in
the Margin, where the word might be found in
the sense I gave it. Meaning no more by it than
This, That I was not the first who had so ap|ply'd
it, but that I had it from the men of their
own Communion, and such as used such lan|guage
long enough before Luther. Next 'tis clear
that my Citation was not brought by way of
proof, (though 'twas a proof of my Candor in
the use of that word,) but rather by way of
Accommodation. Else I had noted both how com|monly,
and how loudly the word was us'd; it
being most for my Interest, and for the Credit
of my Cause, to make it appear that it was us'd
rather by many, than by one; nor only in one, but
in many places. So that mine Enemies should
have thank't my love of Brevity in a Margin,

which would not suffer me to be fond of my
whole Advantage. For (Thirdly) had I pursued
it, as very prosperously I might, I might have
added that That Censure (fixt on the Pope and
the Cardinals, and the Roman Church in ge|neral,)
was not only VoxHaec inquam Pater, loqui|tur Populus, c. Populi, (which of it
self had been enough,) but too agreeable besides
with hisVereor ne mendacii vel Adulationis contraham no|tam, si solu Populo Con|tradixero. p. 330. Edit. Lugd. p. 427. edit. Colon. own opinion; as also with the opinion
of CardinalVeruntamen quia Populo testimonium perhibet [Cardinalis] ei usquequa Contradiere non praesumo, c. ibid. Guido, whom the plain-hearted
Bishop thought it praesumption to contradict. And
though he made a due exception of some par|ticular
good men, (which in the worst Times
and Places were never wanting,) yet, That
Justice being don, and other Civilities being
premis'd, He toldquia Roma Corrupta apud Deum reperi|tur indigna. Tu erg quia id habes offi|cii, quaere, c.Sed timeo ne dum pergis quaerere quae vis, ab impru|dente audias quae non vis.  caet. ubi supra. the Pope to his Teeth,
(as Guido had don in a publick Synod, in which
the Pope himself presided,) some Enormities
which his Holiness both did, and winck't at.
. 4. This is all the Vindication of that whole
Sermon, which I have ever thought needful for
my Protestant Readers; or have look't upon my
self as concern'd to make. (For did I know any
thing else at which a weak-sighted Brother had
ever Stumbl'd, I would take the like care to
put the Block out of his way.) And for such
of my Readers as are not Protestant, who are

Afraid of being satisfied, and scorn Conviction,
I think it most proper to say but This; That if
'tis matter of any moment to be allow'd the last
word on any Controverted Subject, Then Mr.
Whithy's full Answer to the Attempt of Mr.
Cressy must needs be happy in its Privilege of
having not met with a Reply.
. 5. And such a Privilege has been injoy'd
by what I writ some years ago in way of Pre|face
to Dr. Sherman, touching the Church of
Rome's Pretensions to an Infallibility. The
Confutation  Discovery of which One Error,
(be it never so short, so it be plain, and per|spicuous,)
does make it absolutely needless to
be Voluminous on the Rest, just as the grubbing
up the Root of a noxious Tree, makes it vain
and superfluous to spend a richer Treasure of
Time, about the mortifying and killing its se|veral
Branches.
. 6. For the point of Infallibility must needs
be one of the two Pillars, (whereof the Pope's
pretended Headship or Universal Pastorship is
the other,) wherewith the Tromperies superstru|cted
must stand, or fall. And as it is skilfully
contriv'd by the Roman Champions, to spend
their strength in securing that Saving Error, [The

Church of Rome cannot Err, because it gives the
the best security to whatsoever other Errors
their Church can own; and under which, as an
Asylum, the grossest Follies they can get-by do
live in safety; so by consequence 'tis as happily
resolv'd by us, (upon so good an occasion given)
to shew the Feeblenesse, and Defects, even of
That which does hold up the Papal Grandeur;
and cannot choose but be acknowledg'd even
by men of both sides, to be their first (or their
second) most Helpfull Engine.
. 7. This does bring into my mind, what
I was told many Years since by an honourable
Friend,Mr. Patrick Carew. (then when newly come out of Italy,
wherein from his childhood he had been bred,)
That having first been convinc'd by the little
Treatise, which had been penn'd on that point
by his Brother Falkland, That his beloved Ro|man
Church was not-unerrable; He could not hin|der
his own Discovery, how very grievously she
had Err'd. Nor by consequence could he hinder
his own Conversion from a Church, still preten|ding
to a privilege of not being able to be deceiv'd,
as soon as he found 'twas even That, which had
most deceiv'd him. And truly had I been tem|pted
but with a little of that leisure I once en|joy'd,

whereby to have written more at large
to Serenus Cressy, (who pretending to Confute,
has Escap'd my Sermon, and only fought like a
Parthian, by certain dexterous Tergiversations,
though unlike a Parthian in point of mischief;
neither denying, nor disproving, but still evading
my Citations, and taking very great care to ob|scure
his own; as well by making both the Greek
and the Latin Fathers to hold their peace in Greek
and Latin, and only speak in that English which
He affords them, as by concealing both the Pages
and the Editions of his Authors, for fear a
Protestant should have leisure and patience too,
whereby to bring them to a strict and a speedy
Trial:) I say, had I the leisure, and could think
it worth while to employ that leisure, in exami|ning
all his Book, as some have thought fit to do,
I should not inlarge on any point with greater
contentment to my Self, or greater hope of con|vincing
both Him, and His, than that on which
he hopes most to guard his obstinacy by.
. 8. For when the Romanists contend for the
Church of Rome's being Infallible, they mean by
the Roman, the whole Church Catholick; and by
the whole Church Catholick, theyFather Iohnson, pag. 350. mean as many
as own the Pope for their Soveraign Pastor. This

is call'd (by a plainer phrase,)Father Cressy, p. 95. The present
Visible Church, to which (for all the General Coun|cils,)
the last Recourse is to be had. But why ra|ther
to the Present, than to the Primitive Church?
or why to the present Church Visible, rather than
to the first General Councils? Even because
(saithIbid. Mr. Cressy) Universal Experience doth
demonstrate it impossible, that any Writing can end
a Debate between multitudes of persons interessed,
and therefore not impartial, or indifferent. Thus
still there is something, not only fallible, but
false, whereby a Romanist is to judge where to
find Infallibility; (for wheresoever That is, the
last Recourse is to be made;) Because an Expe|rience
as Universal, as that whereof Mr. Cressy
speaks, doth also demonstrate it as impossible,
That Any present Church Visible (much less that
His) should put an end to a Debate between
multitudes of persons, whose Interest and Byass
is multifariously divided, as well as They. Men
must equally agree (which they never will) first
what is to be meant by the present Visible Church;
and after That, that she is Infallible; before she
can possibly put an end to all their Dissensions in
their Debates.
. 9. But what does he mean by the present

Church Visible? Does he mean all the Churches
that do submit unto the Pope as their Soveraign Pa|stor,
either IN, or OUT of a General Council?
If the first; he must mean either a written, or
speaking Council. If the former, Then he should
not have distinguish'd it from the present Church
Visible, as here he does. Then there needed no
more than One, but That (by all means) must
be a standing General Council, from the beginning
of the Church till the Day of Iudgment. And
then the Church was never able to make her
Members a jot the better for her Infallibility,
or to prove she had such a priviledge, by being
able to put an End to a Debate between Multi|tudes
of different Interest and Judgment in se|veral
Nations, either before the Nicene Council,
which was the first that was General, or since
the Council held at Trent, which they avow to
be the last. But if he mean's only a speaking
Council, then he confesses that at present there
is no such present Visible Church, as can Infallibly
put an end to the Debate above mention'd; even
because there is no such General Council. Which
things being so; where is the boasted Infallibi|lity?
How shall we find, or comprehend it? or
how is any Creature the wiser for it? And if

he means (what was said in the second Branch of
my first Dilemma,) All the Churches which own
the Pope as their Soveraign Pastor, not IN, but
OUT of a General Council; Then the Pope
in his Conclave, or College of Cardinals, (which,
by the way, is a Conventicle, though not a Coun|cil,
not Concilium, but Counciliabulum,) must be
the sole and proper speaking Iudge, who can end
such a Debate as before we spake of; so that in
Him, as in her Head, the present Visible Church
does entirely lodge; at least in respect of her
Infallible Iudgment; which none but the Pope
(out of a Council) can have, or utter. But thus
the Romanists Absurdities will be more nota|ble
than before. For the Pope may be an Here|tick,
if not an Heathen. Pope Marcellinus was
the first, and Pope Liberius the second. And
there is no better arguing, than to the Aptitude
from the Act. Nay, in some of the 30 Schisms
whichOnuph. in Chron. p. 50. Onuphrius reckons up in the Church of
Rome, (before the word Protestant was ever
heard of,) when two or three Popes did sit at once,
'twas even impossible to determine, which Pope
was the true, and which the false. The Councils
ofConcil. Con|staniense prae|cipu congre|gatum extin|guendi schis|matis Caus, quis esset ve|rus Pontifex, vix agnosce|bat. V. Hist. Concil.  Paulo V. Edit. Tom. 4. p. 127. Constance andStatim illud in Controver|siam venit, Nam Synodus Pisana in Illos potuerit ani|madertere, cm eorum aluter ve|rus esset Pon|tif. sed inter+is esse non coaret. ib. p. seqq. Pisa (whereof the former, by
the way, was a General Council, in the Catalo|gue

set forth by Pope Paulus Quintus,) were
utterly at a Loss in their Debates of this matter.
From whence it follows unavoidably, that
Mr. Cressy must not dare to avow this last no|tion
of The present Visible Church; as well be|cause
it is not That, to which he dares say the
last Recourse is to be had, as because she can too
easily declare her sense in another way, than as she
was ever represented by her Pastors out of all Na|tions,
that is to say, by a General Council, which
yet the present visible Church can never do, saith
Mr. Cressy, chap. 9. p. 95. But when I say, he
must not dare to avow this last notion of the
present visible Church, to which he gives the last
Recourse, and to which he ascribes Infallibility:
I mean, he must not for the future, not but that
for the present he dares to do it; Because he tells
us expressly, p. 97. ( as dogmatically too, as with|out
all proof,) That the present Superiours living
and speaking must conclude all controversies, their
Interpretation of Scripture and Fathers, their Testi|mony
of Tradition, must more than put to silence all
contradiction of particular persons, or Churches;
it must also subdue their minds to an Assent, and
this under the penalty of an Anathema, or cutting off
from the body of Christ.
. 10. This is said by M. Cressy concerning
the living and speaking Iudges of his Church,
Judges for the time being in every Age. Quite
forgetting what he had said not long before, p. 95.
That Reason, Inspiration, and Examples of Pri|mitive
Fathers, must joyntly make up the only
Guide, which He affirms to be Infallible. For,
unless they all concur, (as he had said before that,
p. 93,) together with the present visible Governours,
(to whom he there gives a judging determining
power,) That which we take to be Reason, and In|spiration,
and the sense of the Primitive Church,
may deceive and misguide us. Now besides that
This saying destroys the former, where no less
was ascrib'd to the present visible Superiours liv|ing
and speaking, than here is attributed to All
four Requisites in conjunction; we know that
Reason may be deceiv'd, Inspiration be counterfeit
by some unclean spirit, (which fallible Reason
must be the Judge of,) primitive Fathers subject
to Error, and present Superiours much more
than Primitive: And, many fallible Guides can
never make up one Infallible, any more than
many Planets can make one Sun, or many Acts
of finite knowledge one true omniscience. For as
Mr. Cressy does confess, that Infallibility and

Omniscience, are incommunicable Attributes of God
Himself, (p. 98.) so he imply's a contradiction,
when he saith they are communicable to any crea|ture,
such as is his present visible Church. And
another contradiction as bad, or worse, when he
saith that a man, although of much Ignorance, may
in a sort be Omniscient within his sphere, (p. 99.)
which is as if he should have said, That a man
may be able to have a knowledge of All things,
because he may so know them All, as to be Igno|rant
of Some. But then, with the help of that
, the meanest man is as omniscient, as is
his Roman Catholick Church; because (within
his determinate sphere) he must needs have a
knowledge of All he know's; and of more than she
know's the Roman Church hath no knowledge. So
again when he would shew how a creature may
be Infallible, though he had said that God
Himself is incommunicably such, (p. 98.) he has
no better a , than an implicit explication
of an Affirmative by a Negative. The immutable
God can preserve mutable creatures from actual
mutation; [ibid.] thereby implying, that the Im|mutable
cannot communicate his incommunicable
Attribute of Immutability to any creature, even
because he cannot possibly perfect a creature into

Himself. But from actual mutation he can pre|serve
any Creature, as well an Ignorant single
man, as a whole Church Catholick. Thus by en|deavouring
to uphold, Mr. Cressy does throughly
Destroy his Doctrine: All he saith coming to
this, That however God only is Undeceivable,
yet he is able to preserve his deceivable creatures
from being actually deceiv'd. Sed quid hoc ad
Iphicli Boves? The Question is not, Whether
God can preserve a Chruch from being actually
in error, (for so he can, and often does, particular
Members of his Church,) But whether de facto
he hath granted an Inerrability, or an Impossibility
of erring, unto that which they call the Roman
Catholick Church. Not whether the Church is
actually false in her opinions, but whether
or no she is Infallible, or exempted by God
from the passive power of giving false Judgment
in points of Faith. Will Mr. Cressy so confound
an Adjective in Bilis, with a Participle derived
from the passive preterperfest Tense, as either to
argue  non actu ad non potentiam, or else to pass
over from the one unto the other? Will he ar|gue
that Adam before his fall was Impeccable,
because he yet was preserved from actual sin?
or, that the Church was Infallible in the Apostles

own Times, because she was not erroneous until
she was? He cannot sure be so destitute either
of Logick or Grammer skill. I think it rather his
skill to dissemble both; as finding no other way
to dispute a whole Chapter for such a Doctrin,
unless he either beg's, or forsakes the Question.
. 11. But now to give him more Advantage
than he is mindful to give himself, when he al|lows
so great a privilege to the present Gover|nours
of the Church in every Age,Ubi supra. p. 97. whom he will
have to be the living and speaking Iudges, to whom
(without contradiction) all particular Churches as
well as persons, must meekly yield up their Assent;
Let us allow it to be his meaning, not that These
are undeceivable, but that God doth still pre|serve
them from being actually deceiv'd. Was
not Pope Hildebrand himself the supream speak|ing
Iudge, when yet theImperial. Statut. apud Goldast. Tom. 1. p. 74. Conc. Con|stantien. A. D. 1414. Sess. 11. Edit. Bi. To. 7. p. 1036. Notori cri|minosus de homicidio, veneficio, pertinax Hzreticus, Simoniacus, contra rtic|lum de Resur|rectione mor|tuorum dog|matizavit. Et paul su|pertius,cum Vxore fratris sui  cum sanctis monia|libus Incestu~ commisit, pag. 1035. Council at Wormes did
set him out as a Brand of Hell? Was not Iohn
the 23. the supream speaking Iudge of Mr. Cressy's
then present visible Church, when yet he openly
deny'd the Immortality of the soul, and for That
(with other crimes) was condemn'd by the Coun|cil
then held at Constance? Were not Iohn the
22. and Anastasius the 2. the supream speaking
Iudges in their several Times, who yet were

both stigmatiz'd for the Crime of Heresie? Let
Mr. Cressy now speak like an honest man; Were
such superiours as these, then living and speaking,
to conclude all controversies? to Interpret Scripture
and the Fathers? to put to silence all particular
Churches? to subdue mens minds to an Assent?
and this under the penalty of their being cut off from
the body of Christ? (Let him read his own di|ctates,
p. 97.) It will but little mend the mat|ter,
to say the Pope is but One, and that He
spake of All Superiours: Because, besides that
they may All have their Byasses and Errors, as
well as He, in case they are All consulted with,
(as they never are,In quantum est Caput Ec|clesiae errare non potest. Et tunc est caput Ecclesiae cm facit quod in se est; nempe cum Consilio Cardinalium  doctissimo|rum Virorum definiendo, ubi errare non po|test. Stella in Luc. 22. 31. page. 280.) 'Tis very evident that the
Pope (like the Sun among the Stars) is more
than All, in all Cases. The greatest part of
those Councils which they are pleas'd to call
General, have been indeed little better than the
meer Properties of their Popes: which that I
may not seem to say, as one that loves to speak
sharply, but rather as compell'd by their own
Accompts of them, I shall here give an Instance
in One, or Two.
. 12. In the last Lateran Council under Julius
the 2. and Leo the 10.A brief Ac|compt of the last Lateran Council. The Holy Scriptures (at
the first Session) are humbly laid down at his

Holiness's feet; And, an Oath being administred,
are formally toucht by the Officials. The Pope
(in that Session) is call'd The Prince of all the
world; and (in the next) The Priest and the King
to be adored by all the People, as being most like to
God Himself. Accordingly (in the 3^d) The
Kingdom of France by Pope Iulius is subjected
to an Interdict, and the Mart held at Lyons trans|ferr'd
to Geneva. The Pragmatick Sanction is
rescinded in the fourth, for the improving of the
Trade of Ecclesiastical Hucksters, the buying and
selling of Church-Preferments. The Pope is as|serted
as God's Lieutenant upon Earth, though not
of equal merits. (A very signal Condescension!
and to be kept in everlasting Remembrance!Ne fleveri Filia Sion (ut Episcopus Mo|drusiensis af|fatur Papam) quia Ecceve|nit Leo de Tribu Juda, Radix David. Ecce Tibi su|scitavit Deus Salvatorem, c. Te, Leo Beatissime, Salvatorem, expectamus, Te Liberato|rem ventu speravimus. Concil. aeran. ult. Sess. 6. Bin. To. 9. pag. 74.
God is meekly acknowledg'd to be superiour to the
Pope.) In the fifth Session, Iulius die's, (ano|ther
great Condescension!) And Leo his Suc|cessor
is saluted, as no less than the Lion of the
Tribe of Iudah, the Root of David, the Saviour
and Deliverer that was to come. (A pretty clintch,
but a blasphemous complement, and unworthy
a Bishop's mouth.) In the eighth and ninth Ses|sions,
This Lion Roar's first against them that
shall violate his Decrees in the present Council,
to whom he threatens such a Sentence of Excom|munication,

as none but Himself could absolve
them from. Next against the Emperour, Kings,
and Princes, whom he chargeth not to hinder such
as were coming to the Council, under the penalty
of incurring God's Displeasure and his own. In
the last of those two Sessions,Divinae Ma|jestatis tuae conspectus, ru|tilanti cujus fulgore imbe|cilles oculi mei caligant c. Et paulo post, In te uno legitimo Christi  Dei Vicario, pro|pheticum iuud debuerit rer|sus impleri, Adorabunt um omnes Reges Terrae, omnes Gentes servient ei. Ibid. Sess. 9. p. 114, 116. Antonius Puccius
tells Leo, how his Eyes are darkned by the ruti|lant
Brightness of his Divine Majesty.in him
alone as the Vicar of God and of Christ, That say|ing
of the Prophet ought again to have its completion,
All the Kings of the Earth shall come and Worship,
All the Nations under Heaven shall do him Service.
In a word, throughout the whole Council, nothing
is carried by the counsel, or consultation of Asses|sors,
(for Assistants I cannot call them,) nothing
by suffrages, or votes, from them that make it
wear the name of a General Council; But, the
supreme present Iudge (to use the phrase of Mr.
Cressy) as an Infallible Dictator, ordained All
This is constantly the Preface to each Decree in
That Council, Leo Episcopus, servus servorum
Dei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, approbante Con|cilio,
c.
. 13. So again in their last and best beloved
General Council,Of the Coun|cil at Trent. All the Fathers do but pre|pare
convenient matter for Decrees, whereunto

the Popes Fiat does give the life. Their two and
twenty years contrivances do end at last in aHumiliter ptimus no|mine dicti Concilii Oecu|menici Triden|tini,  Sancti|tas vestra dig|netur confir|mare omnia  singula, c. Edit. Bin. Tom. 9. pag. 442. meek
Petition, That his Holiness will vouchsafe to con|firm
what they had done; (that is,) to inform the
lifeless matters they had prepared; which could
not have the nature and force of Articles, or De|crees,
until the Pope had breathed on them the
Breath of Life. So a little before That,Si in his re|cipiendis ali|qua Difficultas oriatur, aut aliqua incide|rint quae De|clarationem aut Finitio|nem postulent,confidit san|cta Synodus Pontificem curaturum.c. viderit expe~direc. Si neces|sarium judi|caverir, c. Si ei visum fuerit, c. Ibid. p. 434. The
General Council does humbly hope, That if any
Difficulty arise in the receiving of the Canons, or
if any things Doubtful shall require a Definition,
or Declaration, His Holiness will provide for the
Necessities of the Provinces, for the Glory of
God, and the Tranquillity of the Church,
either by calling a General Council, if He shall
judge it to be needful, or by committing all the
Business to such as He shall think fit, or by what
way soever He shall judge more commodious.
All, upon the matter, both is, and must be, as
He pleaseth; and when the Council is dissolv'd,
He is himself Tantamount to a General Council.
Indeed much more. For the Council did but pro|pose,
But HeApostolic Auctoritate declaramus  definimus p. 444. declares, and defines, by Apostoli|cal
Authority. HeFidem sine ull Dubitati|one haberi mandamus atque decerni|mus, p. 443. command's, and decree's, by
somewhat more than Apostolical, That Faith
without the least Doubting, be had by all to his

Creed; and all under the penalty of being cut off
from the Body of Christ; notwithstanding some
part of his Creed isVide Con|cil. Trident. Edit. Bin. excus. Ge|nev. A. D. 1612. Tom. 9 Sess. 4. p. 354. This, That Apocryphal wri|tings,
and meer Traditions, concerning Faith, as
well as Manners, are by all to be receiv'd with as
much Reverence and Affection, as things proceeding
from God the Holy Ghost, or from the mouth of our
Lord Iesus Christ.
Now if a Council (as the Lateran) does only
Read a Decree in Fieri, And a Pope (as the
Tenth Leo) by saying Placet, does make it one in
Facto esse; If a Council cannot be currant, unless
it be called by the Pope, and by the Pope praesided
in; yea if nothing don in it can pass for currant,
until the Pope hath approved of it, or until he
hath made it become Authentick by an Act of his
Will, or by a word of his Mouth; Mr. Cressy,
and Father Iohnson, who do so earnestly contend
for a subcoelestial Infallability, cannot chuse but
believe, (if at all they believe, as well as plead it,)
That its real Inherence is in the Pope, and only
said to be in the Church, because it does more
become the Error, and set it off to the People with
better Grace. The Reason of what I say is very
cogent in it self; and that it may be so to others,
I thus endeavour to make it plain. They say

that Councils are not currant, unless approved of
by the Pope. Nor does he give his Approbation,
until the Council is at an end. His Approbation
is after; and not before it. From whence 'tis
natural to Inferr, That he approve's not of the
Council, because Infallibly good and therefore cur|rant;
(it would not then need his Approbation:)
But the Council is good and currant, because He
approve's it. And why should That be said,
unless because He is Infallible with Them that
say it? Thus (I say) it is to Them, not Thus
in It selfe. For then there would follow this
other Absurdity, That if The Council hath
err'd, it is because the Pope hath not approv'd it.
For let him but approve, and It hath not err'd,
because it hath every thing required to its In|fallibility.
If not, let them speak; for I argue
only ad homines, and (out of very great charity)
try to make them asham'd with their own De|vices.
. 14. Now (to speak a gross Truth,) The
Approbation of a Pope, when a Council hath don
with its Consultations, cannot possibly have the
virtue to effect that such a Council shall not have
err'd. For if it hath erred it is erroneous, though
He approve's it. If not, it is orthodox, though

He rejects it. The Emperours who call'd the
first and truest General Councils, did either not
care for, or not expect his Approbation. Yet
Those were the Councils, either not erring at all,
or at least the least erring of any other.
. 15. But let us yield Mr. Cressy yet more
Advantage, and suppose him only to mean what
once he saith, (for he saith so many things, that
he seem's to have many, and even contradictory
meanings,)Ch. 9. p. 95. Sect. 7. A Church represented by her Pastors
out of All Nations, which Pastors out of All
Nations make aConcilia Ge|neralia dicun|tur ea, quibu interesse pos|sunt  debent Episcopitotius Orbis, (nisi legitim impe|diantur)  quibus nemo rect praesidet nisi Summus Pontifex, aut alius ejus no|mine. Inde n. dicuntur Oe|cumenica, i. e. Orbis Totius Terrae Conci|lia. Bellarm. Controv. To. 1. l. 1. de Concil. c. 4. p. 1096. General Council; And that
This only is the Church, to which he ascribes
Infallibility. To which I answer, by two De|grees.
First by observing, that he takes for
granted what is false. For there was never such
a Council, as to which All Nations did send their
Pastors, and by consequence The Church was
never so Represented; and by consequence never
Infallible, if She can only be Infallible when
so Represented, to wit, by the Pastors of All Na|tions
which have Christian Churches in them.
For, the first four General Councils were not
such in That sense; And only were called Oe|cumenical,
not for Bellarmine's Reason, but be|cause
they consisted of all the Pastors who were

sent from Those Nations which made up all the
Roman Empire, whose Emperours (by a figure)
were call'd the Masters of the world.. Concil. Chal. Act. 1. Bin. To. 3. p. 50. Beyond
the limits of the Empire, None of those, or after-Councils,
did ever reach. None went thither out
of Persia, India, the Inmost Arabia, and Aethiopia,
wherein the Churches were never under the Ro|man
Empire; Nor yet out of Britain, France,
and Spain, when, being parted from the Em|pire,
They became the Peculiar of other Prin|ces.
And as the Empire grew scanty, so the
Councils in proportion did grow less General.
Whose Greatness is to be measur'd, not by
the number of the Bishops, but by the multi|tude
of the Churches, and by the Greatnesse of
the Regions from which they come. But since
the Bishops of Rome, with other Rights of the Ro|man
Empire, have invaded This also, of calling
and praesiding in General Councils, they have
been only call'd General, for being a Confluence
of Pastors out of all the Papal Empire. And
therefore, according to Mr. Cressy, They could
not possibly be Infallible, because not such, as
to which All Nations did send their Pastors.
. 16. Next I answer by observing that the
learned'st Romanists cannot agree, about the

Nature, or Number, of General Councils. For,
first as to the Nature, The General Councils of
the Romanists areQuaedam sunt ab Apo|stolica sede approbata, at|que ab Eccle|si univers recepta; quae|dam omnino reprobata; quaedam par|tim reprobata, partim appro|bata; quaedam nec approbata, nec reprobata; Bellarm. ubi sup. p. 1097. thus divided by themselves;
Some (say they) are approved by the Sea Apo|stolical,
and received by the Catholick Church. ^2
Some are absolutely reprobated. ^3 Some are re|probated
in part, approved. ^4 Some
are neither reprobated, nor approved. Now since
each of these sorts is said by Romanists to be Ge|neral,
and General Councils in the general are also
said by the same to be Infallible; What else do
they say, in effect substance, but that the Church
represented in General Councils is either absolutely
Infallible, (as in the first species of General
Councils,) or altogether fallible, (as in the se|cond;)
or partly Infallible, and partly fallible,
(as in the third;) or neither fallible, nor infallible,
(as in the fourth.) If General Councils cannot err,
Why then do they reprobate, or doubt any of
them? If they have sufficient reason both to
reprobate some, and to doubt of others, Why do
they callpag. 1105, 1107, 1109. Et inde con|stat, locutum esse Bellar|minum ex sententia su, quia sic claudit Parti|tionem, Quod membrum postremum in Confiliis particulari|bu potissimu~ locum habet. p. 1097. Ergo membra pri|ora in Gene|ralibus, ut  postremum aliquatenus, etiamsi non potissimum. Them General Councils? or, if Gene|ral
Councils can be doubted of at all, and that by
Them too; By what Infallible Token shall they
know, either that the Councils are truly General,
and Genuine; or at least, that being such, they
are Infallible? Of Bellarmine's 18 General Coun|cils,

which are his first and best species, he
proves the Approvedness and validity by the
Pope's praesiding in, or approving of them.
His General proof is but this, [They are ap|proved
of by the Pope, and receiv'd by Papists.]
And what is this but to beg the Question? The
first 8 Councils he proves to be such, by theDist. 16. Can. sancta octo. apud Gratian. p. 60, 61. De|cree
of the Pope. The Nine that follow he proves to
be approved, Because the Pope praesided in them.
And the last was confirm'd by Pius Quartus. So
that a Council's  is derived from the Pope,
and depend's upon his Pleasure. But now of
those 18. there is a very great difference. For
the first four only were received and rever'd by
Gregory the Great, as were the fourGratian. Decret. par. 1. Dist. 5. Huc spectat E|pist. Viilii Papae ad Eu|tychium, a|pud Concil. Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 593. Gospels of
Iesus Christ. Which Reverence would have
been due to the other fourteen, had they been of
as great Authority; as they needs must have
been, had all been aequally Infallible, in their o|pinion
who own them All. And yet the later
Councils had been more valid than the former, if
'tis notAbsque Ro|mani Pontifi|cis Authoritate Synodum ai|quibus congre|gare non lcet. Ibid. Dist. 17. lawful to call a Council, without the Au|thority
of the Pope, as Marcellus his Decretal af|firm's
it is not. Secondly for the Number of
their approved General Councils, I see not how it
can be agreed. For besides that theConcil. Elorent. Sess. 5,  6. Greeks

receive no more than the first seven, TheMagdeburg. Cent. 8. c. 9.  Cent. 9. c. 9. Lu|therans
but six, The Eutychians in Africa no more
than three, The Nestorians in the East no more
than two, and the Polonian Trinitarians no more
than one, (which Difference is acknowledged
by Bellarmine Himself,): I say, besides This,
I wonder when Bellarmine will be ever agreed
with Pope Paul the fift; The former rejecting
the Council at Constance from the number of the
Approved, which yet theV. Concil. Gen.  Paulo V. Edit. Tom. 4. Later does admit of
with equal Reverence. It was reprobated indeed by
a worse than it self, to wit the Council at Florence
next following after; but 'twas only for decree|ing,
that a Council was above the Pope, for which it
ought to have been approv'd. And abating those
things which consist not with the Haughtiness
(but the just Dignity) of the Popes, It is as
generally received as any other. Yet we need no
better Argument to prove such a Council above
a Pope, and the gross fallibility of both together,
than an Historical Accompt of That one Council,
as we find it set down by Pope Paul the fift.
The Third at Constantinople, which is com|monly
reckoned the sixth General Council, was
by the 14^t^h at Toledo (Can. 7.) esteem'd the
Fift. Implying the former under Vigilius, not to

have been one of the General Councils, which
yet with other Councils does pass for such with|out
Question. And so much for the Number
of general Councils, as well as for the Nature
of them.
. 17. Last of all let Mr. Cressy be allow'd
to mean at the most Advantage, That his Ge|neral
Councils are said to be Infallible, not be|cause
they cannot, but do not err; for so he most
improperly, but yet most kindly helps out him|self,
chap. 9. pag. 98.Socrat. Hist. Ecc. l. 1. c. 8. Sozomen. l. 1. c. 23. Niceph. l. 8. c. 19. But does he not think it
was an Error in the first Council of Nice, (as in
the third of Constantinople) to assent to Paphnu|tius
his , and patroni|zing
the Marriage of Priests, as both Socrates,
and Sozomen, and the RomanDist. 32. Can. Nicen. V. Concil. Constantin. III. Can. 13. To. 5. p. 326. Concil. Elib. Can. 36. Decree do alike
affirm? At least the Council of Eliberis (which
was contemporary with That) Mr. Cressy will
say was in an Error, for declaring it unlawful,
to paint in the windows or walls of Churches,
what is the object of Adoration.Concil. Nic. 2. Act. 4. Concil. Con|stant. quartu~ decrevit en|dem Imaginu~ cultum. Edit. Bin. Tom. 7. p. 1046. And so much
the rather will he believe it to be an Error, be|cause
the second Nicene General Council decreed
that Images are to be worship'd, and denounced
an Anathema to all that doubt the Truth of it.
Does he not think it was an Error in the Council

of Chalcedon,Concil. Chalced. Act. 15. Can. 28. Qui Canon enuinus est, non obstante Binii subter|fugio pudendo. Tom. 3. pag. 446. to Decree unto the Bishop of Con|stantinople,
even in causes Ecclesiastical, an equality
of priuiledges with the Bishop of Rome? Or does
he not think it was an Error in theConcil. Constanti|nop. III. Act. 13. Tom.. 5 lib. 211. Vide Notas in vitam Honor. Edit. Bin. Tom. 4. pag. 572. , c. Concil. Flor. definit. Edit. Bin. To. 8. p. 854. sixth General
Council, to condemn Pope Honorius as a Monothe|lite,
and to decree that his Name should be razed
out of the Churches Diptychs; seeing another
General Council, since held at Florence, hath
defined the Pope to be the High-Prist over all the
world, the Successor of St, Peter, Christ's Lieute|nant,
The Head of the Church, The Father and
Teacher of all Christians, and one to whom in St.
Peter our Lord Iesus Christ did deliver a full
Power, as well to GOVERN, as to feed the
Universal Church? And did accordingly exau|ctorate
the Council at Constance, for seating a
Council above a Pope? Or is it not thought by
Mr. Cressy, that This Florentine Council was in
an Error, in Granting the Roman Church a
Power of adding to the Creed, which the Gene|ral
Council of Chalcedon had forbidden to be don
under the Penalty of a Curse? as wasIbid. Sess. 5. p 593. obser|ved
and urg'd by Pope Vigilius Himself, to Eu|tychius
the Patriarch of Constantinople? Let Mr.
Cressy but compare the sixt General Council
(whose famous Canons were made in Trullo,)

with the Tridentine Canons, and the General
Practice of his Church, And (sure I am) he will
acknowledge, that the one or the other hath foul|ly
err'd. It was decreed in the sixt,, c. , c. Conc. Constant. III. Can. 13. To. 5. Edit. Bin. To. 5. p. 326. That mar|ried
men without scruple should be admitted in|to
the Priesthood, and this without any condition
of abstaining thence-forwards from cohabitation,
lest men should seem to offer Contumely unto
God's holy Institution. Yea (which is most to
be observ'd) This was a Canon made professedly
, c.  c. ibid. p. 325, 326. against the Canon of the Church of Rome, where|unto
is confronted the antient Canon, which is
there said to be of Apostolical Perfection. Here
the Doctrin and Practice of the Chruch of Rome is
condemn'd by a Council, which is owned to be
General by the same Church of Rome. The
Church of Rome is also condemn'd by the same
General Council (in its 55 Canon,) and command|ed
to conform to the 65 Canon of the Apostles
(from which they had scandalously departed)
under two great Poenalties therein express't.Ibid. p. 338. To
all which if I shall add, How the 8^t^h General
Council made a peremptory Decree,. Concil. Constant. IV. Act. 9. Can. 3. Edit. Bin. To. 7. p. 977. That the

Image of Christ is to be worship't as the Gospel of
God, That whosoever adore's it not, shall never
see his Face at his second coming, (never at least
by their good will,) That the Pictures of Angels
and all the Saints are in like manner to be adored,
And that all who think otherwise are to be Anathe|matiz'd;
I hope Mr. Cressy and Father Johnson
are not such Lovers of Idolatry and Contradiction,
as not to know and to acknowledge the Fallibility
of their Church in a general Council.
. 18. I have the rather made it my choise to
use the Canons and Decrees of Popes and Coun|cils,
(especially of such as by the Romanists
themselves are accompted General,) Because
for want of a better Refuge, when they are
press't with many things which cannot be justi|fi'd,
or deny'd, They have evermore recourse to
This one Catholick evasion, That they are but the
sentiments of private Doctors, whose ill opinions or
mistakes are not chargable on the Church. Now
though we cannot but beleive their PrivateSuch as Bellarmin, Baronius, Onuphri, Vasques, Mal|donat, Stella, Lya, Staple|ton, Pamelius, Petavius, Vi|es, Rubanus Maurus, and others. Yea Scotus, Aqui|nas, Pope Gregory the Great. The Bishops of Germany in the Council at Wormes, c. Do|ctors
(as they call them) when they are men
of great Learning, and greater Zeal to That
Cause, and only speak as Narrators touching
matters of Fact, and such as of which they might
be silent with more advantage unto themselves;

Yet I hope 'twill not be said, That the present
superiours living and speaking, to whomCh. 9. 97. Mr.
Cressy ascribes the power of Concluding all Con|troversies,
are no better than private Doctors;
much lesse will they say it of their General Coun|cils
unto which they doIb. p. 95. acknowledge the last
reeourse is to be had. And here if any man shall
ask what may be probably the Reason, why
when the Tenet of Infallibility is so far a Do|ctrine
of their Church, as it is taught and main|tain'd
by theirIb. p. 93. Present visible Governours or
their present Superiours living and speaking,Ib. p. 97. (unto
whom is ascribed the power aforesaid,) It hath
not yet been thought fitt to be credited by the
Decree of a General Council, (nor indeed of any
Council that I am able to alledge;) I know not
what Reason to render of it, unlesse I may say
that they distinguish between their Doctrines,
and their Opinions; or between Things pretended,
and Things Beleived by their Superiours; As
if the Governours Themselves (whomUbi supra. praesertim pag. 97. they
make Tantamount to a General Council) were
not able to beleive the Infallibility they pretend
to, But only thought fitt that The People should.
If any other man Can give any better reason, I
do earnestly desire that what I have given may
go for None.
. 19. And as, on the one side, Their stedfast
Belief That Shee cannot err, is enough to con|firm
them in all their Errors; So, to convince
them on the other side of that one Error, will
make them ready both to see, and renounce the
Rest. That it may seem to be a vain, or a
needless Thing, for any man to be lavish of
Time, or Labour, in a particular Ventilation of
other controverted Points, whilst This of In|fallibility
remain's untouch't, or undecided. For
if we shew them the Absurdities of Bread and
Wine being transmuted into the Body and Blood
of Christ; or of being so transmuted into Hu|man
Flesh and Blood, as to retain both the
Colour, Touch, and Tast, and all other Adjuncts of
Bread and Wine; or of its so beginning now to be
(in the Act of Consecration) the numerical Body
of a crucified Iesus, as to have been the very
same under Pontius Pilate, as well as in the
Virgins Womb; or of its beginning to be as often,
and of as many several Ages, as the Priests
as their Altars shall please to make it; or of its
being the same Body, whether eaten by a Chri|stian,
or by a Dog: They will defend them|selves
with This, That though 'tis Absurd,
and Impossible, yet it is necessarily True, because

'tis taught by that Church which cannot de|ceive,
or be deceiv'd. Whereas, if once we can
convince them that she is able to be deceiv'd,
who had taught them to believe she is unde|ceivable,
(and that in matters of greatest mo|ment,)
They cannot chuse but disapprove and
forsake her too, as the greatest Deceiver in all
the world.
. 20. That Shee is Able to be deceiv'd,
cannot better be evinced than by the Evi|dence
that Shee Is. And tis evident that Shee
Is, by her own Confession. For shee is no
where more seen than in her General Coun|cils,
whereof when any one does condemn what
Shee asserts as no Error, or when one does
contradict and accuse another, (of which I have
given sufficient Instance,) she does confess her
self Fallible, by so declaring She has been
False. And accordingly Mr. Cressy could not
righteously be blam'd by the Roman Parti|zans,
for having confessed (as he did) in his
Exhomologesis,See the use which is made by Dr. Pearson in his Preface to the Reply of the Lord Viscount Faulkland. That this Infallibility is an un|fortunate
word; That he could wish it were for|gotten,
or at least laid aside; That Mr. Chilling|worth
fought against it with too great successe;
That it is not to be met with in any Council; And

That the Authority of the Church (meaning the
Church undepraved) was never inlarged by Her|self
to so great a wideness. And as They cannot
blame him, much less can I, for confessing a
Disadvantage he could not conveniently deny.
That which I blame him for is This, (and for
This he can never be blam'd enough,) That
havingRom. Cath. Doct. no Nov. confessed Infallibility to be one of
God's peculiarCap. 9. Sect. 11. p. 98. Incommunicable Attributes, and
by consequence that the Church which he calls
the Roman Catholick, can no more be Infallible,
than Omniscient, He has yet been so transpor|ted
with Partiality to a Church he has resolved
to assert, (whether right, or wrong,) as toUbi supra, pag. 89.
communicate That to Her, which he confesseth
Pag. 98. Incommunicable; and to affirm that That is
Necessary, which he confesseth to be Impossible;
and so to espouse in a Fit of Kindness, what in
a Fit of Discretion He cannot Own.
. 2. Having thus cloy'd my Reader with but
a Tast of Mr. Cressy, I persevere in my pur|pose
not to spend or loose time upon all the
Rest; partly for the Reason aleady menti|on'd,
beeause 'twould be as well a thanklesse,
as needlesse office. Partly becasue tis under|taken
(without my Care or procurement) by

other men. Nor only undertaken, But elabo|rately
don too; not only by Mr. Whitby, (and
by Him very sufficiently,) But by a Person
of greater Eminence; after whom to sett
about it, would at least be superfluous, if
not Immodest. Partly because I am still dis|swaded
both by the Virulence of mine Ene|mies,
and by the Kindnesse of my Friends, as
well as by many my more peculiar and lesse|dispensable
Employments. Lastly because by
a little Pattern of any strong or slight Stuff,
'Tis both the cheapest and easiest way where|by
to Judge of the whole Piece.
.
FINIS.








.
OR THE
LIFELESNES of LIFE
On the hether side of
IMMORTALITY.
With a Timely Caveat against
PROCRASTINATION.
Briefly expressed and applyed in a
SERMON
Preached at the Funeral of
EDWARD PEYTO
of Chesterton in Warwick-shire Esq

.
Sophocles .
.




To my ever Honoured Friend
M^r^s^. Elizabeth Peyto
of Chesterton.
MADAM,
TO speak my sense of your many Favours,
with my reverent esteem of your Approba|tion,
and how inclinable I have been to yield obe|dience
to your Commands, the greatest expression
that I can make, hath been hetherto the least that I
think is due. And now I am sorry I can prove by
no better Argument, (at the present,) how great a
deference and submission I think is due to your
Judgment, than by my having preferr'd it before
mine own, in permitting that Sermon to lye in
Common, which I had only intended for your
Inclosure. For though the thing hath been desired
by several persons of Quality, besides your self;
yet the principal end of my Publication, is not to
gratifie their desires, whom I could civilly deny,
but to comply with your reasons, which I cannot

pardonably resist. The very piety of your Reasons
having added to them so great a power, that what
was skill in Aspendius, in me would certainly be
guilt, should I (through Avarice or Envy) reserve
any thing to my self, by which your charity doth1 Cor. 13. 7.
believe I may profit others.
Indeed considering we are fallen, I do not only
say, into an iron age, but into an age whose very
iron hath gather'd rust too, wherein the most do so
live, as if they thought they should never dye,
(at least had forgotten that they are dying, and
being dead,2 Cor. 5. 10. must be accountable for what is don
whilst they are living,) it may be labour well spent,
to trig the wheels of their sensuality; and that by
thrusting into their eyes such sad and seasonable ob|jects,
as may make them consider their latter end.
It was a custome with some of old,Deut. 32. 29. whensoever they
intended a sumptuous Feast, to put a deaths-head
into a dish, and serve it up unto the Table: which
being meant for a significant, though silent Orator,
to plead for temperance, and sobriety, by minding
the men of their mortality, and that the end of their
eating should be to live, and that the end of their
living should be to dye, and the end of their dying
to live for ever, (for even the Heathens who deny|ed
the resurrection of the body, did yet believe

the immortality of the Soul,) was look'd upon by
all sober and considering guests, as the whole|somest
part of their Entertainment. And since 'tis
true,Eccles. 7. 3. (what is said by Solomon) that sorrow is
better than laughter, for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better; where|upon
the Royal Preacher concludes it better of
the two,Verse 2. for a man to go into the house of mour|ning;
I cannot but reason within my self, that
whenVerse 4. the heart of fools is in the house of
mirth, whose customary language is such as this,
[Wisd. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Come on, let us injoy the good things that
are present, let us crown our selves with Rose|buds
before they be wither'd, let none of us go
without his part of voluptuousness, let us leave
tokens of our joyfulness in every street, let us
oppress the poor man that is righteous, and
let our strength be the law of justice,] there can
be nothing more friendly, or more agreeable to their
wants, than to invite such men to the house of
mourning, and there to treat them with the cha|racter
of the most troublesome life of man,
(which being impartially provided, will serve as
well as a Deaths-head,) during the time of his
floating in a valley of Tears.
For this is usefull to teach us all, not to be amo|rous
of a life, which is not only so short, as that it
cannot be kept long,Joh. 14. 1. but withal so full of trouble,
as that 'tis hardly worth keeping. Nor by conse|quence
to doat on a flattering world, which is so
little to be injoy'd, and its Injoyments also so full
of vexatious mixtures.Eccles. 2. 12. Again 'tis useful to in|courage
us, not to be afraid of a man that must
die,Isa. 51. 12. Mat. 10. 28. and whilst he lives can but kill the body.
Nor to scruple at the paying that common debt,
which we owe to Religion, as well as Nature;
that God may give us anMat. 25. 21. acquittance, as well
as nature: we having received an ensurance from
the infallible undertaker, that the way both to save,
and prolong a life,Mat. 16. 25. Mark. 8. 36. is religiously to lose it, or lay it
down. Again 'tis useful to admonish us, (after the
measure that we are negligent,) toMat. 25. 16. Luk. 19. 15. trade with the
talent of our time, for the unspeakable advantages
of life eternal; and to do all the work we can,
because the night cometh,Joh. 9. 4. when we shall be able
to work no more. Lastly it mindeth us, as to be
doing, because our Lord cometh, and is at hand,
so to be vigilant and watchful,Phil. 4. 5. because we know
notMat. 24. 42. what hour. In a word; the more transitory,
and the more troublesome, the life of men shall
appear to be, by so much the better will be the

uses, which we are prompted to make of its im|perfection.
And here it comes into my mind, to give you my
thanks by my observance of the seasonable counsel
you lately gave me, not to lavish out my time in
shaming the adversaries of truth, (by way of an|swer
or reply to their meer impertinencies and
slanders,) but rather to spend it in such practical
and peaceable meditations, as are likelier to for|ward
their Reformation. And though it was not
your opinion that I could not use my time ill, in
writing continuall vindications of the lately perse|cuted
doctrines of Iesus Christ, but onely that you
thought I might use it better; yet my opinion doth
so fully concur with yours, that even as soon as my
leasure serves me to pay my Readers what I have
promis'd, (that men may learn to love God, by
thinking him free from their Impieties, and may
not reverence their Impieties, so far forth as they
think them the works of God,) I shall direct my
whole studies, as you have charitably advised.
And indeed I am the fitter to take your Counsel,
because I want a fit enemy with whom to combate;
since three or four of the ablest have quit the field,
and as it were bowed to the truth of the things in
question. For though they have lately sent out a

Teazer, who (they hoped) might tempt me to loss
of time, not by disputing in any measure against
a line of what I have publish'd, but only by open|ing
a noysome mouth, in a very wide manner
against my person, and (which is infinitely sadder)
against myHe saith expresly, 1. That what|ever God foresees, and doth not prevent, (which is all the wicked|ness in the word) he may be justly said to Cause. (p. 9.) 2. That Gods absolute will is the prime cause, and necessarily productive of eve|ry action of the creature, p. 10. (and so no less of our worst, then of our best actions.) 3. That God can|not be freed from being the au|thor of sin, by such as acknowledge his prescience, p. 9. (so that either he cannot believe Gods prescience, or cannot but believe him the Author of sin.) 4. That he cannot deny God to be the author of sin, or to will the event of sin, p. 2. God too; yet this does
signifie no more, than that they are
stomackful in their afflictions,
and like the mettlesom Cynaegyrus
in no particular but this, that when
his Hands were cut off, he pursued
the enemy with his Teeth. A Prin|ted
Pamphlet comes to me, subscri|bed
and sent by Edward Bagshaw,
(with your pardon be it spoken, for
'tis not handsom in your presence,
to mention the name of so foul a thing,) which
neither the gravity of my Calling, nor the price I
put upon my time, nor the reverence I bear to your
advice, will permit me to answer in more than two
words. (and in these I shall imitate the most judi|cious
Mr. Hooker.) For whereas it amounteth to
these two things, to wit, his railing against God
as theP. 2. l. 19, 20  p. 9. l. 18. to l. 22. p. 10. l. 23, 25. to be compared with l. 32. Author of sin, and his railing against me
as a grievous sinner, (without the offer of any
proof, for the one, or the other,) To the first I say,

No, to the second, Nothing. As for his blasphe|mies
at large, his inconsistencies with himself,
his frequent confessions that he is ignorant of
what he presumeth to affirm, his impotent slanders,
his most unsavoury scurrilities, his pique at my
cassock and my cap, his evil eye upon my Re|ctory,
and female Readers, (to the honour of
your sex, and shame of ours,) last of all for his
impenitency and resolutions to persevere in his
crying sins,) against That person of all the world,
whom, next to God, and his Parents, he ought
to have had in the greatest reverence,) I shall
leave him to the mercy of one or other of my Dis|ciples;
who being as much his Iuniors, as he is
mine, may have youth enough to excuse, if not
commend them, for cooling the courage of so pru|rient
and bold a Writer. But for my self, I have
determined, so to profit by what I Preach in the
following Sermon, as not to leave it in the power
of every petulant undertaker, to dispose of my
hours in altercation. They that look to live long
before theyPsal. 16. 10. look upon the grave, may trifle
out their time with better pretensions to an excuse;
but I who have lost so much already, and have had
(as I may say) so many Trials for my Life, (at
that Bar of Mortality, the Bed of Sickness,)

which makes me consider it as a perishing, and dying
life, cannot think it so much as lawful, to dispute
it away with an itching adversary; who, how|ever
insufficient to hold up his quarrel, is yet too
restless to lay it down.
But I proceed to that Subject (from which my
thoughts have been kept by a long parenthesis)
of which I love to be speaking on all occasions that
can be offer'd, because I find so much in it, of
which I cannot but speak well; and no less to the
honour of his memory, than to the profit and
pleasure of his survivers. He was certainly a per|son,
who liv'd a great deal of life in a little time;
especially dating it (as he did) from the memora|ble
point of his renovation. When I consider him
in his Childhood at the University of Oxford (I am
sure some years before you knew him) exciting o|thers
by his Example, to mind the end of their
being there; how strict and studious he appeared
throughout his course; how much farther he went
before, (in point of standing and proficiency,)
then he came behind others, in point of years; how
much applauded he was by all, for his publick
Exercises in Lent, both as an Oratour at the
Desk, and as a Philosopher in the Schools; how
(like the brave Epaminondas) he added honour

to his degree, which yet to us (of his form) was
all we were able to attain; when I reflect upon his
progress through much variety of Learning, through
every part of the Mathematicks, especially through
Algebra, the most untrodden part of them; and
when I compare with all this, the great sobriety of
his temper, his unaffected humility, and (after a
publick aberration) his perfect return into the
way, out of which (for some years) he had unhap|pily
been seduced; last of all when I rememember,
how whilst nothing but prosperity made some in the
world to hug their errour, he hated his so much
the more, the more he had prosper'd by its delu|sion,
(which was an argument of the most generous
and Christian temper,) I think I may fitly affirm of
him, what was said by Siracides concerning
Enoch,Wisd. 4. 13. that being made perfect in a short time,
he fulfill'd a long time.
I do the rather think it a duty, to praise him af|ter
his decease, the less he was able to endure it,
whilst yet alive. And I conceive my self the fitter,
to speak a little in his absence of his perfections,
because so long as he was present, I only told him
of his faults. (Never leaving him as a Monitor,
until I thought he left them.) For having found
him my noble Friend, and (which in honour to

his memory, I think it my duty to acknowledge)
my very munificent Benefactor, I could not be
so unkind a thing, as not to afford him my repre|hensions,
(yet still attended with respect,) in
whatsoever regard I could think them useful. And
'twas the mark of an excellent judicious spirit, that
he valued me most for my greatest freedom in that
particular. Even then when our heads were most
at enmity, (by the over great influence of his Fa|ther's
persuasion upon his own) there still remained
in both our hearts a most inviolable friendship.
And yet the chiefest instance of mine, was only my
often having been angry with what I conceived to be
a sin; against which (by Gods goodness being suf|ficiently
convinc'd) he grew at last to be as angry,
as Friends or Enemies could have been. He had
impartially consider'd that sacred Aphorism, that
to refuse instruction, is to despise ones own soul.
And he who could not be thankful for being chid,
was judg'd by him to be unworthy of any honest
mans anger. Nor can I imagine a solid reason,
why he was careful in time of health, to bespeak
my presence in time of Sickness, (of which you
are able to be his witness,) unless because he did
esteem me the most affectionate person of his ac|quaintance,
by his having still found me the most

severe. To conceal his great failing, (which was
so far scandalous, as it was publick, and apt to
be hurtful by the reverence which many men had
to his example,) and only to speak of the best
things in him, were rather to flatter, then to com|mend
him. But yet as the Scripture hath said of
David, that he did what was right in the eyes
of the Lord,1 King. 15. 5. save only in the matter of Uriah
the Hittite, so I think I may say of your self|departed,
that unless it were in that one unhap|piness,
of ingaging himself in an ugly Cause,
(which yet he seriously repented, and so was fitted
for that early, but most exemplary death, which
happily opened a door to his Immortality,) his
greatest Vice was but this, that he modestly con|cealed
too many Virtues.
The remarkable manner of his departure did
most remarkably resemble Sir Spencer Compton's
(a person so singularly qualified, by Grace, and
Nature, and Education, that however his extra|ction
was highly Noble, I may confidently say it
was the lowest thing in him,) who dyed at Bruges
about the time, wherein the man of our desires
expir'd at Compton. Never did I hear of a more
heavenly Valediction to all the contentments of
the earth, than was given by these two at their

dissolutions. Never yet did I hear, of any two
farewells so much alike. Never were any more
admired, by those that saw them whilst they were
going; or more desired, when they were gon.
How your excellent Husband behav'd himself, I
have but partly related in the conclusion of my
Sermon. For though I may not dissemble so great
a Truth, as my strong inclinations both to think and
speak of him to his advantage; yet in my last
office of friendship, I did religiously set so strict a
watch over my tongue, as that I rather came
short in many points of his commendation, than
went beyond him in any one. And could I have
had the possibility to have kept him company in his
sickness, which I as earnestly endeavour'd as He
desir'd it, (but his sickness was too short, and my
journey too long, for either of us either to give, or
to receive that satisfaction,) I might have perfe|cted
that account, which many witnesses enabl'd
me to give in part.
Having thus far spoken of him to you, I must
only speak of you to others. For such as reject
what they deserve, I think it a Panegyrick suffi|cient,
to make it known they will have none. Ha|ving
dedicated my papers to a person of your In|dowments,
for whom to approve, is to patronize

them, I also dedicate your person (with the hopeful
particles of your self) to the peculiar protection
and grace of God. And as the Heirs of that Fa|mily,
which you were pleased by adoption to make
your own, have already been Lords of that seat for
more than eighteen Generations, (which I can
reckon,) so that the person whom I commemorate may
inherit also that other blessing, (as an addition to
that blessing which God hath given Him in your
self,) confer'd in favour upon Jonadab the son of
Rechab,Jer. 35. 19. [Not to want a man to stand before
him for ever,] is no less the hope, than the prayer,
of him who thinks himself obliged, as well to be,
as to Write himself,
Your most importunate Servant
at the Throne of Grace,
THOMAS PIERCE.






THE
LIFELESNES of LIFE
on the hether side of
IMMORTALITY.
A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of
Mr. EDWARD PETTO.

JOB XIV. 1.
Man that is born of a Woman, hath but a short time
to live, and is full of Trouble.

NOw ye have listen'd unto the Text, Cast
your Eyes upon the shrine too. For
that does verifie This, by no less then an
Ocular Demonstration. You see the Reliques
of a Person, full of honour indeed, but not of
years; he having had his December (I may say)
in Iune; and reaching the end of his Journy,
(as 'twere) in the middle of his Course. So
that if I should be silent upon the mention only
of this Text [Man that is born of a Woman hath
but a short time to live,] That very Hearse would
present us with a visible Sermon.
Yet something I must say, in Honour and
Duty unto the Dead; and something too, for
the use and benefit of the Living; that as Death
already hath been to Him,  it may be also to
Us Advantage; That some at least who here are
present, may go from Hence (when I have
done,) if not the wiser or more intelligent, yet at
least the more considerate, and the better Resolved
for coming hither. I need not be teaching my
weakest Brethren, (what common Experience
hath taught us All,) either the Misery, or the
shortness, or the uncertainty of our Days. But
yet recounting how many Souls do perish for
ever in their Impieties, not so much by wan|ting
Knowledge, as by abounding in the Thought|lesness
of what they know, I shall not sue be
unexcusable (having S. Peter for my example)
if I tell you those things which you know already.2 Per. 1. 12. 13. 15.
An Honest Remembrancer is as needful, as the
most Eloquent Instructor to be imagin'd, because
we do less want the Knowledge, than the conside|ration
of our Duties. S. Peter hath magnified
the office no less than three times together in that
Epistle which he compos'd a. ver. 14. little before his
Dissolution. I will not (saith he) be negligent to
put you alwayes in Remembrance, though ye know

these things, and be established in the Truth. Yea I
think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to
stir you up, by putting you in Remembrance. Again
(saith he) I will endeavour that ye may be able,
after my Decease, to have these things always in
Remembrance. When I consider that these
words were by2 Tim. 3. 16. Divine Inspiration, and that
they were written for our Instruction, yea and
inculcated upon us no less than thrice in one breath;
methinks they tacitely reprove us, for having
such wanton and Itching Ears, as will be satis|fied
with nothing but what is New. Whereas
the Thing that is to us of greatest moment, is
not the study of more Knowledge, but the ma|king
good use of the things we know. Not the
urnishing of our Heads with a Richer Treasure
of Speculations, but the laying them up within
our Hearts, and the drawing them out into our
Lives. Men would not live as they are wont,
were they sufficiently. Isocrat. . mindful that they are
men. Did they but often enough consider, how
short a time they have to live; how very2 Cor. 11. 23. often
they are in Deaths, before they dye; how much
their short time of life is moreMat. 24. 42. uncertain than
it is short; how very shortly they are to render
a strict Account unto the Iudge, (I say not of

every evil work, but) even of everyMat. 12. 36. idle word,
and of each unprofitable hour; they would not
make so many Demurrs in the important work
of their Reformation.Luk. 21. 36. The uncertainty of their
Time would make them watchful over their
ways; that how suddenly soever they may be
Caught, (by the common Pursevant of Nature)
it may not be by a surprize. That they may not
die with the Fools Motto, [Non. Polyb. l. 10. p. 603. putram] in
their mouths.
Now to consider my present Text in the
most useful manner that I am able, I must be|speak
your best Attention, not so much to the
Dogmatical, as to the Applicatory part of my Me|ditations.
It being chiefly in my design, to shew
what Profit we are to reap from all such melan|choly
Solemnities, as by many deep Mourners
are sown in Tears. What kind of Influences
and Virtues, from the great brittleness of our
Lives, are to be shed upon the Practice and Con|duct
of them. What kind of Consectaries and
Uses should flow from the one, upon the other.
I shall not therefore wear out my little Time
in any such accurate and logical Analysing of the
words, as would but serve to divert you from
the scope and drift, for which the holy man Iob

did make them a part of his Preaching, and for
which I have chosen them to be the subject of
mine own; but shall immediately consider them
as an entire Doctrinal Proposition, exhibiting
to us both the frailty, and frame of man, and
the reason of the one implicitly rising out of the
other. Man is born of a Woman; there's his
Frame. Hath but a short time to live, there's his
Frailty. Hath but a short time to live, because
he is born of a Woman; there is the Reason of
his Frailty, from the condition of his Frame.
Nor is he attended only with vanity, but vexa|tion
of spirit. As Iacob said unto Pharaoh, His
Days are Evil, as well as Few. However empty
of better Things, yet from the Bottom to the
Top, (I mean from his Birth unto his Burial,)
he is Repletus miseriis, fill'd full of Trouble.
And yet by way of Application, we may re|flect
upon the Text in a threefold Antithesis.
For
To Man as born of a Woman, we may op|pose
the same Man, as being Regenerate, and
born of God.
To the very short life he hath by Nature, we
may oppose the life Eternal he hath by Grace.
And to his fulness of misery whilst he is here

in the body, we may oppose his fulness of Bliss
and Glory.
But first let Man be consider'd in his Hypogaeo,
that is, his state of Declination, as he is born of
a Woman, and having a short time to live; and
that for this reason, because he is born of a Wo|man.
For 'tis a Maxime in Philosophy which
never fails, That Generable and Corruptible
are Terms Convertible. It is demonstrably
prov'd we must one day Dye, because we did
one day begin to Live. All that is born of a
Woman is both mixt, and compounded, after the
Image of the Woman of whom 'tis born; not
only mixt of the four Elements, but also com|pounded
of Matter and Form. And all things
Compounded. Arist. Eth. lib. 10. cap. 3. must be dissolv'd, into the very
same Principles of which at first they were
compos'd. Hence are those pangs and yernings
of the flesh and the spirit, of the Appetite and
the Will, of the law in the members, and the law
in the mind;. Id. l. 9. c. 4. the one inclining towards Earth,
from whence 'twas taken, and the other towards
Heaven, from whence 'twas sent. The truth of
this had been apparent, if it had been only ta|ken
out of Aristotle's Lyceum; but we have it
confirmed out of Solomon's Portch too: for in

the Day when man goeth to hisEccles. 12. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, 5. long home,
when the grinders cease, and the windows be dar|kened,
and all the Daughters of Musick are brought
low, when the silver cord is once loosed, and the
golden Bowl broken, so as the mourners are going
about the streets;Vers. 7. Then the Dust shall return to
the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God
who gave it. When God himself was pleased to
be born of a Woman, he submitted to the condi|tions
of Mortality, and had (we know) but a
short time to live; for He expir'd by Crucisixion
before he was full thirty four, as his younger
Heb. 2. 17. Brother, whom we commemorate, before he
was full thirty three.
Man hath a short time indeed, as he is born of
a Woman, because he is born of a Woman; for
(as it presently follows in the verses immedi|ately
after my Text) He cometh forth as a. Homer. flower,
and (as a flower) he is cut down. He flyeth also
is a shadow, and continueth not. And therefore
Epictetus did fitly argue the very great fickleness
and frailty of worldly things, first because they
were. made, and therefore had their beginning;
next because they are made Epict. Ench. cap. 21. ours, and therefore
must have a speedy End. For if we will be but
so just, and so Impartial to our selves, as to ar|raign

our Bodies at the tribunal of our Reason,
they shall be found, by composition, no more
than well complexion'd Dust.Gen. 3. 19. Dust thou art,
said God to Adam.Gen. 18. 27. Dust and Ashes I am, said
Abraham to God. He knoweth (saith thePsal. 103. 14 Psal|mist)
whereof we are made, he remembreth we are
but Dust. Were it not that theEccl. 3. 21. spirit of man
goeth upward, whilst the spirit of a Beast goeth
downward to the earth, there would beVers. 19. no preemi|nence
of the one over the other; forVers. 20. all go unto one
place, (as to the Centre of the Body,) All are of
the Dust, and all turn to Dust again: which shews
the vanity and sickness of those mens souls, who
erect such strong and stately Sepulchers for
their Bodies, for fear the poor mans Dust should
sully theirs; as if they did not remember, that
Man is born of a Woman, and that his veryJob 4. 19. foun|dation
is in the dust. Well he may have the more
vanity, but not the morePsal. 49. 12. understanding for being
in honour, and may the sooner beIbid. compar'd to the
Beasts that Perish. The Protoplast wasGen. 2. 7. formed
of the Dust of the ground. And however his po|sterity
hath been distinguish'd, by issuing out
from that Fountain through several channels,
yet their original extraction must needs be. Epist. loco super cit. e|qually
vile; (if any thing can be vile which is

of God's own making.) For All men descen|ded
out of the very same Eve; and so, by Her,
out of the very same Adam; and so, by Him,
out of the very same Earth.
The days of Man are but few then, on sup|position
they are as many as Nature meant him;
and that his glass is run out without being bro|ken,
unless it be by the hand of Time. The
whole duration of Time it self, is but the Non|age
of Eternity. And therefore Moses (as a
Psalmist) spake very fitly, when he addressed
his speech to God;Psal. 90. 4. A thousand years in thy sight
are but as yesterday, when it is past; which is in|finitely
less then was yesterday when it was pre|sent.
And 'tis the same in effect with that ex|pression
of David, the Psalmist Royal; who
said his Age was asPsal. 39. 5. Nothing, in respect of Him
who is All in All; And that (as great as some
men do seem to be to themselves and others,)
Every man is but vanity at hisIbid. best estate. What
he is at his worst, 'twill be impossible to express,
unless we shall say with David too, that he is
altogetherPsal. 62. 50. lighter than Vanity it self. Now if
a thousand years are but as yesterday, and as ye|sterday
when it is past too, how short a thing is
the life of man in comparison? how short, when

compared with the long line of Time? how no|thing,
when compared with the Circle of Eter|nity?
Threescore and Ten are all the years which
are allow'd byPsal. 90. 10. Moses to a Natural Mans life.
And though some are so strong as to arrive at
fourscore, yet that Overplus of years is butIbid. la|bour
and sorrow.. Moschion. They do not live, but linger,
who pass that Tropick of their Mortality. From
after Threescore years and Ten, they are but sur|vivers
to themselves; at least they feel them|selves
dying; and their Bodies become their
Burdens,. Sophocl. . if not the Chrnel Houses or Sepulchers,
wherein their Souls as 'twere lye Buried. The
Septuagint Translators thought fit to call it,
, and the Vulgar Latin, Eorum Am|plius,
which we cannot better express in English,
than if we call it, their Surplusage of Life;
when Nature in them is so strong, as to shoot
beyond her own Mark. Her Mark is Threescore
and Ten, if Moses himself hath set it right. Or
place it further, at fourscore; farther yet, at an
hundred; the life of man (we see) is short,
though it should reach the very utmost that Na|ture
aymes at.
But how many wayes are there, whereby to
frustrate the Intentions and Ends of Nature?

How many are there buried, before their Birth?
How many mens Cradles become their graves?
How many rising Suns are set, almost as soon
as they are risen? and overtaken with Dark|ness
in the very Dawning of their Dayes?
How many are there (like the good King Iosias,
like righteous Abel, and Enoch, and that lauda|ble
Person whom now we celebrate,) who are
taken awayWisd. 4. 11. speedily from amongst the wicked,
as it were in the Zenith or Vertical Point of their
strength and lustre? It is in every mans power
to be Master of our Lives, who is but able to
despise his own. Nay 'tis in every one's power
who can but wink, to turn our beauty into
Darkness; and in times of Pestilence, how many
are there can look us dead, by an arrow shot out
of the Eye into the Heart? For one single way
of coming into the world, how many are there to
go out of it before our Time? (I mean, before
Nature is spent within us.) Many are sent out
of the world, by the Difficulties and hardships
of coming in. We are easily cut off, even by eat|ing
and drinking, the very Instruments, and
Means of Life. Not to speak of those greater
slaughters, which are commonly committed by
Sword, and Famine, (which yet must both give

place to surfet,) Death may possibly fly to us,
as once to Aeschylus, in an Eagles wing. Or we
may easily swallow Death, as Anacreon did, in
a Grape. We may be murder'd, like Homer,
with a fit of Grief: Or fall, like Pindarus, by
our Repose: we may become a Sacrifice, as
Philemon of old, to a little Iest. Or else, as
Sophocles, to a witty Sentence. We may be
eaten up of worms, like mighty Herod. Or prove
a Feast for the Rats, like him of Mentz. A man
may vomit out his Soul, as Sulla did in a fit of
Rage. Or else like Coma, may force it backwards.
He may perish by his strength, as did Polydamas
and Milo. Or he may dye, like Thalna, by the
very excess of his Injoyment. He may be Pro|vender
for his Horses, like Diomedes. Or pro|vision
for his Hounds, like Actaeon and Lucian.
Or else like Tullus Hostilius, he may be burnt
up quick with a flash of Lightning. Or if there
were nothing from without, which could violent|ly
break off our Thread of Life, (and which be|ing
a slender thread is very easily cut asunder) we
have a thousand Intenstine Enemies to dispatch
us speedily from within. There is hardly any
thing in the Body, but furnisheth matter for a
Disease. There is not an Arterie, or a Vein, but

is a Room in Natures Work-house, wherein our
Humours (as so many Cyclops's) are forging
those Instruments of Mortality, which every mo|ment
of our Lives are able to sweep us into our
Graves. An ordinary Apoplexie, or a little Im|postume
in the Brain, or a sudden rising of the
Lights, is enough to make a man Dye in Health;
and may lodge him in Heaven or in Hell, before
he hath the leasure to cry for Mercy.
Thus ourJob 4. 19. Poma oculis tenus, contacta cinerescunt. Tertul. Apol. c. 40. p. 70. Houses of Clay (as Eliphaz the
Temanite did fitly call them) do seem as false,
and as frail, as the Apples of Sodom; which be|ing
specious to the Eye, did fall to crumbles
by every Touch. The frame of our building is
not only so frail, but (as some have thought)
so ridiculous, that if we contemplate the body
of man in his condition of Mortality, and by re|flecting
upon the soul, do thereby prove it to
be Immortal, we shall be tempted to stand ama|zed
at the inequality of the Match, but that to
wonder at our Frailty, were but to wonder that
we are Men. Yet sure if We, that is, our Souls,
(for our bodies are so far from being Us, that
we can hardly call them Ours,) are not capable
of corruption, our Bodies were not intended for
our Husbands, but for our Houses; whose Dores

will either be open, that we may go forth, or
whose Building will be ruinous, that needs we
must; we cannot, by any means possible, make
it the place of our Continuance; for though our
bodies (as saith our Saviour) are not so glori|ous
as the Lillies, yet (saith Iob) they are as
frail. And by that time (with David) they
wax old as doth a garment, how earnestly (with
S. Paul) shall we groan to be cloath'd upon?2 Cor. 5. 2. to be
cloath'd with New apparel, whilst the old is as
'twere turning? for when Christ shall come in
the clouds with his holy Angels, at once to re|store,
and reform our Nature, he shall change our
vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body. But here I speak of what it is, not
what it shall be; though it shall be glorious, yet
now 'tis vile; though it shall be immarcescible,
yet now 'tis fading; though it shall be a long life,
'tis now a short one.
It is indeed so short, and withall so uncertain,
thatPsal. 90. 9. we bring our years to an end like as a Tale
that is told. Death comes so hastily upon us, that
we never canPsal. 89. 48. see it, till we are blind. We can|not
but know that it is short, for wePsal. 90. 5. fade away
suddenly like the grass; And yet we know not
how short it is, for we pray that God will

teachVers. 12. us to number our dayes. This we know
without teaching;Wisd. 5. 13. that even then when we were
born, we began to draw towards our End. VVhe|ther
sleeping, or waking, we are alwayes flying
upon the wings of Time; And even this Instant,
whilst I am speaking, doth set us well on towards
our Journeys end; whether we are worldly, and
therefore study to keep Life; or Male-Contents,
and therefore weary of its possession; the King
of Terrours will not fail,Job 18. 4. either to meet, or over|take
us. And whilst we all are. Philo Iud. . Travelling to
the very same Country, (I mean the Land of for|getfulness,
without considering it as an Anti|chamber
to Heaven or Hell,) although we walk
thither inHunc di|verso tramite Mortales Omnes co|nantur adi|pisci. Boeth. de Consol. Phi|los. l. 3. p. 98. several Rodes; 'tis plain that he who
lives longest, goes but the farthest way about, and
that he who dies soonest, goes the nearest way
home.
I remember it was the humour, I know
not whether of a more Cruel, or CapriciousLeo Isau|rus . Em|perour,
to put a Tax upon Child-births; to make
it a thing excizable, for a man to be born of a
Woman. As if he had farm'd Gods Custom-house,
he made every man fine for being a Man; a great
Instance of his Cruelty, and as good an Embleme
of our frailty, our state of Pilgrimage upon

Earth. For we arrive at this VVorld, as at a
forreign and strange Country; where I am sure
it is proper, although not just, that we pay Tole
for our very landing. And then being landed,
we are such transitory Inhabitants, that we do
not so properly dwell here, asPsal. 39. 14. sojourn. All the
meat we take in, is at God's great Ordinary;
and even the breath which we drink, is not ours,
but His; (which when he taketh away, we dye, and
are turn'd again into our Dust.) Insomuch that to
expire, is no more in effect, then to be honest:
to pay back a Life, which we did but borrow.
Eipides in Phaenissis. ,
.
And well it were, if it were no worse: for if
the life of man were pleasant, it would the less
disgrace it, that it is short. A short life and. Eurip. in Alcestide. a
Merry, is that which many men applaud. But
as the son of a woman hath but a few dayes to
live, so it follows in the Text, that even those
few days are full of Trouble. And indeed so they
are, in whatsoever Condition a man is plac'd:
for if he is poor, he hath the trouble of pains, to
get the goods of this world. If he is rich, he
hath the trouble of Care, to keep his Riches; the

trouble of Avarice,. Socrat. in Epist. ad Anonym. p. 8. to increase them; the trou|ble
of fear, to lose them; the trouble of sorrow,
when they are lost. And so his Riches can only
make him the more illustriously unhappy. If he
lives as he ought, he hath the trouble of self|denyals;
the trouble ofCol. 3. 5. Rom. 8. 13. mortifying the flesh, with
the affections and lusts; the trouble of being in
2 Cor. 11. 23. Deaths often; the trouble ofRom. 6. 6. Gal. 6. 14. crucifying him|self,
and of1 Cor. 15. 31. dying daily. If to avoid those
Troubles, he lives in pleasure, as he ought not,
he hath the trouble of being told, that he is1 Tim. 5. 6.
dead whilst he lives; the trouble toEccl. 41. 1. think that
he must dye; the trouble to fear (whilst he is
dying) that he must live when he is dead, that
he may dye eternally. Not to speak of those
troubles which a man suffers in his Nonage, by
being weaned from the breast, and by breeding teeth;
in his boyage and youth, by bearing the yoke
of subjection, and the rigid discipline of the
Rod; in his manhood and riper years, by ma|king
provision for all his Family, as servant Ge|neral
to the whole; Not to speak of those
Troubles which flow in upon him from every
quarter, whether by Losses, or Affronts, Con|tempts,
or Envyings, by the anguish of some Ma|ladies,
and by the loathsomness of others; rather

than want matter of trouble, he will be most of
all troubled that he hath. Herodo. in Thalia. c. 43. p. 179. nothing to vex him. In
his sober Intervalls and Fits, when he considers
that he must dye, and begins toWisd. 4. 20. cast up the ac|counts
of his sins, it will be some trouble to him
that he is without chastisement, whereby he knows
he is aHeb. 12. 8. Bastard, and not a Son. It will disquiet
him not a little, that he lives at rest in his posses|sions;
and become his great Cross, that he hath
prosperity in all things. Not only the sting, and
the stroak, but the very Remembrance of Death
will be bitter to him; so saith Jesus the Son of
Sirach, chap. 41. vers. 1.
Thus (we see) the Child of man, or the
man who is born of a woman is so full of Trou|ble
to the brim, that many times it overflows
him. On one side, or other, we all are troubled;
but some are troubled on2 Cor. 4. 8. Occidere est, veare cupi|entem mori. Sen. in The|baide. every side. Insomuch
that they themselves are the greatest Trouble
unto themselves; and 'tis a kind of death to them
they cannot dye. We find King David so sick of
Life, as to fall into a wishing for the wings of a
Dove, that so his Soul might fly away from the
great Impediments of his Body.Psal. 54. He confessed
that his Dayes were at the longest butPsal. 39. 5. a Span,
and yet complain'd they were no shorter. It

seems that Span was as the span of a wither'd
Hand; which the farther he stretcheth out, the
more it griev'd him. He wasPsal. 6. 6. weary of his
groaning. His Soul didPsal. 42. 1. pant after Heaven, and
evenVers. 2. thirsted for God. And he might once more
have cryed (though in another sense) Wo is me,
that I am constrain'd to dwell with Meseck, and to
have mine habitation among the Tents of Kedar!
I remember that Charidemus in Dio Chrysostom,Dio Chrysot. Orat. 30. pag. 305. D.
compared mans Life to a Feast, or Banquet. And
I the rather took notice of it, because the Pro|phet
Elijah did seem (in some sense) to have
made it good. Who after a first or second Course
(as I may say) of living, as if he had surfetted
of Life, cryed out in hast, It is enough; and with
the very same breath, desired God to take away;
for so saith the Scripture, 1. Kings 19. 4. He
went into the Wilderness (a solitary place) and
there he sate under a Iuniper (in a melancholly
posture) and requested of God that he might dye,1 King. 19. 4.
(in a very disconsolate and doleful manner,)
even pouring forth his Soul in these melting
Accents, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my
life, for I am no better than my Fathers. And if
the Dayes of Elijah were full of trouble how
was Iob overwhelm'd, and running over with his

Calamity? when theJob 6. 4. Terrors of God did set
themselves in aray against him, how did heVers. 8, 9. long
for destruction? O (saith he) that I might have
my request, that God would grant me the thing that I
long for! Even that it would please him to destroy
me, that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off.
How did heJob 3. 1, 3, 4, 5, c. Curse the Day of his Birth, and the
Night where in he was conceived? Let that Day be
darkness, let the shadow of Death stain it, let a
cloud dwell upon it, let blackness terrifie it. And
for the Night, let it not be joyned to the dayes of the
year. Let the Stars of the twilight thereof be dark;
neither let it see the dawning of the day. And
what was his reason for this unkindness to that
particular Day and Night, save that they
brought upon him the trouble of being a Man
born of a Woman: for we find him complaining
a little after,Vers. 11. 12. Why died I not from the Womb! why
did I not give up the ghost, when I came out of the
Belly? And then for the Life of our blessed
Saviour, who is call'd by way of Eminence,
The Son of Man; as I observ'd before, that it
was short, so must I here put you in mind, it
was full of Trouble. He was therefore call'd
by way of Eminence, Vir Dolorum,Isa. 53. 3. A Man of
Sorrows. The Prophet adds, he wasIbid. acquainted

with Grief. For the whole Tenor of his Life
was a continuation of his Calamities.
The Time would fail me should I but men|tion
the hundreth part of those men, whose
short time of life hath seemed long to them, even
because they have felt it so full of Trouble. But
enough hath been said concerning the Doctrin of
the Text. And it lies upon us now to make
some Use.
First then let us consider,The Applica|tion. that if man (as
born of a woman) hath but a short time to live,
It concerns us to take up the prayer of David,Psal. 39. 4.
that God will teach us to know our End, and the
number of our Dayes,2 King. 20. 6. that we (like Hezekiah)
may be fully certified how short our Time is. It con|cerns
us to take up the resolution of Iob; All
the dayes of our appointed time,Job 14. 14. incessantly waiting
till our change cometh. It concerns us, not to say,
with the rich man in the Parable, we will pull
down our Barns and build greater,Luk. 12. 18. and there we will
bestow all our fruits and our goods: much less may
we say, with that other Worldling, Souls take
your ease,Vers 19. eat, drink, and be merry, for ye have
much goods laid up for many years: for (alas!)
how can we know, (slly creatures as we are,)
but that this very Night, yea this very minute,

either they may be taken from us, or we from
them? there is such a fadingness on their parts,
and such a fickleness on ours. But rather it con|cerns
us to say with Iob,Job 1. 21. Naked came we into the
world, and naked shall we go out of it. Or it con|cerns
us rather yet to say with David,Psal. 39. 12. that we
are strangers upon Earth, and but so many sojour|ners,
as all our Fathers were: for wihlst we con|sider
we are but strangers, we shall, as1 Pet. 2. 11. Stran|gers
and Pilgrims,Heb, 11. 13. abstain from fleshly lusts, which
war against the soul. And so long as we remem|ber
we are but sojourners upon earth, we shall
pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. And
behaving our selves among the Gentiles, as a cho|sen
Generation,1 Pet. 2. 9. 12. a Royal Priesthood, an holy Na|tion,
a peculiar People, we shall shew forth his praise,
who hath called us out of Darkness, into his marvel|lous
Light.
Secondly let us consider, that since our Life
is uncertain, as well as short, (inasmuch as we
know not how short it is) it concerns us imme|diately,
to labour hard in the Improvement of this
our span into Eternity; to employ our very short
and uncertain time, in making a seasonable pro|vision
against them both; I mean, its shortness,
and its uncertainty. For shall we be lavish even

of that, which is so easily lost, and of which
we have so very little, and every minute of which
Little does carry such a weight with it, as will
be either a kind of Pulley to help raise us up to
Heaven, or else a Clogg to pull us down to the
lowest Hell? Of whatsoever we may be wast|full,
we ought to be charie of our Time, which
doth incontinently perish, and will eternally be
reckoned on our account. Pereunt  imputantur,
the Epigammatist could say of his precious
hours.
Now the way to provide against the shortness
of our Life, is so to live, as to dye, to the great|est
Advantage to be imagin'd; and so to dye, as
to live for ever.Tobit. 4. 21. What Tobit said to Tobias, in
respect of wealth, [Fear not, my son, that we are
made poor, for thou hast much wealth, if thou fear
God, and depart from all sin, and do that which is
pleasing in his ight.] He might have said as well
in respect of wisdom, and by consequence as well
in respect of long life.Job 28. 28. For as the fear of the
Lord is solid wisdom, and to depart from Evil is
understanding; so honourable Age is, not that which
standeth in the length of Time,Wisd. 4. 8, 9. nor that is measured
by number of years, but Wisdom is the gray hair
unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. To be

devoted (like Anna) to the House of God, so
as to serve him night and day with fasting and
prayer,Luk. 2. 37. and not to content our selves with that
which is meerly lawful, or barely enough to
serve turn, (as men do commonly reason within
themselves,) but to study the things that are
Rom. 2. 8. more excellent, to strein hard towards2 Cor. . 1. perfe|ction,
to forget those things that are behind, and to
reach forth unto those things that are before, pressing
on towards the mark,Phil. 3. 13, 14 for the prize of the high cal|ling
of God in Christ Iesus, this is to amplifie our
lives, and to frustrate the malice of our morta|lity;
and as the want of stature many times is
supply'd in thickness, so this is to live a great deal
in the little time of our duration.
Ampliat Aetatis spatium sibi Vir bonus, hoc est
Vivere bis, Vita posse priore frui.
As we are thus to provide against the short|ness,
so in like manner we must provide against
the uncertainty of our time. And the way to do
that, is to distrust the future, and to lay hold
upon the present; so to live every hour, as if we
were not to live the next. Having a short time
to live, our time to repent cannot be long. And
not assured of theNemo tam Divos habuit aventes, cra|stinum ut possit sibi polliceri. morrow, 'tis madness not to

repent to-day: when we see many persons of
the most promising countenance, and the most
prosperous constitution, not only nach'd by
an early, but sudden death, why should we not
seriously consider, that we may be of their num+ber,
having no promise of the contrary, eithe
within, or without us?Cuivis po|test accidere quod cui|quam potest. Publi. What happens to any
man, may happen to every man; every man be|ing
encompassed with the same conditions of
mortality. 'Tis true indeed, that we may live
till we are old; but 'tis as true, that we may
dye whilst we are young; and therefore the la|ter
possibility should as well prevail with us for
a dispatch of our repentance, as the former too
too often prevails upon us for a delay. Nay if
we procrastinate our repentance, in hope of living
till we are old, how much rather should we
precipitate it, for fear of dying whilst we are
young? (if yet it were possible to precipitate so
good and necessary a work, as a solid impartial
sincere repentance.) For as to repent whilst we
are young, can never do us the least harm; so it
may probably do us the greatest, to post it off
till we are old. Nay it may cost us the loss of
Heaven, and a sad eternity in Hell, if we defer
our repentance (I do not say till we are old, but

if we der it) being young, till one day older
than now we are. And shall we defer it beyond
to-day, because we may do it as well to morrow?
This is madness unexpressible. For as 'tis true
that we may, so 'tis as true that we may not.
Our knowledge of the ne, is just as little as of the
other. (Or rather out ignorance is just as much.)
And shall we dare to tempt God, by presuming
upon that which we do not know? Are Heaven
and Hell such trivial things, as to be put to a
bare adventure? Shall we play for salvation, as
'twere by silliping, cross or pile? implicitly saying
within our selves, if we live till the morrow, we will
repent and be saved; but if we die before night, we
will die in our sins, and be damn'd for ever: shall we
reason within our selves, that though we know
our own death may be as sudden as other mens,
yet we will put it to the venture, and make no doubt
but to fare, as well as hitherto we have done?
what is this but to dally with the day of Iudg|ment,Sophocl. in Trachiniis.
or to bewray our dis-belief that there is
any such thing? It's true we may live until the
morrow, and so on the morrow we may repent. But
what is this to the purpose, that 'tis certain e|nough
we may, whilst 'tis as doubtful whether
we shall? Is it not good to make sure of hap|piness,

by repenting seriously at present, rather
than let it lye doubtful, by not repenting untill
anon? Methinks we should easily be perswaded
to espouse that course, which we are throughly
convinc'd does tend the most to our Advantage.
When the rich worldling in the Parable was
speaking placentia to his soul, [Luk. 12. 22. soul take thine
ease,] alledging no other reason, than his having
much goods for many years; nothing is fitter to
be observ'd, than our Saviours words upon that
occasion, Stulte, Thou Fool, this night shall thy
soul be required of thee; then whose shall those
things be which thou hast provided? However the
men of this world have quite another measure
of wit, and do esteem it the greatest prudence to
take their pleasure whilst they are young, reser|ving
the work of mortification for times of sick|ness,
and old age, (when 'twill be easie to leave
their pleasures, because their pleasures leave
Them,) yet in the Judgment of God the Son,
(the Word and Wisdom of the Father) 'tis the part
of a blockhead, and a fool, to make account of
more years, than he is sure of dayes, or hours.
He is a sot, as well as a sinner, who does adjourn
and shift off the amendment of his life, perhaps
till twenty, or thirty, or fourty years after his

death. 'Tis true indeed that Hezekiah, whilst he
was yet in the confines and skirts of death, had a
2 King. 20. 6. lease of life granted no less than fifteen years
long; but he defer'd not his repentance one day
the longer. And shall we adventure to live an
hour in an impenitent estate, who have not a lease
of life promis'd, no not so much as an hour? shall
we dare enter into our beds, and sleep securely
any one night, not thinking how we may awake,
whether in Heaven, or in Hell? we know 'tis
timely repentance which must secure us of the
one, and 'tis final impenitence which gives us assu|rance
of the other. VVhat the Apostle of the
Gentiles hath said of wrath, may be as usefully
spoken of every other provoking sin,Eph. 4. 26. Let not
the Sun go down upon it. Let us not live in any
sin until the Sun is gon down, because we are. Soph. ubi supra.
far from being sure we shall live 'till Sun-rising.
How many Professors go to sleep, (when the
Sun is down, and the curtain of the night are
drawn about them,) in a state of drunkenness,
or adultery, in a state of avarice, or malice, in a
state of sacriledge, or rebellion, in a state of deceit|fulness,
and hypocrisie, without the least consi|deration
how short a time they have to live, and
how very much shorter then they imagine? Yet

unless they believe they can dream devoutly, and
truly repent when they are sleeping, they cannot
but know they are damn'd for ever,1 Thes 5. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 10. if the day of
the Lord shall come upon them as a thief in the night,
and catch them napping in their Impieties.
Consider this all ye that forget God, least he pluck
you away,Psal. 50. 22. and there be none to deliver you. Con|sider
it all ye that forget your selves. That for|get
how few your dayes are, and how full of mi|sery.
Consider your bodies, from whence they
came; and consider your souls, whether is it that
they are going. Consider your life is in your
breath, and your breath is in your nostrils; and
that in the management of a moment, (for the
better, or for the worse,) there dependeth
either a joyful, or a sad Eternity. If our Time
indeed were certain, as well as short, (or rather
if we were certain, how short it is,) there might
b some colour, or pretence, for the posting off of
our Reformation.Mat. 24. 42, 43, 44. But since we know not at what
hour our Lord will come, this should mightily in|gage
us, to be hourly standing upon ourHaba. 2. 1. watch.
And this may suffice for the subject of our se|cond
consideration.
Thirdly let us consider, that if our dayes,
which are few, are as full of trouble, it should

serve to make us less fond of living, and less de|voted
to self-preservation, and less afraid of the
Cross of Christ, when our Faith shall be call'd
to the severest Trials.Eecl. 41. 2. O Death (saith the son
of Sirach) acceptable is thy sentence unto the needy,
and to him that is vexed with all things. The trou|bles
incident to life have made theJob 3. 20, 21. bitter in
Soul to long for Death, and toVers. 22. rejoyce exceeding|ly
when they have found the grave. If the Em|press
Cuspinianus in vita Sigis|mundi, p. 498. Barbara had been Orthodox, in believing
mens Souls to be just as mortal as their bodies,
death at least would be capable of this applause
and commendation, that it puts a conclusion to
all our troubles. If we did not fear Him,Mat. 10. 27, 28. who
can cast both body and soul into Hell, we should
not need to fear Them, who can destroy the body
only; becauseEcclus. 41. 4 there is no Inquisition in the grave.
Job 3. 17, 18, 14, 19. 18. There the wicked cease from troubling: and there
the weary are at rest. There the Prisoners lye down
with Kings and Counsellers of the Earth. The ser|vant
there is free from his Master. There is sleep,
and still silence, nor can they hear the voice of the
Oppressor.
Mors Bona si non est, Finis tamen Illa Malorum.
But we have farther to consider the threefold

Antithesis, which we ought to oppose to the
three Clauses in the Text: for as man, who is born
of a woman, hath but a short time to live, and is
full of trouble; so man, as regenerate, and born of
God, hath a long time to live, and is full of bliss.
A life so long, that it runs parallel with eternity;
and therefore (without a Catachresis) we can|not
use such an expression, as length of time. It
is not a long, but an endless life; it is not time,
but eternity, which now I speak of. Nor is it a
wretched eternity, of which a man may have the
priviledge, as he is born of a woman; but an eter|nity
of bliss, which is competent to him only,
as born of God. And of this bliss there is such a
fullness, that our heads are too thick to under|stand
it. Or if we were able to understand it,
yet our hearts are two narrow to give it entrance.
Or if our hearts could hold it, yet our tongues
are too stammering, to express and utter it. Or
if we were able to do that, yet our lives are too
short, to communicate and reveal it to other
creatures. In a word, it is such, as not only eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, but it never hath en|tred
into the heart of man to conceive. Incompre|hensible
as it is, 'tis such as God hath prepared
for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
If we compare this life, with the life descri|bed
in the Text, it will several ways be useful to
us; for it will moderate our joyes, whilst we
possess our dear friends; and it will mitigate our
sorrows, when we have lost them; for it will
mind us that they are freed from a life of misery,
and that they are happily translated to one of
bliss. Nay if we are true lovers indeed, and
look not only at ourPhilip. 2. 4. own interest, but at the
interest of the parties to whom we vow love, we
even lose them to our advantage, because o
theirs. Lastly it sweetens the solemn farewel,
which our souls must take of our mortal bodies;
we shall desire to be dissolved, when we can groun|dedly
hope we shall be with Christ; we shall groan,
and groan earnestly, to be uncloathed of our bodies
with which we are2 Cor. 5. 23, 24. burden'd; if weVers. 7. live by this
faith, that we shall shortly be cloath'd upon with our
house from Heaven. We shall cheerfully lay
down our bodies in the dust, when 'tis to rest
in his peace, who will certainly raise us by his
power, that we may rest and reign with him
in glory.
THus have I don with my Text, though but
in the middle of my Sermon; and but
briefly consider'd it in its Antithesis, because not
pertinent any otherwise, then by affording unto
Mourners an use of comfort. And because I am
confident, that there are many such here, (when
I consider how many losses lye wrapt in one,)
not only wearers of black, but serious Mourners,
whose very souls are hung with sable, and
whose unaffected sorrow do call for comfort; I
shall furnish you with matter of real joy, from
the ground and occasion of all your sorrows.
For there is yet another Text, upon which I
must give you another Sermon. A Text, I say,
whose matter and form have been divided by
God and Nature. Alexis in Olympiodoro. The inward form is ascen|ded,
to him from whom it came down; but
the outward matter still lies before us. And
well may that person become our Text, who
was himself a living Sermon; since the integrity
of his Life was truly Doctrinal, and the resplen|dent
piety of his Death a very pertinent Applica|tion.
I am sure 'tis well known in another place,
and therefore I hope 'tis believ'd in this, that I
am none of their number, who use to scatter a|broad
their Eulogies upon every man's Hearse,

meerly as customary offerings, or things of
course. Those alone are my seasons wherein to
make narratives of the dead, when it may righ|teously
be don for the use and benefit of the li|ving.
Ye know that Jesus the Son of Sirach
does set himself solemnly to the work: and that
with an ,Ecclus. 44. 1, 2, 3, c. Let us now praise fa|mous
men. Men renowned for their power; men of
knowledge and learning; wise and eloquent in their
instructions. Rich men furnished with ability, and
living peaceably in their habitations. There be of
them that have left a name behind them, that their
praises might be reported. And some there be who
have no memorial, who have perished as though they
had never been, and are bcome as though they had
never been born, and their children after them. But
these were merciful men, whose righteousness hath
not been forgotten;. Eurip in Heub. their bodies are buried in peace,
but their name liveth for evermore; for the people
will tell of their wisdom, and the congregation will
shew forth their praise.
Our honour'd Brother now departed (I will
not say the unhappy, but) the now-blessed Sub|ject
of this solemnity, as he deserves a noble
Eulogie, so he needs none at all: He being one
of those few of my particular acquaintance, of

whom I have seldom or never heard an ill word
spoken. But in this one thing, he had the least
resemblance unto his Saviour, who was hated
by many, despis'd by more, and basely forsaken
almost by all. This is therefore no commenda|tion,
on which our Saviour proclaims a Woe
Woe be to you when all men speak well of you. Nor
do I say that this worthy Gentleman was ill
spoken of by none, (he was sure too worthy to be
so befriended by the world,) I only say that I
have seldom or never heard it.James 4. 4. And he was so
much the less obnoxious to the dishonesty of the
Tongue, because (as far as his Quality would
give him leave) he ever delighted in that obscu|rity,
which most young Gentlemen are wont
to shun. For although his extraction (we know)
was noble, and his fortune extreamly fair; though
his natural parts and abilities were truly great,
as well as greatly improved by Art and Industry,
(he having been Master of many Languages,
and (I am sure) well vers'd in great variety of
Learning,) yet still his modesty and his meekness
were so much greater than all the rest, that (in
a perfect contrariety to the vain-glorious and
hypocritical) he never turn'd his worst side out|wards.
The late retir'dness of his life made

him so blameless and inoffensive, that I suppose
it hath ditted the mouth of envy.
It was no doubt an effect of those two vir|tues,
(I mean his modesty, and his meekness,)
that he so constantly observ'd that Apostolical
Precept,.Hom. . James 1. 19. For He, if any man liv|ing,
was swift to hear, but slow to speak. And
when he thought it his turn to speak, it was ra|ther
much, than in many words. As the speech
of Menelaus describ'd by Homer, so perfectly
free were his discourses, from the fault of imper|tinence,
or superfluity.
So far was He from sitting down in the chai
of the scornful, (as too many of his quality are
wont to do,) nay so far from walking in the
counsels of the ungodly, (from the time that he
found them to be such,) that he made it his care
and chiefest caution, (in his later years more
especially,) not so much as to stand in the way
of sinners.
For as much as I could judge of him, (who
had the happiness to know him for many years)
he was a true Nathanael,Joh. 1. 47, 48. an Israelite indeed;
who, though he had many Imperfections, as one
who was born of a Woman; yet he had sure no
guile, as being also regenerate, and born of God.

Methinks I hear him now speaking to all that
knew him,1 Sam. 12. 2, 3. as Samuel did to all Israel; I have
walked before you from my childhood to this day.
Behold here I am, witness against me before the
Lord; whose Oxe have I taken; or whose Ass have
I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have
I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any
bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith, and I will re|store
it? To which methinks I here the Answer
which was made to Samuel in the next verse,
thou hast not defrauded,Vers. 4. nor oppressd us.
Tis this that speaks a man right honest, which
is a nobler Title, than right honourable; though
I may say very truly, that he had many due
titles of honour too. For not to speak of his
Ancestors, who came in hether with the Con|quest,
and that from the City Poitou in France,
(from whence they derived the name of Peyto,)
I think it more for his honour, to have been ma|ny
ways. Chyst. Hom. (in Gen). 3. good; to wit, a good Husband, and a
good Father; a good Master, and a good Friend;
a good Neighbour, and a good Landlord; a good
Christian, and a good Man. And, which is a
sign of more goodness than all the rest, he never
thought he was good enough; especially in the
first, and the two last particulars.
It is an excellent ingredient in that religious
composition, which he had sent before him to bless
his soul, and left behind him in memory to perfume
his Name too, that having been charged with a
debt, (whether by his Fathers last will and te|stament,
or by the condition of the times, or
by both together,) he was ever in some pain till
he had paid that debt, or at least had made pro|vision
for it; because until he had don justice,
he knew he could not so well shew works of
mercy; and that was doubtless a pregnant to|ken
of walking humbly with his God. The three
grand Duties which God requires, in the sixth
Chapter of Micah, at the ninth verse.
The end of Christs coming into the world,
was to make us live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. (Tit. 2. 13.) the first im|plying
our whole duty towards our selves, the
second towards our neighbour, the third towards
our God. That extraordinary person, of whom
I speak, doth seem to me, as well as others, to
have reached those ends. He was so eminently
sober, that I believe he was never known to have
sinn'd against his own body in any kind; so
eminently righteous, that (as I said) he was in
pain, till he had rendred to every man his due.

Being so sober, and so righteous, he is inferred to
have been so godly too, as to have liv'd in oppo|sition
to those professors of Christianity, who
having a form only of godliness, deny the power of
it; for give me leave to tell you, what is not
every day consider'd, The most material part of
godliness, is moral honesty. Nor was there any
thing more conspicuous in the holy life of our
blessed Lord. The second Table is the touch|stone
of our obedience unto the first. And to
apply what I say unto the honourable person of
whom I speak, we may conclude him to have
lived the life of faith,Gal. 3. 11. because we find him to
have dyed the death of the righteous.Num. 23. 10.
To pass on therefore towards his death, as
the fittest transition unto his burial; I am en|abled
to say of him, (by such as were eye and
ear witnesses,) that he abundantly injoyed [that
] that happy calmness of death, which the
Emperour Augustus was wont to pray for. I
say he injoy'd it in both acceptions of the word
For first however he was sick of a burning Fea|ver,
(which carried him up, like Elias, in a
fiery Chariot,) yet he had this rare happiness
which is the priviledge but of few, that he even
ijoyed his whole disease, without the least taint

of deliration. That knot of union betwixt his
body and his soul, was not violently broken, but
very leasurely untied; they having parted like
two friends, not by a rude falling out, but a lo|ving
farewell. Thus was his Euthanasia in the
first acception of the word. But he had it much
more, as to the second. For
Two things there are, which are wont to
make death terrible. The first is suddenness,
the second, sin. He was so arm'd against the
first, that he did not only take care for the setting
his outward house in order,King. 20. 1. that nothing in this
world might trash his flight towards a better;
but also sent for the Divine, to imp the wings of
his devotion; and farther told his Physician,
that God had sent him his summons; so well was
he arm'd against the first of those Phobera, and
that by the help of our English Litany, which
prompts us to pray against sudden death; and
which he commanded one of his servants to
assist him with upon his death-bed, bestowing
upon it (when he had don) a great deal of holy
admiration.
Again, so well was he prepared against the
second, that for the tenderness of his conscience,
and his deep resentment of all his sins, those of

the times more especially, in which he deplo|red
his unhappiness that he had had a great share
(till God was pleas'd in much mercy to shew
him that errour of his judgment, by which the
errour of his practice was bred and cherish'd;)
Next for his hatred of himself in remembrance
of them, (though we may say, that in compari|son
with many others alive and dead, he had
kept himself unspotted from the world;)Jam. 1. 27. Then
for his stedfast resolutions of better life, of ma|king
ample satisfaction for every ill that he had
don, and so of bringing forth fruitsLuk. 3. 8. Act. 26. 20. worthy of
repentance, (if God should be pleas'd to inlarge
his time;) and last of all for his sollicitude, that
all hisJosh. 24. 15. family might live in the fear of God,
and redeem those opportunities, which he seem'd
(unto himself) to have sometimes lost, or neg|lected;
I say, in all these respects, he appears to
me, (as well as to others,) a more than ordinary
Example.
But some may say,Object. that sick persons are ever
sorry for their sins; but it is many time a sorrow
squeez'd out by sickness. And as soon as they
recover, they do relaps too.
To which I say,Answ. that though 'tis often so in
others, yet in this exemplary Christian it could not
be so. For
First it was a mark of his sincerity, that he
look'd upon his failings, as through a Micro|scope;
which made them seem nearer, and very
much greater than they were. He warn'd all
those who stood about his sick bed, to beware
of those sins which the world calls little; and
of the n-little sins which the world calls none;
yea from the very least1 Thes. 5. 22 appearances and oppor|tunities
of sin. It was his own expression, that
all the sins of his former life did even kick in his very
face;Prov. 5. 8. yet he remembred theMat. 20. 9. labourer, who
went late into the Vineyard, and was rewarded
He also made some reflections upon theCito igno|scit Dominus quia cito^ ille convertitur. Abro. in Luc. 23. 43. thief
on the cross; that his faith might steer an even
course, betwixt the Scylla of despair, and the
Charybdis of presumption.
Secondly, It was another good token of his
sincerity, that he was not meerly a death-bed pe|nitent,
whose repentance too too often is but
[a ] a sorrow according to the world; but
(as divers persons can witness) he began the
great work in his time of health; so as his sick|ness
did but declare his having been a2 Cor. 5. 17. new crea|ture
by2 Cor. 7. 9. change of mind, and that he did not fall
back, butPhil. 3. 14. press forwards towards the mark,
and persevere in so doing unto the. Mat. 24. 13. end.
Thirdly, 'Twas another mark of his since|rity,
that he insisted on the nature of true repen|tance,
which still importeth an amendment, and
reformation of life. Nor had he a willingness
to recover his former health, unless to the end
he might demonstrate his renvation, by that care|fulness,
that fear, that indignation, that vehe|ment
desire, that zeal, yea that revenge, which
S. Paul hath recorded as the effects of a godly
sorrow in his Corinthians.2 Cor. 7. 11. Abhorring and deplo|ring
those desperate notions of Repentance,
which the world is so commonly mistaken in.
Fourthly, 'Twas a comfortable token of his
sincerity, that he was obstinate in his Prayers,
against the precept of his Physician; and resolv'd
to pour out his soul, though to the prejudice of
his body. As if he were piously ambitious of
being too strong for his own infirmities; when
a reverend Divine (who was standing by) would
fain have don that office for him, at least as a
Deputy to his lungs only, that he might not
spend his few spirits as yet left in him; he made
him this resolute, and hasty, but pious answer,
that whilst a Tongue was in his head whereby to
speak, and whilst he had breath in his body to move
and animate his Tongue, and whilst he had lungs in

his brest to supply his breath, he would shew forth
the goodness and the glory of God, who had been
pleas'd to do so great thing for him. And in a
mercil Answer to all his Prayers, which he
continued to the amazement of all that heard
him, (after some conflicts which he had had
with the ghostly enemy, to make him happier in
a victious, than he could possibly have been in
an untry'd innocence,) God was pleased (very
signally) to reveal himself to him, to speak peace
unto his Conscience, to fill him inwardly with joy
in the Holy Ghost, to give him some glimmerings
and fore-tasts of the glory to be revealed. That
I may use his own words, (which, as he came
out of a Trance, he was heard to speak,) he had
a ravishing glimps of the Beatifick Vision; mean|ing
thereby (as I interpret) that God had re|freshed
his drooping spirits with his unspeak|able
comforts; saying unto his soul, I am thy
salvation, or this day salvation is come to thy house.
So that now being plac'd above the level of
temptations, and exempted from the fear of
what the * red Dragon could do unto him, he
cheerfully lifted up his head, and fixt his eyes up|on
Jesus, the author and finisher of his faith, and
for the joy that was set before him, expected the

Advent of his death, as of a very dear friend.
Fifthly, It was another great sign that his
heart was right towards God, and therefore not
treacherous to himself, that he extended his
care to the souls of others, with as true a cha|rity,
as to his own; exhorting one in particular
against the love of this world; charging another
to be watchful against intemperance, and debauch;
exciting a third unto frequent and fervent prayer.
I do but mention the several subjects, on which
he treated like a Divine. To all his servants in
the general, and to three of them in special,
(for his words likeExod. 16. 18. Manna in the wilderness,
and the ApostlesAct. 2. 45. doal, were discreetly proportio|ned
to every one as he had need; so as they who
had most of his Deathbed instructions had no|thing
over, and they who had least had no lack,)
I say, in general, and in special, he was by his
precepts, as well as practice, (even as righte|ous
2 Pet. 2. 5. Noah) a true Preacher of Repentance. Nor
did his care end here. But
As it were in imitation of good old Iacob,Gen. 49.
before he was gather'd to his fathers, he gave a
blessing to all his children. And farther gave it in
charge to his virtuous Consort, whom he wor|thily
esteemed his dearer self, (and of whom he

also requested pardon, if by any cross word he had
ever greved her,) not to educate his children, so
much to learning and other accomplishments, as to
the knowledge, and service, and fear of God. Nor
was it a little to his advantage, that he was
careful to have them season'd with those his
last Principles, which by his later experience he
found the best.
Not to be endless upon the subject, (on
which it is difficult not to be long, and yet im|possible
to be tedious,) he was briefly all that,
which I pray God of his mercy to make us all.
That whensoever he shall appear unto us, in
death, or in judgment, we may be found, like
wiseMat. 25. 7, 8. Virgins, with oyl in our lamps. And that
together with this our Brother, (whose remem|brance
(like that ofEccl. 49. 1. Iosias) will ever be sweet
unto us as musick at a banquet of Wine,) we may
be joyned in Consort with the quire of Angels,Heb. 12. 22, 23.
and with the general Assembly of the First-born
which are written in Heaven, and with the souls of
just men made perfect, singing Hosanna's and
Hallelujah's,Rev. 5. 13. to him that sitteth upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for evermore.
FINIS.





VIR
Explorata Integritate,
Gravitate morum Primaeva
Annumerandus Patribus;
Scientiarum lumen omnium,
Supraque scientias eminens
Humilitate summa:
Innocenter doctus, 

EDOARDUS PEYTO
De Chesterton in Agro Warwicensi
ARMIGER,
Ex Antiquo PICTAVORUM stemmate oriundus,
EDOARDI PEYTO
Equitis Aurati
Filius Unigenitus:
Uxorem duxit ELIZABETHAM
GREVILLI VERNEY
De Compton-Mordake in eodem Agro
Equitis Aurati
Filtam Unigenitam:
Lectissimam pariter  Dilectissimam foeminam.

Compar Conjugium!

Cujus ex felici Copula
Manavit sexus utriusque Trias,
Altera Filiorum, Edoardus, Guilielmus, Franciscus,
Altera  Filiarum, Elizabetha, Catharina, Margareta,
Patris simul;  Matrus Ectypa:
Virorum  Foeminarum olim Exemplaria.


Proh Dolor!
Tantae Familiae  Virtutis Instauratorem brevem,
Primo velut in Molimine fatiscentem;
In ipso aetatis store decussum,
!


Tamen Querelarum desine.
Quippe saeculi pertaesus, Maturus Coelo,
Et praeproper laborans Maturitate,
Perfectionem vitae cum Immortalitate commutavit,
Anno Aetatis supra XXX^m currente Tertio,
Salutis Reparatae MDCLVIII.
VIII^o. Calendas VII^b^r^e^s^.


Anima, Christi appetentissima, in Christi gremium evolavit;
Coelorum, qu dudum ascenderat, tandem Incola:
Corpus reclinavit in Pulveris Dormitorium;
Sic etiam Christum in sepulchro quaeritans.
Telluris sarcina subter tellurem deposita;
Incolumes reliquiae sub Domini custodi.


.
.
,
.

FINIS.



THE TABLE
OF
PARTICULARS.

A
A Dam, Subjected even in In|nocence
to a threefold Law.
Pag. 204.
Affliction, Necessary to all, p. 93,
94. A Mark of Gods Favour,
p. 102, c. 107. 129, c.
They lye the heaviest on Gods
own people, 134, 137, 139, 140,
c. 468.
Antiquity, Courted in Art and Na|ture,
p. 349, 50. In Policy, and
Religion, 351, 352. The pre|tense
of most hereticks, 355, 456.
that to be prefer'd which is near|est
the beginning, ibid. prov'd
by Instances, 360, 361. The
only reason of the Secession of the
Church of England from the
Church of Rome, 362, 363. c.
Apostles, Describ'd in their basest,
and best estate, p. 314, 315.
Their aequality, 368.
Authority, Divine in the profanest,
p. 211, 212, 240. Not to be cen|sur'd
by the People, 213. How
it differs from Power, 248. To
be reverenc'd in the worst, as in
the best of Mankind, 248, 249.
Submitted to by Christ, p. 293,
294.


B
Bishops, Necessary to Monarchy,

p. 18, 19, 20. Chief in their own
Dioceses, 368, 369.


C
Ceremonies, Their use, and In|nocence,
asserted by all Prote|stant
Churches, and Mr. Calvin,
p. 205, 206.
Councils, Their dependance on the
Pope, p. 412, c. One out of
all nations never was, 418, 419.
Many of them reject each other,
420, 421, c. The Doctrines,
and Practices of the Papists con|demn'd
by not a few of them,
423, 424, c.
Clergy, Their Prosperity the Lay|mans
Privilege, p. 17, 18.
Charity, To enemies npon the Mo|tives
of generosity, p. 28, 29.
Christ, why he needed a Conformity
to the law for uncleanness, p. 275,
276, c. his presentation, 278,
c. How to be presented by us,
286, 287.
Christian, Wherein his Bravery
consists, p. 63, 64. how a disgrace
to Christianity, p. 153, 154. and
how a Glory, p. 165, 166. should
press after Perfection, 323, 324.
Church, The rightful Power re|duc'd
to four heads, p. 196, 197,
c. The necessity of its Autho|rity,
199, 200, c. For the
ending of strife, 216, 217.
Conscience, unaffectedly tender, p.
89, 90.
Consideration of how great use,
451, c.
Controversies, Their unseasonable|ness,
439, c.
Custome, How the same from God,
and Belial, p. 262.


D
Death, often to be thought of, p. 436,
437, c. desirable, p. 467, c.
478. An Instance of an happy
calmness of Death, p. 487, 488.
Deliverance, Compared to the day,
p. 16, 17, c. should be an in|forcement
to change of life, p. 23.
Despair, Good, and Evil, p. 88,
89, c.
Devil, How Instrumental to our
Good, p. 104, 105, c.
Divorce, Why only permitted by
Moses, p. 353, 354. Allowed by
the Papists, contrary to the Law
of Christ, p. 381, 382.
Drollery, Its dangerous Tendency to
Profaneness, p. 335, c. 338,
339.


E
Enemies, Not to be Insed over,

p. 10, 11. but rather obliged,
p. 27, 28.
England, Characters of its state be|fore
his Majesties Restauration,
p. 12, 13, c. p. 43, 44, c. p.
58, 59. p. 149. The Kings
thereof Absolute, 385. How by
degrees incroached on by the
Pope, 386, 387.


F
Faith, How in many who think they
want it, p. 90. Its Victory over
our sufferings, p. 165, 166, 167.
Fortitude, Wherein it stands, p.
64, 65.
Fear, How useful, p. 83, 84, c.


G
God, How the Author of all our suf|ferings,
and the sole support in
them, p. 161, 162, c. To be
serv'd with the best of what we
are or can, p. 281, 282, c.
Gospel, How spread through the
world, p. 315, 316, c.
Gratitude, Its Generosity, p. 31,
32. Motives to it in England,
p. 58, 59.


H
Half-Communion, Its Rise, p.
358, 376, 377. How contrary to
Scripture, ibid.
Hierarchy, Twofold, Civil as well
as Ecclesiastical, p. 212,  p.
233, 234, c.
Humility, Its proper season, p.
36. Motives to it, p. 266,
270, c.


I
Ignorance, aggravates as well as
excuses, p. 37, 38.
Impunity, the greatest punishment,
p. 132, 133.
Impurity, Legal a Type of Origi|nal
Sin, 265, 266.
Infallibility, The chief Foundation
of all Popish Errors, 357, 401,
402. Acknowledged to be In|communicable
to any Church,
429, 430.
Ingratitude, Its chief Aggravati|on,
p. 66, 67, c.
Indifferent things, what kind of
necessity they acquire to them|selves,
and how, 202, 203, c.
289, 290, c.


K
King, His Prerogative the Peoples
Privilege, p. 16, 17. His right
of calling Synods, 197, 198,
c. His presiding in, and over
them, 209, 210. His Divine
Institution, and Supremacy, p.

223, 224, c. ad p. 258.


L
Lawes, Their Original Institution
threefold, p. 203, 204, c.
Bind the Conscience though of
Humane Institution, p. 208.
Learning, The Vsefulness and
Necessity of that which is but
Humane, p. 304, 305, c. Its
Insufficiency without the help of
the Divine, p. 313, 314, c.
Its right imployment, p. 331,
332, 333, c.
Lite, Its shortness, p. 457, 458,
462, 463. Its uncertaint, 459,
473. and Frailty, 461. Its vex|ation,
464, 465, c. Motives
to, and the Method of Impro|ving
it, 470, 471; c. This
life compar'd with Eternity, p.
479, 480.


M
Magistrates, Their Ordination,
p. 232, 233, c. ad p. 244.
Their Subordination, p. 245,
246, c.
Man, Motives to his Humility
from the baseness of his Matter,
p. 267, 268, c. All equal in
what respects, p. 270, 271, c.
His twofold Original, 454, 455,
c.
Marriage, Its Primitive Institu|tion
Vindicated, p. 352, 354.
When first denyed to the Clergy,
p. 358, 379. Contrary to Scri|pture,
and the practise of the
Apostles, 380.
Mercy, How Gods chiefest Attri|bute,
p. 77, 78, c. 116, 117.


O
Oath, How it differs from Gods
Word, p. 110, 111.
Obedience, to Magistratee a good
work of the first rank, p. 211,
212. In things indifferent,
p. 293, 294.
Obligations, cease to bind in three
Cases, p. 115.


P
People, Not the Original of Go|vernment,
p. 233, c. and
p. 243, 244, c.
Persecution, Compar'd to the night,
p. 12, 13. c.
Pestilence, How much worse than
War, p. 149, 150, 151. Tends
the most to Humiliation, p. 157.
Ever laid on by an hand from
Heaven, p. 162, 163.
Popes, Many of them cofessedly
Heretical, p. 371, 372, 406,
411, 412. The Original of

their Supremacy, p. 359, 366,
367, c. Primacy of order
allow'd to them, 367, 369.
Prayer, in an unknown Tongue, con|trary
to Scripture, and the pra|ctise
of the Primitive Church,
p. 378, 379.
Preaching, Its Different Effects,
p. 320, 321.
Praecepts, Difference 'twixt them,
and a bare Permission, p. 353.
Pride, How inexcusable in man,
p. 268, 269.
Priest, His Duty, p. 325, 326,
c.
Promises, of God Conditional as
his Threats, p. 113, 114.
Prosperity, Its proper use, p. 25,
26, c. Its danger, p. 33,
34, 35. Its proper season, p. 50,
c. Its mischief, p. 51, 52,
c. Its dignity, p. 60, 61.
Punishment, Its threefold End,
p. 128, 129, c. For the A|mendment
of Offenders, p. 130,
c. For the benefit of others,
p. 134, c. For the satisfacti|on
of the injur'd, p. 139, c.
significant of the sin, which it re|vengeth,
p. 147, 148.
Purgatory, Its Original, p. 358.
Purification, of the Virgin, p. 259,
260, c.


R
Rebellion, A species of Sacrileg,
p. 241.
Reformation, Its proper Season,
and Reasons of it, p. 31, 32,
c. 61, 62. The Moderation
of ours from Rome, p. 212, 213.
From the Court of Rome, p. 388.
Its causes, p. 382, 383. Justi|fied,
p. 387.
Repentance, In what sense apply'd
to God, p. 109. Even in men it
works Miracles, p. 116, 117.
Not to be deferr'd, p. 284, 472,
c. With the danger of defer|ring
it ibid. ad p. 478. Five
Tokens of a sincere Repentance,
p. 490. 491, 492, c.
Rome, Its Church a particular
Church, and younger than Jeru|salem,
c. p. 365. Confess'd
by its Champions to be corrupt in
point of Doctrine, p. 373. And
Practise, p. 382, 383, 399,
400, 406. Is in no sense Infal|lible,
p. 403, c. ad p. 407.


S
Schisme, On whom to be charg'd,
384.
Scripture, Translated into Mo|ther-tongues,
p. 377, 378.
Sermons, The Danger of Idoli|zing

them, p. 321, 322.
Severity, The mercy of it, p. 100,
101, c. p. 107, 131, 132,
c. 146.
Sin, Worse than the suff'rings, which
it produceth, p. 131, 132, c.
p. 158, 159. How vile it makes
us, p. 267. 268.
Subjects, Their Obligations to obey
Magistrates especially the Su|pream,
p. 233, 234, c. Ad
p. 258.
Suffrings, How comforts, p. 160.
c. 164. 165.
Synod, Its power, and proper work,
p. 173, c. ad p. 218.


T
Thanksgiving, Wherein it Consists,
p. 24. 25. 70.
Threats, In all times needfull,
p. 83. 84. c. Two sorts, under
oath, and word only, p. 108.
109, c.
Tongue, Of what Importance in
Religion, p. 333. 334, c.
Tradition, Vniversal the Rule for
synods to make Canons by, p. 214,
215, c.
Transubstantiation, When it be|gan,
p. 358. 374. Impossible,
375. 428.


V
Victory, The End of it is to oblige
p. 11. 27. 28. 29.
Virgin, How Mary could need a
Purification, p. 272. 273. 275.
Universities, Their use, and abuse
p. 337. 338.


W
Wit, Being Vnsanctifyed is Mis|cheivous,
p. 338. 339.

FINIS.






