




THE SINGLE SONGS, With the DIALOGUE, Sung in the New OPERA, Call'd BRUTUS of ALBA: OR, Augusta's Triumph.
Compos'd by Mr. Daniel Purcell.
LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford at the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet, and Samuel Scott at the Middle-Temple Gate, where the first Vol. of De|liciae Musicae, and the first and second Books of the second Vol. also the New Scotch Song (numbered the first) is to be had; where all other sorts of Vocal and Instrumental Musick is sold. 1696.
Price one Shilling.




TO Richard Norton, Esquires. AND Anthony Henley, Esquires.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU having been pleas'd to be my first Encouragers at coming to Town, and since that to continue your Fa|vours to me; I thought it my Duty (as it is my Ambition) to present this part of the Per|formance to your Acceptance, as the best Re|commendation of it to the Town, and further Encouragement to the Endeavours of
Your Most Obliged, and Humble Servant, Dan. Purcell.






A Song
Sung by Mrs. Cross.
 CEase Cynthia, cease, cease, cease your fruitless tears, cease, Cynthia, cease, cease, cease your   fruitless tears; in vain you do for Pity move; Strepon regardless all your passion hears, and vows   he can no longer love; then learn of him Inconstancy,   no longer wait his being kind, but to some other Lover   fly, and banish, banish him your mind. 



Sung by Mr. Church, the Words by Mr. Io. Hanes.
 I Courted and Writt shew'd my Love and my Witt, and still pretty Flavia deny'd;   'twas her Vertue I thought, made me prove such a sot, to a-dore her the more for her   Pride; till I happen'd to sit by her Mask'd in the Pitt, whilst a crow'd of gay   Beas held her Play, when so wan-tonly free, was her smart Re-par-tee, I was   Cur'd and went blushing, went blushing away. 

II.
How Lovers mistake,
The addresses they make,
When they swear to be constant and true,
For all the Nymphs hold,
Tho' the sport be still old,
That their Playmates must ever be new;
Each pretty new toy,
How they'l long to enjoy;
And then for a newer will pine?
But when they perceive,
Others like what they leave,
Then they cry for their Bauble agen.




Sung by Mr. Leverige, the Words by Mr. Io. Hanes.
 HOw happy am I the fair Sex can defy, and can ev'ry day say that my heart is   my own, I never saw yet that Beauty or Witt, but I'de love if I pleas'd or cou'd   let her alone; I thought that my flame wou'd still be the same, for   Beautifull Celia, if Celia was true; but Love is so blind when Celia   was kind, I chang'd her for Mopsa, for Mopsa was new. 

II.
Then Phillida's Charms,
Forc't her from my Arms;
But when Phillida wou'd not grant my desire,
I presently kneel'd,
To the next that wou'd yeild,
To quench my old flame I made a new fire.


III.
Now is it not fair,
That my faults I declare;
Then Ladies be't known to all you I adore,
Since I must deceive,
Take you the same leave,
The Devil's in't if you can ask any more.




A Song
Sung by Mr. Freeman.
 'TIs vain to tell me I am deceiv'd, for Celia seems so   kind, 'twere Sin she shou'd not be believ'd, since I no cheat can find:   If flattery with falsehood lye in her soft youth conceal'd, a thousand times I'de rather dye than have the   truth, than have the truth reveal'd. 

II.
Let buisy fools in Libels raile,
Their malice I'le out-brave;
On me no scandal shall prevail,
So she th' appearance save:
For if I think I have her Heart,
My own for hers is due;
Let her but act the tender part,
I'le think the joy is true.




Sung by Mrs. Willis in the 3d. Act.
 GReat Queen of Hymen's hallowed fires, the sovereign of all Chast de   sires, that with true joy the genial Bed inspire;   See, see what bending Knees we pay thee, thus adore thee, thus,   thus obey thee; See what bending Knees we pay thee, thus, thus adore thee, thus, thus obey thee. 



Sung by Mr. Church, Words by Iohn Robens, Esq.
 WHy Cloe, why, why will you not perceive, the wounds you give, you   give my heart; why, why like a tyrant will you live, regardless, regardless of my smart: My sighs have tyr'd the pitying   Swains, my groans have fill'd, have fill'd the Grove; yet Cloe still unmov'd re   mains, and vows she'll never, and vows she'll never, she'll never, never Love. 

II.
But Cloe, oh! at length be taught,
Reserv'dness is a crime;
And if you can commit a fault,
'Tis one to fool with time:
Old age may come, your Charms will wast,
Your Beauties may decay;
Then to Love's tenders't joys make hast,
Be happy whilst you may.


III.
Single the Phaenix lives alone,
The reason for't is this;
Nature at once permits but one,
If two they'd taste the Bliss:
With envious Eyes long she perceives,
Joys other Creatures prove;
For want of which the world she leaves,
Expires in flames of Love.


 LEt others boast of liberty, I envy   not their Bliss; Amintor's Charmes have captiv'd me, and I   am only his: If Loving true be call'd a Chaine, 'tis   pleasing to endure, for who can count that   thing a pain, they never wish to cure?   



Sung by Mr. Freeman in the 5th. Act.
  IF Mortals laugh and sing, 'tis time we Gods, we   Gods take wing; To mount, to mount and   send him down the guardian of his Crown; As   trea, Astrea, who from Earth was driv'n till Albion call'd her   back, till Albion call'd her back from Heav'n, till Albion   call'd her back from Heav'n. 



A Dialogue Sung between Mr. Edwards, and Mrs. Cross.
  WHY, Why dost thou fly me pretty, pretty, pretty Maid; tho' old, I feel, I   feel Loves fire, which cannot, which cannot be quench'd without thy Aid, then   prethee, then prethee fair one be not cold, for tho' 'tis true I'm   very, very old, I still have young, I still have   young desire, I still, I still have young desire.   Nay prethee dear Nestor cease, cease this discourse, for I've often, I've often been 
  told, that for a young Virgin there is nothing worse, than to bed with a   Man, than to bed with a Man that is old. You much mistake, my   pretty fair, for old Men always constant are. I do not doubt your   constancy, for age of course must constant be; your youthfull Vigour   being gone, you scarce can think, can think of more than one. Is there   nothing then can gain you? Yes, yes there is. Here's Gold, will that obtain 
  you? Oh! fye, fye, fye. See here, see here is store of Gold, oh!   fye, fye, fye, fye, oh! fye, you'r old. No matter Child, no matter   Child, here's Gold. Well I'le take it for once, but I must have more, for   this is too little, too little to win me: Nay rather than so thou shalt   have all my store, and if that fail, and if that fail, the   Devil, the Devil is in ye. I thank you, and now I must go. And 
  I will go with yee, Oh! no, no, no, no, Why sure Child you   won't, you won't serve me so? Indeed but I must, Then give me my   Gold, No, no I never make presents to Men that are old. 

CHORUS.
 No, no I never make Presents to Men that are old.  Then give me, give, give me my Gold; give, give me my Gold. 

FINIS.




Vocal and Instrumental Musick lately Printed and Reprinted with large Additions, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet.
HArmonia Sacra, in 2 Books, containing Divine Hymns and Dialogues lately set to Musick by Dr. Iohn Blow, and Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters. Price Bound of both Books 15 Shillings, the Second Book Sticht 4 s.
Deliciae Musicae, in 4 Books, with Three Elegies on our late Queen, being the first Volume, Contains most of the Newest and Best Songs, by the late Famous Mr. Henry Purcell. The Price of the Volume Sticht, 5 s.
The whole Book of Psalms in 3 Parts, by Iohn Playford, as they are Sung in Churches: Printed for the use of several Masters in most Countries, who teach the same. The 2d. Edition in 8^0. Price Bound 5 s.
The Introduction to Musick, with Mr. Purcell's Addition, being the best Rules for Composition, Price bound 2 s.
The New Treasury of Musick, in Fol. being the best Collection of Song-Books for this 20 Years last past. Price Bound 2 s.
The 2d. Book of the Pleasant-Musical Companion, being a Choice Collection of Catches in 3 and 4 Parts, to which is added several Songs for Two Voices, by Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters. Price Stitcht 2 s.




