



LONDON'S Tryumph, CELEBRATED The Nine and Twentieth day of October, in the Year 1659.
In Honour of the much Honoured, Thomas Allen, Lord Mayor of the said City.
Presented and personated by an Europian, an Egyptian, and a Persian. And done at the Costs and Charges of the ever to be Honoured Company of GROCERS.


London, Printed by Thomas Mabb, 1659.




To the Right Honourable, THOMAS ALLEN, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
_ALthough I may seem a stranger to your Person, I am not so to your Worth and Goodnes, which have so generally spread themselves, they are rooted in mens hearts and Affections: As the glory of a City, consists in the Prudence and Magnani|mity of her Governor; so she ought to be well read and ac|quainted with his Vertues, whom she chooseth. This be|gat such Acclamations of joy

at your Election; witness your Honourable Companies, and indeed (I may speak it without Flattery) the Voice and Heart of the whole City; My Lord, these motives have induced or rather encouraged me to make this my Address  Presentati|on, not dispairing of your graci|ous Acceptance; since things of this nature have been by use, partly made customary: How|ever, I hope, the transgression (if any) carries not so ill an A|spect, but that it may come within the Verge of your Can|dor, whereby I may be licensed to subscribe my self,
My Lord, Your Honours most Humble and Faithfull Servant,
Iohn Tatham.



TO THE Worshipfull Company OF GROCERS,
THe Commons of Rome con|ceiving some distast against their Senators, under pretence of some great Oppression, did in a mutenous manner depart to the Mount Aventine; but things being brought to a head, by Ar|guments of Reason and Power, they were reconciled; And in memory thereof, they Celebrated their Games or Tryumphs; It is also reported by Macrobeus that the Romans in the very heat of of their Games Celebrated to Apollo; were suddenly inva|ded, and forced to betake them to

, and returning Conquerours, assisted by an un|known hand; Clouds of Arrows and Darts, having covered their Enemies, they found an old man dancing, and their sports in some manner continued, whereat with much joy they uttered forth, Sal|va res est, saltat senex, which afterwards became a Proverb,  is properly spoken when a sud|den evill is seconded with a good event, beyond Hope or Expecta|tion. Gentlemen, the inference needs little explanation; tis suf|ficient Providence affords us that happinesse to return to our Try|umphs, the glory of the City, an encouragement to Arts, and an Obliger of,
Gentlemen, your humble Servant,
JOHN TATHAM.





Londons Tryumph, Presented by An European, an Egyptian, and a Persian; Performed at the Costs and Charges of the ever to be honoured Company of GROCERS.
October 29. 1659.
THe whole Body appointed for the ser|vice of the day, being met together at Grocers-Hall; that is to say:

1. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants in their Gowns, faced with Foyns, and Hoods.
2. The Livery in Gowns, faced with Budge, and their Hoods.
3. The Foyns Batchellors in Gowns with Hoods.
4. The Budge Batchellors in their Gowns with Sattin Hoods.
5. The Gentlemen Ushers with Gold Chains

about their Shoulders, and white Staves in their Hands.
6. Eighteen Trumpeters.
7. Four Ensigns.
8. Fourteen Drums and Fifes.
9. The Master of Defence, and his Eight At|tendants.
10. The Banners and Standard Bearers in White Coats and Red Caps.
11. The Pentioners in Blew Gowns and Red Caps, each of them a Javelin in one hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is painted the se|veral Coats of Arms of the Aldermen, Assistants and Benefactors.
12. The Foot-Marshall and his Six Atten|dants, in Fustion Dublets and White Stockins.
13. Four Pages with White Hats and Cas|sacks, each of them a Truntion in one hand and a Target in the other, wherein is painted the Coats of Arms of the present Master and War|dens.


About Eight of the Clock the said Foot-Marshal Ranks out the said Company two by two.

Beginning,
1. WIth the said Pentioners, after them the Standard and Banner Bearers, and in the Front of the said Pentioners, placeth four Drums, Two Fifes, and two Ensigns.
2. In the second Division falls in six Drums, two Fifes more, and two other Ensignes; after them falls in six Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Budge Batchellors.
3. In the third Division fals in six Trumpets, after them the Banners of St. George, in the rear of which fals in eight more of the Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Foynes Batchellors.
4. In the fourth Division, fals in six other Trumpets, after them the Companies Ban|ners, in the rear of which, fals in ten other of the Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Livery.
5. In the fifth Division, fals in six other Trumpets, after them the Lord Mayors and Ci|ties Banners, after them ten other Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Assistants.
6. In the sixt or last Division, fals in foure Pages, each of them a Truntion in one hand, and a Target in the other; wherein is painted the Coats of Arms of the present Master and War|dens, after them fals in eight other Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the present Master and Wardens.
In this equipage of ranks two by two, they march from Grocers-hall towards the Lord Mayors house, the Foot Marshall and his At|tendants removing, the first two Ensignes, foure Drums and two Fifes next the Ma|ster and Wardens, placing himself and his At|tendants in the front, doe lead the way, till ei|ther they meet his Lordship or come to his Gate; and then removing the said Ensignes,

Drums, and Fifes to their first place or head of the Pentioners, placing himself in the Front; they led back down Cornhill and the Old-jury, by Guild-Hall Gate, there taking in the old Lord Mayor, do march up Lawrence Lain, down Soper Lain, Cloak Lain, Colledge Hill; and at the foot of the said Hill, the said Pentioners, Standard, and Banner bearers, doe open to the right and left, making a Gallory, through which the Budge and Foynes Batchellors doe pass to the place as|signed for them to dine at, the Livery, Assistants, the Master, the Wardens, and their attendant Ushers (except Pages) together with their Trumpets pass through the said Gallory to Mer|chant Taylor Stairs (at the East end of Three-Crain Wharf) into their several Barges.
The Lord Mayors Aldermen and their attendants into their Barge; and being so, all convenient speed is made towards Westminster by them and the severall Companies of London, in Barges adorned with Streamers and Banners, Wind-musick, Drums, and Trumpets, where by the way severall peeces of Ordnance are dis|charged; but the Banner and Standard Bearers, with the Pentioners, Pages, Drums, Fifes, En|signes, Foot Marshall and his attendants repaire towards Baynards Castle, there waiting his Lord|ships and the Companies return.
The Companies being landed, they set them|selves as a Guard on both sides, from Westmin|ster Bridge round Westminster Hall, through which the Company of Grocers do pass, likewise

the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their attendants, but the Livery and their attendants doe return to their Barge, the Assistants the Master and Wardens and their severall attendants march up the Chequer staires, making a Guard from the Chequer Barr to the stayrs head, through which the Lord Mayor and Aldermen doe passe (the new Lord Mayor on the right, the old on the left of the Recorder toward the said Barr) and after a speech made by the said Recorder, shew|ing the cause of their addresses,  answer made by the Lord Cheif Barron, his Lordship is Sworn; and being so, the Company fall in as before, leading to the Chancery, the Upper-Bench, and the Common-Pleas Barrs, Seales a Writ at each Court, and presently the whole Body march|eth to their Barges, and being entred and the se|verall Barges on floate, the former Ordnance (as a token of joy) are again discharged, all con|venient speed being likewise made by that body towards Baynards Castle; but the severall Com|panies to Pauls Wharfe, and other places in or|der to their making of a Guard or Gallory from the top of Pauls Wharfe, or Pauls Chaine hill, through Pauls Church yard, Cheap-side, Corn|hill, Leaden-hall-street, to his Lordships House; through which said Gallory the Company of Grocers, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their attendants are to passe.
The Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their atten|dants being landed at the foresaid place; doe meet the Foot-Marshall, the Drums, Fifes, Trum|pets,

Ensignes, Silk-worke, Pentioners, Pages, Gentlemen Ushers, Budge and Foynes Bachel|lers, set in order as at first, and ready to March, and placing himself and Company in the Front, marcheth up Pauls Wharfe-hill through Pauls Church yard into Cheap-side, and between Foster, and Gutter-laine is saluted by one Sceane, flankt with two Griffins, on the back of one is placed a Negar, on the other an Indian with Banners in the hands of both: The Sceane representeth Commerce in the figure of a young man sitting under a Canopy, supported by foure figures or young persons, holding Pendants and Sheilds in their hands, wherein is painted the badges of the foure parts of the world; his Lordship drawing nigh the said Sceane, Commerce salutes him in these words.


The first Speech.

MY Lord, 'tis thought the world was but a plain
Levell, or Champion, whil'st men did remain
In idleness, the Nurse of Ignorance;
Which lulls mens braines, in a Lethergean Trance;
At th' last Necessity seem'd to infuse
In them the Art of Arthitect, the use
Of Huts and Houses; every one began
To shew himself or more, or lesse a Man.
Left their wilde kinde of living, and did build
Cities for safety, in the which they held,
A Civiliz'd comunication, each
By a Divine instinct the Arts did teach;
Nor did they perish when the World was drown'd
Their Hyrogliphicks were in pillars found,
That by degrees succeeding ages did
Reveale to one another secrets hid;
Which though before were seeds in them, yet they
Shew'd not untill Experience taught the way.
Then did the Navigator search the Mayne,
How to steere forth, how to return again
With prize and safety? straight that art was hurld,
Into our lap, the center of the World,
By divine hand; that we in a short time,
Made our selves countrymen of every clymb,
Searching the spacious Universe, our skill,
And courage did the mouth of wonder fill,
Riding on dangers neck, as though t'were meant,
We should be Lords of the whole Continent.
Such were our darings, that, what, Histories
Forget to speak of our discoveries.
Greenland, Lapland, Michar, Isles remote
And many more, which later times denote,
Unto our Countryes glory, we made ours,
By the direction of fore-seeing Powers:
Thus are we nourish't from the breasts encrease;
Could we among our selves but mediate peace.
The antient Poets Pyramids of praise,
Did to the Honour of their Countryes rayse,
In all my reading, or my travells (Sir)
I must our own above the rest preferr.
For as th' Magnetique Courts, the Adamant
With her Simphatick faculty, the want
Of whose Assotiation makes her seem
Uselesse, regardlesse, as of small esteeme:
So we from most parts of the Universe
Are sought, rather petitioned for Commerce.
Traffique brings profit, towards which they bend,
As though their welfare did on ours depend:
Thus doe we (Sir) still by our patriots care,
Or'e take their riches at their full Carreire.
My Lord, you are Our Cities Hope, whereon
She doth rely, her Father and her Son;
Shee gave you breath, and education too,
Which made you fit for whats conferr'd on you:
Then since th' extention of Her love was such;
Your care of Her, cannot be shewn too much:
Which, as shee doubts not of, so we rejoyce,
And celebrate Your Triumphs in Her Uoice.

The Speech ended, the Scene quits the place, and (hastning towards his Lordships House) is placed in the rear of a Ship, not yet visible to his Lordship, and his Lordship, the Aldermen and their attendants pass through Cheap-side, and the Poultry; towards the Exchange they meet another Scean, representing several of the pla|ces or Countries, in which the Commodities be|longing to the Grocers trade doe grow, and the natives disporting therein, in habits of each Na|tion; on one part of the said Stage is placed a Clove Tree, in another a Nutmeg Tree and a Cur|rent Tree, on another part thereof is planted Rice, Rasons, Figgs, and Druggs; and in the Front is placed or fixed a Crockadile, with an Egyptian

on his back, a banner in his hand, at each Angle of the Stage a Nymph; when his Lordship draws nigh, the Egyptian salutes him in these words:


The second Speech.

WHere am I? What auspicious wind convey'd
Me to this Isle? what sudden thoughts in|vade
My faculties? Egyptian darkness, hence,
I now discern the cause and th' influence;
It was the soft and winning breath of Fame,
Fanning the way unto the honoured name
Of him, that this dayes Tryumphs wait upon,
Wafted me hither, and hath put me on
This bold attempt. My Lord, all Nations are
Bound to this Seat, and must Concenter here
In point of Traffique; other parts but stand
Like Marginal Notes, directing to this Land:
Or, as in times past Mercurie's Statues were
Fixt in high-wayes by th' hand of Publique care,
To point at consequents, this little Round
Is in it self a World; Istmus and Sound,
Memphis no more of your fain'd Rampiers boast;
Lysbone your Tagus, Caria your Coasts
Persia, Scythia, Parthia, Thratia,
Lydia, Syria, Syberia, Caspia,
Ty up your numerous Glories, with your Tongue,
That heretofore the want on Muses sung;
For in this Inch of Earth's comprized more,
Than all the Poets fanoi'd yours before.
It is Our wishes (Sir) your belov'd Name,
May adde a breathing to the breath of Fame;
To sound you Great and Good, that your just Fate
May fix you a firm Pillar to this State:
May You in Her, and She in You this year
Propitious be, as th' Motion of a Sphere.

The Speech ended, this Scene likewise quits the place, and is conveyed through Leaden Hall street toward his Lordships House, where mee|ting with the former, is divided into two parts; that Stage whereon the Spaniards and Negars are, being placed on the Right hand of Commerce, the Persians and Indians on the Left, and the Griffins Flanking of each; In the Front is pla|ced the Ship, and on the Right wing thereof is the Crookodile placed, and on the Left a Camel, with a Negar on his back, having a Pendent in the one hand, and with the other takes out of his Dorcers Cloves, Currence and other Fruit, and throwes among the people; and on the head of that Stage stands one in a Persian habit, with a two Attendants, on each side: The several Scens thus placed, and his Lordship with the Alder|men and their attendants coming nere, the Ma|riners presented his Lordship wih this Song:


The Marriners Song.

SInce the pan reap,
By Hazard grows cheap;



And that we are now within Ken, boyes:
Let's cast Anchor here,
No City more freer,


To Harbour sueh Iovial Men boyes:
Then merily sing, and as merily quaf't,
Let's drink up the Riches of th' World in a draught.

The Song ended, the Foot Marshal with his Company, and likewise the Pentioners, being come nere to the Lord Mayors doore, the Foot Marshal placeth the said Pentioners in a single File, on the North side the said street, and caus|eth every man to hang his Target on the top of his Javelin, then openeth the remaining part of the said Company to the Right and Left, him|self and Company passeth through, till they come to the Masters and Wardens, and then Marcheth them, and the whole Body through that Intervail, placing the Master at the Lord Mayors Gate, and the whole Body successively, on the Wing each of other, before the said Pen|tioners, and the Drums, Fises, Trumpets, En|signes, Banners, and Streamer bearers, in equall divisions as a Front Guard before them, who as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their atten|dants pass do each one perform his part; but the Lords being come nere, the Scenes being placed as aforesaid, the person representing a Persian Merchant, makes his address in this man|ner:



The third Speech.
My Lord,

THe European Traveller with Experienc'd Keyes
Opend the Gate to his Discoveries,
Shwing th' essentiall species of Commerce
The very hinges to the Universe.
The Egyptian seem'd in his discourse to Treate
Of places, and for Trade made this the Seate.
And now my Lord to amplyfy what they
Before have spoke, the Candid winds this day
Set me on Shore, as though the Twins had known,
What Tyumphs to your Honour would be shewn.
The Marriners their severall voices reare
For joy they safely have arrived here;
And brought their Vessell to their wisht for home
Laden with Easterne Treasure, Spice and Gum;
The Dulcid Trees, whose substances do bear,
Heart pleasing Synamon, Cloves, Mace Nutmeggs are
From fam'd Arabia brought, likewise from thence
Comes Casia, Myrrh, and precious Frankinsence,
From Pharo Figgs; Zant, Currans; Maligo,
Affords you Reasons; Dates and Pepper grow
In other places; Sugar and what not
But brings a benefit unto this Spot.
The manner how they grow (my Lord) you'l see,
In th' perfect Figure of each branch and tree.
Then Sena, Rhuberb, China, Rootes that doe
Not onely purify, but strengthen too,
Sarsaparella, Aggrick, then comes in
Storax, Aloes, Indico, Benjamin,
And hundreds more, that th' Indies and the Streights
Heape in to add unto your wealth by freights,
As though the Company of which y'are free
With your own Trade twisted Society
In their Commerce and profits doubtles so
And may that linck and firme affection flow
T'inrich this Citie, that the Nation may
Participate the comfort of this day;
For (Sir) the Causes our disturbance bred
Are now Composed, rage and fury fled
To their dark Celles; That by your light we move
The second Subject of Our Hopes and Love.
May to th' addition of your Name and Blood
Be attributed all that fame speaks good;
That so your praises may like lynes from hence
The Center, fill the worlds circumference.

The Speech ended, and my Lords and their company within the Gate; the foot Marshall ranks the whole body as before; and placing himself and Attendants in the Front, do lead towards Grocers Hall, and the Sceanes or Pa|geants make what haste or speed, they possibly can after them.





1.
FRom th' Indies and th' Streights,
We come with full freight,
To add to your Wealth,
Your Pleasure, and Health,
Ingrediences such,
Would puzle one much:
To search out their Natures, and define their Names:
For their growth, and their places;
Hard things, as the case is,
Ye must Travell further than th' River of Thames.


2.
Your Currans from Zant,
When your Worships want,
Come flying as wood,
In Vessels so good:
And Reason you know
Come from Maligo;
Dates, Figs, Cloves, and Nutmegs, with Sugar and Rice:
Then Pepper and Ginger,
That Nose osting twinger,
Then  and mace  spice.


3.
Then Casia and Myrrh,
We next must prefer,
With fine Francking sense,
That doth cost you pence:
Then sweet Bejamine
Doth draw Storax in
With Seva, and China, and Rhuberb so good:
All the next I can tell a,
Is Sarsaparella
Which strengthens the body and cleanseth the blood.

This was an Entertainment to the Committee Appointed for carrying on the Charge of the whole businesse; and presented before them on Thursday night last at Gresham Colledge.
Although the Gentleman whose singular judgment de|signed and Modelled the se|veral Fabricks, Structures and Sceanes of this days Tryumph, desired to have his Name con|cealed; I hold it a piece of pre|judice to omit theirs imployed by him; In the performance thereof, as Capt. Andrew Da|kers and Mr. William Light|foot, Painters: Mr. Thomas Whiting, Ioyner: Mr. Richard Clear, Carver, each of them in their qualities deserving ample commendations.

FINIS.





