




THE True and Originall Co|py of the first Petition which was delivered by sir David Watkins, Mr. Shute, who were accompanied with Mr. Burrowes, M. Pe|ters, Mr. Goodwin, and fourescore and fifteene more, who framed this Petition upon the grounds of the late Protestation which they had formerly taken.
VVhich Petition was delivered to the Honourable House of Commons on Thursday the first of December, 1642.
Whereunto is added Master Shutes Speech at the delivery of the said Petition, together with their propositions and demands; also the Reasons why and wherefore the aforesaid Petition was delivered.
Together with the House of Commons Answer to the said Petition.
Likewise the gracious entertainment and answer which both Houses of Parliament gave to the other five thousand Petitioners on Wednesday being the fifteenth of this moneth.
Published for all those that desire truely to be informed; as also concerning the last Tu|mult at Guild Hall, and by whom it was caused.
Printed at London for Francis Coule. 1642.



TO The Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Remonstrance and Petition of many of the Citizens of London.
Shewing.
_THat ever since the beginning of these present distra|ctions which threaten ruines to these flourishing Kingdomes, and indeede ever since the sitting of this present Parliament, they have been ready out of their zeale to the cause of God, and sence of their duty to to this Honourable Assembly, upon all occasions to contribute subserve, and lay out themselves in all those wayes, which they did either discerne, or were directed, did tend to the mainte|nance of that Cause, or were necessary for the defence of the common safety, wherein they have at all times with all cheer|fulnesse and readinesse, advanced such monies as have bin de|sired, (in the whole to very great and vast summes) and have levied and raysed amongst them the greatest number of those men, who both first formed and now also recruted the Army.
By all which they hoped to have seen the end of their dan|gers and removall of their feares, by the just, severe, and ex|emplary punishment of Delinquents, who are the causes of all these ruining perturbations, and to have been by this time setled in the enjoyment of that happy Peace they have always

desired: but deceived of this hope, they cannot omit humbly to remonstrate, that after all this vast expence, they find them|selves but little neerer their end, if not more dangerously in|volved, and like enough to keep those intestine Wars on foot,  they shortly become a prey to forreign force, as late disco|veries give them cause to feare.
And however they are very sensible of the great burthen of renued contributions, both beyond the example of former times, and their owne expectation of such supplies; yet they shall with the samelife and cheerefulnesse go on to adventure more; so as it may be employed in a more speedy and effectu|all prosecution of the Warres, which they humbly conceive would not have beene drawne out to this length, had it not bin for giving eare to those counsells of accommodation, a proposition induced by our enemies to gain time, which if concluded, they will keep only so long as to serve their ends, but the very conclusion of it wholly incomptable, as your Re|monstrants humbly conceive, with the Protestation of bring|ing to condigne punishment these grand Delinquents, and in|cendiaries, who have imbroyled our State, and sought to iu|troduce a tyrannie, without whose counsell and influence nothing on that side can be concluded, and as also the ready way to expend and wast their remaining Treasure, and render them thereby wholly unable to defend themselves.
The contemplation of their emminent danger thereby, in|forceth them humbly to remonstrate, that if these destru|ctive counsells of accommodation be re-assumed, they shall think it necessary to look to their own safeties, and forbeare to contribute to their own ruine; to which onely accommo|dation, and not the greatest force of these enemies of the pub|lique peace can ever bring; the motion whereof your Remon|strants beleeve, will be exploded with the greatest indignity

by all the good patriors of your honourable assembly, yet humbly desire you will be pleased to publish such a Declara|tion herein, as shall seem good to your Wisedomes, whereby not only the people may be assured, that men mis-affected to the publique may not serve their own ends, or drive on their particular designs in this destructive accommodation; but al|so the Ingenires of these contrivances may lye under the ex|pectation of a just and heavy censure; if they shall yet by such dangerous and unreasonable interpellations, to bereave us of the right and wholsome use of our advantages and opportu|nities; by which for the present, besides all other dangerous effects, the Delinquents and Incendiaries are incouraged with the hope of a good retreat, when they have done their utmost.
The sad effects of this accommodation appearing at di|stance, more terrible unto your Remonstrants then the present view of the worst of this unnaturall war, gives the boldnesse to them, to make this humble addresse to this most honoura|ble assembly: withall professing that they are resolved with the utmost expense of Lives, and estates to stand by, assist, maintain, and execute all your counsells and command, that shall tend to the vigorous and effectuall prosecution of this Warre.
They therefore humbly pray you will be pleased to declare your Sense against this dangerous accommodation, that being assured of your fixed resolution not to treat with his Majesty, but in parliament, and divided from his wicked and despe|rate Councellors, they may with the greater resolution bee prepared to go on cheerfully in such supplies, as are necessary to bring these distractions to a happy issue.
For which they shall ever pray, c.





The reasons and Propo|sitions by M. Shute to the House.
That whereas we being sensible of many pressing dangers upon this City and Kingdome, which without speedy remo|vall are like to fall heavily and undeservedly upon them, are bold to present these following.
1. THat no Accomodation be made but such as is ac|cording to those honourable and safe conditions, which have sundry times been presented by both Houses, and expressed by Master Pym in Guild-hall: together with the punishment of Delinquents, and repaira|tion of those vast Charges expended by the City out of De|linquents estates.
2. That this Treaty be put to a period in very few dayes, which otherwaies will consume our estates, sinke our spirits, and expose us to desperate dangers.
3. That there may be an Army of sixe thousand Horse, to pursue the Enemy uncessantly till the work be finished.
4. That his Excellency may instantly goe forth, which was certainely promised; and by us fully expected before this time.
5. That our loving Neighbours of Essex and Hartford

which came and are gone backe, may be instantly recalled and imployed in this service.
6. That life may be given to such Ordinances as concerne the seazing and securing of the malignant persons and estates, both in City and Country.
7. That the Prisons in London may be secured by turning out the Malignant Keepers, and putting in men of trust; and that no malignant be discharged without good information from honest men that know their spirits and estates.
8. That our Army may supply their necessities upon Pa|pists and Malignants, as well as they have done upon us; else we shall preserve them and destroy our selves.
9. That the Countries that now lye in danger to be seized on by the enimy, especially Kent, may be fully secured by spee|dy and convenient forces, with all Castles.
10. That the Ministers in the City and Country that have declared themselves Malignants, especially such as haue been convinced and ajudged unworthy of their places may be pre|sently seized on, and so kept from opening their mouthes a|gainst God, the Parliament and all goodnesse, as they daily de to the prejudice of the Cause in hand; and other godly Ministers appointed to supply their places, and their Livings presently Sequestred for their paines.



THe Petitions being come to the House of Commons, no|tice being given of the said petitioners without, with a pe|tition from the City of London; upon which relation the pe|titioners with their petition were admited into the House,Sir Benj|mn Rud|ad  the petition being delivered, it was publikely read, which be|ing finished, Demand was made by a worthy Member of the House of Commons, whether the petition was of themselves, or whether it was by the consent of the City, yea orn; or whether the Common Counsell had any notice of the same: Answer was made, that is was not with consent of the whole City, nor was it with the advice of the Common Counsell; but done by themselves who were here present, and who had ingaged themselves and estates in the Parliaments and whole Kingdomes Cause, and it being according to their late protestation: It was replyed, that the parliament and the whole Kingdome was much beholding to them for their love and care, and likewise for their great paines, especially in this particular; and likewise to the whole City for their love and hearty expressions to the parliament, and that the parliament would ingage themselves for the Cities security and safety, for their reall and former expressions and intentions: withall desi|ring the petitioners to returne back to their habitations, and to acquaint the Lord Major and the Common Counsell of London with the said petition, and that if the Lord Major and the Common Counsell would agree to it, and make it their and the whole Cities Act they would hearken unto it;  very suddenly give them and the whole City a faire and a ple|nary answer. The petitioners returned, and the next day ac|quainted the L. Major with their proceedings; whereupon the L. Major promised the petitioners that a Common Counsell should be called, and the petition read; which was done, and

and being all or most of them present, the petition of the said Master Shutes was openly read, and many arguings and deba|tings there was, pro  contra about it; but at last by most voyces the said petition was rejected and throwne out of the Court.
Then divers other very good able, and sufficient Citizens hearing of this petition, and that the petition as they heard was for no accommodation, as you may judg of it, framed an other petition for an accomodation and for peace; thinking first to acquaint the Lord Major and the Common Counsell therewith, and to desire their consents therein, distasts were taken at their proceedings, jealousies, feares, and doubts on both sides did arise, whereupon divers comming to Guild|hall to second their petition, both parties being met, words agravated, and ill language, caused spleen and choller to arise on each parties, wherupon in a daring manner divers souldiers that were without in the yard were commanded to goe into the aforesaid Hall, who came in with their swords drawne, brandishing and flourishing them about their heads, and dri|ving all those innocent men who had neither stick nor staffe to defend themselves to the other end of the Hall in a heape together, frighting some, wounding others, in so much that the Sheriffes were called for out of the Court to come to paci|fie their fury, who commanded the souldiers to depart away, so the busines was quallifyed for that time,  thanks be given to God not much hurt done, though the signe was in Capri|corne, and so I conclude, wishing and praying for a firme and a true peace, which the God of all peace grant unto this poor Nation and City; And so let all good men and faithfull Sub|jects say Amen.
This day being Wednesday and the 14 of this month of De|cemb. divers worthy Citizens to the number of 5000. went to the parliament he use with their petition for peace; which was honourably accepted of both Houses, being promised to have a faire and full answer the next day by one of the choise from both Houses.

FINIS.



