




MEMOIRS
Of the Most
Material Transactions
IN
ENGLAND,
FOR
The Last Hundred YEARS,
Preceding the Revolution in 1688.
By JAMES WELWOOD, M. D.
Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and
Fellow of the College of Physicians, London.
LONDON:
Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Queen's-Head
against St. Dunstan's-Church in
Fleetstreet. 1700.




TO THE
KING.
SIR,
_THE Great Patrons
of Liberty have not
thought it below
them to become the
Patrons of History:
And any thing of that kind which
concerns England, does naturally

claim the Protection of a Prince,
who by his Valour and Conduct
has not only Restor'd to the English
Nation that Figure they had lost in
the World for near an Hundred
Years past, but has rais'd them to a
Greater than ever they had before:
A Prince, who in all He has done
for the Common Safety of Europe,
could have no Brighter Examples to
follow, than those of his own Fa|mily:
For when Others have fought
for Dominion and Power, vain
empty Notions, and destructive to
Mankind; It has ever been a Glory
peculiar to the House of Nassau to
have fought for LIBERTY, the
Noblest Cause, and the Greatest
Stake that Mortals can contend
for.
Let some Princes pretend to Fa|ding
Lawrels, by depopulating
Countries, oppressing their Neigh|bours,

and enslaving Free People;
The surest and best way to transmit
a Glorious Name to Posterity, is to
relieve the Oppress'd, break off their
Fetters, and set the World free.
These require no varnish to set
off their true Lustre; whilst those
are oblig'd to make use of false
Colours to palliate the highest In|justice.
Let them value themselves
upon a Greatness that's borrow'd
from Schemes that could hardly
fail, as being transmitted to them
from the long Experience of the
Ablest Ministers, and most Refin'd
Statesmen of the Age: That Prince,
who without these Helps at his first
Appearance on the Stage, has by the
mere Strength of his own Genius
surmounted Difficulties that would
have pall'd any Courage but his
own; and at length has broke all
those Measures that had of a long

time been concerting towards the
enslaving of Christendom; cannot
fail to make one of the Noblest
and Brightest Figures in History.
If it be the Prerogative of an
Almighty Power and Goodness to
set Bounds to the Raging Sea, it
must be the highest and most justi|fiable
Imitation of It, to put a Stop
to the Ambition of Men, and to
shelter Nations from their Fury.
It is in this sense chiefly, that
Kings may be called Gods: And
it were a pity that the Lives of
such were not as Immortal as their
Deeds.
The Memory of that Prince
must be lasting, who in all the Wars
he has been engag'd in, and in all
the Treaties that have been made
to restore Peace to his Countrey,
has never made any Terms for Him|self;
except once, when the Interest

of Three Kingdoms, and his Own,
were become one and the same.
When succeeding Ages shall see
scarce any other Coin in England
but of one Stamp, they must look
back with Amazement upon the
Reign of a Prince whose Image it
bears; and wonder how it was pos|sible,
That during the Heat of the
most Expensive War that ever was,
so vast a Treasure could be new
minted, and at so prodigious a Loss:
While at the same time they will
commend and bless a People, that
with so much Cheerfulness assisted
Him with Supplies suitable to such
Mighty Undertakings. They will
be no less surpriz'd to find, That
amidst a great many Hardships and
Disappointments which could not
be avoided, his Armies follow'd
Him with an Inviolable Fidelity
and Inimitable Courage: And will

hardly believe, That it was within
the Compass of Human Prudence
to Cement so many Jarring Inte|rests,
and unite so many Princes of
different Religions into one Alli|ance,
and to influence their firm
Adherence to that Alliance, till the
Glorious Conclusion of a General
Peace.
SIR,
All these Great Things were re|serv'd
for Your MAJESTY,
which will be Admir'd and Extoll'd
by Posterity, no less than they are
by the present Age: And it's but
reasonable that the Memory of such
Actions should live for ever. The
following Sheets, containing a Short
View of the various Disposition of
Affairs in England for a whole Cen|tury
before Your MAJESTY's
Happy Accession to the Crown, I

humbly beg Leave to Lay them at
Your MAJESTY's Feet, with
the most profound Submission and
Duty, that becomes,
May it please Your Majesty,
Your Majesty's most Humble,
most Faithful, and most
Obedient Subject and Servant,
James Welwood.




To the Reader.
THESE Sheets were writ
some Years ago, by the En|couragement
of One whose
Memory will be ever Sacred to Poste|rity.
It's needless to mention the Occa|sion:
And they had not been publish'd
now, if a Surreptitious Copy of a Part
of the Manuscript, had not crept
abroad. I can hardly expect they
should please in an Age like this, that
is fond only of what is writ for or
against a Party: For I have trac'd
Truth as near as I could, without espou|sing
any one Interest or Faction. I hope
I may venture to say, That I have tread
as softly as was possible over the Graves
of the Dead, and have not aggravated
the Errors of the Living. As to the

latter, it's enough that we are deliver'd
from their Power, without insulting
over their Misfortunes; and it is un|worthy
of a Generous Mind, to trample
upon those that are already down.
Most of the Accounts I have seen of
the Transactions of those Times, are
partial to some one Side; which being
one of the greatest Blemishes of Histo|ry,
I have endeavour'd to avoid: But
whether I have fallen into the same
Error my self, it is the Reader must be
now Iudge. I leave Satyr and Pane|gyrick
to others. I envy no man the
Art of making Court to the Great by
Flattery, and have not Ill Nature
enough for Detraction.
The Design of these Memoirs being
only to give a Short Idea of the Thread
of Affairs in England, for the Space
of a Hundred Years, it is not to be ex|pected
that I should have observ'd the
Rules of a Regular History, much
less any Niceness of Method, or Exact|ness

in the Narration. As to the Stile,
I have taken very little pains about it;
and all I have aim'd at, is to be under|stood.
In the Account I have given of the
Last Reign, I would not be thought to
Reflect upon the Roman-Catholicks
in general, for what a Party among
them is chargeable. They were chiefly
the Bigots of some Religious Orders,
and the New Converts, that advis'd and
carried on those Violences that in the
end overturn'd their Master's Throne:
And it is hop'd the Roman-Catholicks
have reason to be satisfied with their
Condition under the present Reign, since
they enjoy an unenvied Liberty of their
Religion, without incurring the Hatred
of their Fellow-Subjects for being in a
Design to overturn the Establish'd
Church; which was their Case under
the late King James. And as I am
far from wishing them less Liberty than
they have, yet cannot but regret the

Hard Usage which the Protestants meet
with in other Countries, and wish they
were but as well treated there, as the
Roman-Catholicks are here.
Before I have done, I beg leave to
take notice of a Pamphlet that came
out last Summer, call'd Cursory Re|marks
upon the Proceedings of the
Last Session of Parliament. The
Gentleman that wrote it, had not only
the Honesty to publish an Answer to
his own Book, but in that Answer to
insinuate that I was the Author of it.
All the Use I shall make of this unusual
Liberty of the Press, is to declare,
That I have not publish'd any one Paper,
Pamphlet, or Book, these Six Years:
And though I have but little Leisure,
and yet less Inclination to appear again
in Print, yet if ever I alter my Reso|lution,
and publish any thing hereafter,
I will certainly put my Name to it; as
I have done to these Memoirs.



THE
CONTENTS.

THE Excellencies of the English Con|stitution,
and the various Changes
that have happen'd in it, Page 1
The State of England under Queen Eliza|beth,
3
Her Character, 5
The Character of her Ministers; particularly
of Walsingham, Cecil, c. and of the
Members of the House of Commons in her
time, 8
Her Conduct towards Mary Queen of
Scots, 15
King James the First's Accession to the
Crown, and the Condition of England
under his Reign, 19
His Character, 20

The Character and Deathof Prince Henry,
23
The Character of the Queen of Bohemia;
and King James's Conduct in the Busi|ness
of the Palatinate, 27
The Fate of Sir Walter Raleigh, 28
King James's Conduct in teh Interdict of
Venice, 34
King Charles the First's Accession to the
Crown; and the Condition of England
at that time, 37
The Breach betwixt Archbishop Abbot, and
Bishop Laud, 38
The Rise of King Charles's Troubles; and
the first and second War with the Scots,
41
The meeting of the Parliament, November
1640. 45
The Fall and Character of Wentworth,
Earl of Strafford, 47
The Fall and Character of Archbishop Laud,
55
The Famous Petition and Remonstrance of
the state of the Nation; and the King's
Answer, 61
His coming to the House of Commons in
Person, to demand the Five Members;
and the Consequences of it, 63

His Leaving the Parliament, and the be|ginning
of the Civil Wars; and who be|gan
it, 66
The Treaty of Uxbridge, how unsuccesful;
and the Marquis of Montrose's fatal
Letter the Cause, 63
The Character and Fall of King Charles
the First, 74
His Opinion of Defensive Arms in the bi|siness
of Rochel, 79
The Character of his Favourite Bucking|ham,
84
The true Cause of the Scot's coming into
England, being a forg'd Letter, 91
King Charles's design beore his Death to
Resign the Crown And the Army's to
set up the Duke of Gloucester, 98
His Consulting the Sortes Virgilianae,
100
The Vsurpation and Character of Oliver
Cromwell, 102
The Restoration of King Charles the Se|cond,
and the Manner of it; with
Monk's part in it, and the Risk Monk
ran in Scotland, 114
One of the true Causes of the Fall of Chan|cellor
Clarendon, 122
The discovery of the Popish Plot; and its
Consequences, 123

The Bill of Exclusion; the design of it, and
how manag'd, 125
The Disgrace of the Duke of Monmouth;
and the Consequences of it, 131
The Protestant Plot, and the Effects of it,
133
The Death of King Charles the Second,
and the Suspicions about the Manner of it
discuss'd, 135
His Character, 143
The Reign of King James the Second,
148
The Advantages and Examples he might
have mae use of, 150
His Brother's and Pope Innocent II.'s Ad|vice
to him, 152
His first Speech to his Privy Council, 153
His first Speech to his Parliament, 156
His Second Memorable Speech to his Parlia|ment,
157
Two Letters from a Foreign Minister to
their Ambassador in England, upon the
occasion of this Speech, 159
Monmouth's Invasion, and the Grounds of
it, 160
Some Passages out of Monmouth's Pocket-Book,
166
Monmouth's Character,
167

His Letter in his Retirement,
169
King James's Speech to the Parliament
upon Monmouth's Defeat, 171
The Parliament's Address thereupon,
173
The Sense of a Foreign Minister of this last
Speech, 175
The Advances made to the Subversion of
the English Constitution, 177
King James's Ambassy to Rome, and how re|ceived,
178
The Panegyricks of King James upon that
occasion, 182
The Manner how King James had been trea|ted
by another Pope, in his Marriage with
the Princess of Modena, 187
King James grants a Toleration of Religi|on,
191
He assumes a dispensing Power, 194
He sets up an Ecclesiastical Commission,
197
The Suspension of the Bishop of London,
198
The Proceedings against Magdalen-Col|lege,
201
His Second Declaration for Liberty of Con|science,
206
The Affair of the Seven Bishops, 208

The Birth of a pretended Prince of Wales,
212
A new Parliament design'd; and to what
end, 213
The Prince and Princess of Orange's Opi|nion
about the Penal Laws and Test;
and how obtain'd, 215
The Army Modell'd, 220
The Methods us'd in Ireland; and Tyrco|nel's
Advancement, 222
The Regulating of the Corporations; and
the Severities against the Protestants
228
The Act of Attainder there, 232
The Interest that Foreign States had in
England, 234
The Emperor's Letter to King James,
236
The Interest of the Prince of Orange,
237
The bad Circumstances of the House of
Orange at the Birth of the Present
Prince of Orange, now King of Eng|land,
238
How he came to be Restored in Holland,
240
The Desolation of Holland in 1672,
242

The Reasons of that Desolation, 244
The Difficulty the Prince of Orange had to
grapple with, 247
The Duke of Luxemburgh's Cruelties at
Swammerdam, 249
The Affair of Overall's Convocation; and
how resented by King James, 255
His Letter to Dr. Abbot on that Occasion,
257




ERRATA.
PAGE 62. Line 14, 15. for the King's
Answer to it at its delivery; read An|swer
to them at their delivery.





MEMOIRS
Of the most Material
Transactions in England, c.
_THERE is not a Natin
in Europe, that from the
Constitution of its Go|vernment
might have
promis'd it self a more
firm and lasting Repse
than England: And yet
scarce any Kingdom we know upon
Earth has suffered so many and various
Convulsions. As if some malevolent.
Planet had over-rul'd one of the best of
Human Constitutions, and by an unac|countable
Fatality had render'd ineffectu|al
all the Endeavours of our Ancestors
to make themselves and their Posterity

happy under a Limited Monarchy. A Mo|narchy,
in which the Prerogative of the
Prince, and the Liberty of the People
are so equally temper'd, that there seems
nothing wanting, that may tend to the
Happiness of either.
The King of England has the Glory to
Rule over a Free People;The Ex|cellency of the En|glish Con|stitution. and the People
of England that of being subject to a
Monarch, who by the Laws of the
Countrey is invested with as much Pow|er
and Greatness as a Wise and Beneficent
Prince can reasonably wish for. To
compleat all, the Crown of England has
been for many Ages Hereditary, and
fix'd in one Family: The Breaches that
have been sometimes made in the imme|diate
Line, not at all derogating from the
nature of a Successive Monarchy, so
long as a due Respect is had to the Blood,
and for the most part the next immediate
Heir, except only upon great and urgent
Difficulties and Emergencies. The
Crown being thus Hereditary, it might
have reasonably been expected, That we
should not only be strangers to the Incon|veniences
that arise naturally from Com|petitions
in Elective Kingdoms; but that
it should be always the Interest of the
Prince that's in Possession of the Throne,

so to govern his People, as not to put
them upon the necessity at any time to
break through the Succession, and pass
by the next Immediate Heir.
But such is the brittle state of human
things, that notwithstanding all the Ad|vantages
and Excellencies of the English
Constitution, scarce an Age has pass'd
without some remarkable Struggle, ei|ther
between King and People for Prero|gative
and Liberty, or between Competi|tors
for the Crown it self.
The Glory of England was arriv'd to
a high pitch in the Reign of Queen Eli|zabeth.The Reign of Q. Eliza|beth.
Her People liv'd at their Ease,
and were happy under her Auspicious
Conduct; and her opprest Neighbours
felt the benign Influences of her great
and bountiful Mind. She it was that
made Head against the then Paramount
Power of Christendom, and that in both
the Old and New Worlds: And it was
in a great measure owing to her Conduct
and Fortune, that the Spaniard fell short
of the Vniversal Monarchy.
To draw a Picture worthy of Queen
Elizabeth,Her Ch|ract. were a Task fit only for the
Greatest Masters; since all that ever was
Great or Wise in Womankind, did con|tribute
to make up her Character. As to

her Person, she had but little of a Regu|lar
Beauty in her Face; but that was
well proportion'd, and in the main very
agreeable. Her Mien and Gait were
Noble; and in every thing she said
or did, there was something of Majesty
that stuck more Awe than Love: Tho
when she had a mind, she could put on
Charms that few were able to resist. In
her Features, Person, and Mien, she had
more of Henry the Eighth, than of the
Unfortunate Anna Bullen, her Mother:
But they were his good, and none of his
ill Qualities, which she deriv'd from her
Father.
Her Youth was a continued Scene of
Afflictions; but she was happy in that
she suffered one of the greatest, before
she was capable of feeling the weight of
it; for she was scarce Three Years old,
when her Mother was sacrific'd to the
Rage and Jealousy of her Husband.
And she that had been the Year she was
born, declar'd not only Heir Apparent of
the Crown, but (which was out of the
ordinary Road) Princess of Wales, and
that by Act of Parliament, was now by
another Act declar'd Illegitimate, and ex|cluded
from the Succession.

Notwithstanding this strange Reverse
of Fortune, particular Care was taken
of her Education, especially by her Bro|ther
Edward the Sixth, who lov'd her
above all things, and was scarce ever
pleas'd but in her Company. Before she
was Seventeen Years of Age she under|stood
perfectly well the Latin, French,
and Italian Tongues; and was so far Mi|stress
of the Greek, that she translated in|to
Latin Two of Isocrates's Orations;
one of which I have seen of her own
Hand-writing, corrected by her Tutor
but in Three places, whereof one is an
Error only in the Orthography. She was
indefatigable in the Study of Learning,
especially Philosophy, History, Divinity,
and Rhetorick; not forgetting both Vo|cal
and Instrumental Musick, as far as it
might become one of her Quality.
Being thus Learned, it was no wonder
she form'd her Tongue and Pen to a pure
and elegant way of speaking and writing,
and her Mind to the Noblest Notions of
Philosophy, and the highest Practice of
Virtue.
Her Brother dying, Queen Mary's He|reditary
Aversion to her upon the account
of their Mothers, broke out with all the
marks of Ill-Nature and Revenge. And

Philip the Second, who prov'd afterwards
her greatest Enemy, was the Person that
preserv'd her Life; but it was upon a
mere political Design, which, however,
miscarried. During all that Reign the
Princess Elizabeth was tost from one Con|finement
to another; being oblig'd many
times to suffer Indignities far unworthy
of her Birth; till at last, by the Death
of Queen Mary, she was call'd from a
Prison to a Throne, at the Age of Twen|ty
five Years. Upon receit of the News
of her Sister's Death, and that she her
self was proclaim'd Queen, it's said she
fell down upon her Knees, and after a
short silence broke out with these words
of the Psalmist, A Domino factum est
isud,  est mirabile in oculis nostris:
Which Words she took afterwards for her
Motto in some of her Gold Coin.
During all the time of her Reign she
would never allow her Title to be deba|ted
or reason'd upon, nor so much as ex|plain'd
or vindicated. She thought it suf|ficient
that she wore the Crown, and was
resolv'd, and knew well how to maintain
it upon her Head, without the help of
Paper-Arguments. She receiv'd with
Indignation a Proposition that was made
to her, to have her Title asseted in Par|liament:

And scorn'd to Repeal even the
Act which declar'd her Illegitimate, and
incapable to succeed.
Her Reign was long and glorious, be|ing
lov'd of her People, fear'd and ad|mir'd
by her Enemies, and attended with
constant Success in all her Enterprizes.
Never Prince was better serv'd, nor more
happy in the choice of her Servants;
and no Age can instance such a Set of
Able Ministers as she had: Her Court
at home was the quiet and happy Seat of
the Muses, while her Fleets and Armies
abroad gather'd Laurels every where for
their Mistress and themselvts.
She had to perfection the Art of plea|sing
her Parliament; and she and they
never parted in discontent, but with the
highest proofs of mutual Confidence.
What sort of men they were that compo|sed
the House of Commons during her
Reign, and of how different a stamp
from those in that of her Sucessor,Appendix, Numb. 1. The Cha|racter of the Mem|bers of Parlia|ment in Q. Elizabth's Reign. is best
express'd in the words of Sir Robert
Nauntwell, Secretary to King Iames, who
was a Member of Parliament in both
Reigns; which may not be improper to
insert in the Appendix.
If Queen Elizabeth can be properly
said to have had Favourites, they were

chiefly the Earls of Leicester and Essex;
but she never fail'd to humble them upon
every occasion, where they presum'd too
much upon her Favour. The one she
recall'd with Ignominy from his Govern|ment
of the Vnited Provinces, for beha|ving
himself haughtily in his Office:
And at another time, upon his threatning
Bower the Vsher of the Black Rod, to have
him turn'd out of his Place for stopping
one of his Retinue at the Queen's Bed-Chamber
Door, she told him with a se|vere
Frown, accompanied with an Oath,
My Lord, I had a mind to do you good, but
you must not expect a Monopoly of my Fa|vours:
I have other Subjects to show my
Bounty to; and I will give and take back
again, when, and as often as I please. If
you pretend to command here, I'll find ways
to humble you. I know of no Master, but I
will make you know there is a Mistress. And
take care upon your peril, that no hurt be
done Bower, for I'll make you answer for
him. The Misfortune of the Earl of
Essex every body knows: Though other|ways
a brave Gentleman, and endow'd
with excellent Qualities, yet he valued
himself too much upon the Queen's Fa|vour;
which together with the Contri|vances
of his Enemies hurried him on

to Courses that in the end lost him his
Head.
A Monarch supported with a Burleigh,
a Walsingham, a Salisbury for the Cabinet;
a Nottingham, a Drake, a Raleigh for
War; with a great many others equally
fit for both, could scarce fail of being
great and fortunate; nor can any thing
reflect more Lustre upon her Wisdom,
than her choice of such men.
Walsingham was a Pattern for all
Statesmen to copy after.The Cha|racter of Sir Francis Walsing|ham. By his Vigilance
and Address he preserv'd his Mistress's
Crown and Life from daily Attempts
and Conspiracies against her; and by a re|fin'd
piece of Policy defeated for a whole
Year together, the Measures Spain had
taken for fitting out their Armado to In|vade
England.
The vast Preparations that were ma|king
for a considerable time in Spain,
kept all Europe in suspense, and it was
not certain against whom they were de|sign'd;
though it was the general Opini|on,
they were to subdue the Netherlands
all at once; which Spain was sensibe
could not be done without a greater Force
by Sea as well as Land, than had been
hitherto employ'd for that Service. Queen
Elizabeth thought fit to be upon her

Guard, and had some Jealousies that she
might be aim'd at; but how to find it
out, was the difficulty, which at length
Walsingham overcame.
He had Intelligence from Madrid,
That Philip had told his Council, that he
had dispatch'd an Express to Rome with
a Letter writ with his own Hand to the
Pope, acquainting him with the true
Design of his Preparations, and asking
his Blessing upon it; which for some
Reasons he would not yet disclose to
them, till the return of the Courier. The
Secret being thus lodg'd with the Pope,
Walsingham by the Means of a Venetian
Priest retain'd at Rome as his Spy, got a
Copy of the Original Letter, which was
stolen out of the Pope's Cabinet by a
Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber, who
took the Keys out of the Pope's Pocket
while he slept. How upon this Intelli|gence
Walsingham found a way to retard
the Spanish Invasion for a whole Year, by
getting the Spanish Bills protested at Ge|noa,
which should have supplied them
with Money to carry on their Prepara|tions;
being properly a Mercantile Af|fair,
is needless here to mention.
I shall only give one Instance more of
Walsingham's dexterity in employing and

instructing his Spies how to get him In|telligence
of the most secret Affairs of
Princes. The Court of Queen Elizabeth
had reason to have an Eye upon the King
of Scots, as being the next Heir to the
Crown, and who they knew was court|ed
with all possible Insinuations into the
French Interest. In order to fathom King
Iames's Intentions, there was one Wig|more
sent to Scotland, who pretending to
be disoblig'd in England, fled thither for
Protection. Sir Francis Walsingham gives
him above Ten Sheets of Paper of In|structions,
all writ with his own Hand,
which I have read in the Cotton Library,
so distinct and so digested, as a Man of
far inferior parts to Wigmore could hardly
fail to be a Master in his Trade. In these
Papers he instructs him how to find out
King James's Natural Temper; his Mo|rals;
his Religion; his Opinion of Mar|riage;
his Inclinations to Queen Elizabeth,
to France, to Spain, to the Hollanders,
and in short, to all his Neighbours. He
likewise directs him how to behave him|self
towards the King, At Table; when a
Hunting; upon his receiving good or bad
News; at his going to Bed; and indeed in
all the Publick and Private Scenes of his
Life. Walsingham was not mistaken in

his Man; for though there past a con|stant
Correspondence betwixt them,
Wigmore liv'd in the greatest Favour and
Familiarity with King Iames for Nine or
Ten Years together, without the least
Suspicion of his being a Spy.
Walsingham also laid the Foundation
of the Civil Wars in France, and the
Low Countries, which put a final stop to
the vast Designs of the House of Austria.
Upon which occasion he told the Queen
at his Return from his Embassy to
France, That she had no reason to fear the
Spaniard; for though he had a strong Ap|petite,
and a good Digestion, he had given
him such a Bone to pick, as would take him
up Twenty Years at least, and break his
Teeth at last: So her Majesty had no more
to do, but to throw into the Fire he had
kindled, some English Fuel from time to
time to keep it burning. This Great Man
after all the Services he had perform'd for
his Queen and Countrey, gave a remark|able
Proof at his Death how far he had
preerr'd the Publick Interest to his own;
for he died so poor, that his Friends were
oblig'd to bury him privately in the
Night, for fear his Body should be ar|rested
for Debt. A Fault which few
Statesmen since his time have been guilty of.

Such Ministers also for Capacity and
Application, were Cecil Lord Burleigh,
and his Son the Earl of Salisbury, the
Inheritor of his Father's great Qualities
and Places. How refin'd a Politician he
was, and how throughly acquainted with
the most secret Designs of Foreign
Courts, cannot be better express'd, than
in the words of the same Nauntwell;Appendix, Numb. 2. to
which the Reader is referr'd.
But to return to Queen Elizabeth: It
appears by her whole Conduct she had no
Inclination to Marriage, being loth to
share her Power with any other. It's
true, she seem'd sometimes to give Ear
to Propositions that were made her by
several Princes; but this was done either
to gain time, or manage their Friendship
to her own Ends. When the Parliament
address'd her to Marry, she handsomly
excus'd her self in a Pathetick Speech,
concluding with this Expression; To me,
said she, it shall be a full satisfaction oth
for the Memorial of my Name, and for my
Glory also, if when I shall let my last
Breath, it be engraven upon my Marble
Tomb, Here lies Elizabeth, who reign'd a
Virgin, and dy'd one. The whole Speech
is of so Noble a Strain,Appendix, Numb. 3. that it deserves
a place in the Appendix.

She was very sparing of Honours; in|somuch
that Sir Francis Walsingham had
been employ'd in several Embassies and
other Matters of State for many Years,
before she could be prevail'd with to make
him a Knight, notwithstanding it appears
that he frequently ask'd it, and particu|larly
in a Printed Letter of his to Cecil.
The Honour of Knighthood, though
often prostituted since, was in so great
Esteem in her Reign, that a Gentleman
of Lincolnshire having rais'd Three hun|dred
men for her Service at Tilbury Camp,
upon his own Interest, told his Wife at
parting, That he hop'd thereby to deserve
the Queen's Favour so far, as that she
should be a Lady at his Return.
She had a particular Friendship for
Henry the Fourth of France; and to her
in a great measure he ow'd his Crown.
She never laid any thing more to heart
than his changing his Religion: And it
was a long time before she could be
brought to believe it. But when she re|ceiv'd
the Account of it from himself, all
her Constancy fail'd her; and in the Ago|ny
of her Grief, snatching a Pen, she
writ him a short Expostulatory Letter,
worthy of her self,Appendix, Numb. 4. and of that melan|choly
occasion; which is related in the

Appendix. This her Grief (says her
Historian) she sought to allay by read|ing
the Sacred Scriptures, and the Wri|tings
of the Fathers, and even the Books
of Philosophers; translating about that
time for an Amusement, Boethius de Con|solatione
Philosophiae, into Elegant Eng|lish.
The only Action that seems to reflect
upon her Memory, was the Death of
Mary Queen of Scots.The Affair of Mary Stuart, Q. of Scots. There had been
an Emulation betwixt them of a long
standing, occasioned at first by the lat|ter's
assuming the Arms and Title of
Queen of England; which it's no won|der
Queen Elizabeth highly resented. A
great many other Accidents did contri|bute
to alienate their Affections. But
when it fell out that every day produc'd
some new Conspiracy against the Life of
Queen Elizabeth, and that in most of
them the Queen of Scots was concern'd
either as a Party, or the Occasion; Queen
Elizabeth was put upon a fatal Necessity
of either taking off the Queen of Scots,
or exposing her own Person to the fre|quent
Attempts of her Enemies. With
what Reluctancy Queen Elizabeth was
brought to consent to her Death, and
how she was deceiv'd at last in Signing

the Warrant for her Execution, by the
over diligence of her Secretary and Privy-Council,Cambden.
her Celebrated Historian has
given us a very full and impartial Ac|count.
Yet Queen Elizabeth is not altogether
excusable in this matter; for Queen Mary
came into England upon a Promise
made her long before. Queen Elizabeth
sent her once a Ring, and at the same
time a Message, That if at any time she
wanted her Protection, she might be as|sured
of it; and the Token betwixt them
was Queen Mary's sending her back the
same Ring. That Unfortunate Princess
seeing her Affairs desperate in Scotland,
dispatch'd a Letter to Queen Elizabeth
with the Ring, to put her in mind of her
Promise; but without waiting for an
Answer, she came into England the very
next day. They were both to be pitied,
the one for her Sufferings, and the other
for being the Cause of them: And I have
seen several Letters in the Cotton-Library,
of Queen Mary's Hand, to Queen Eliza|beth,
writ in the most moving Strain that
could be; most of them in French, be|ing
the Language she did generally write
in. There was one particularly, where|in
she tells her, That her long Imprison|ment

had brought her to a Dropsical Swelling
in her Legs, and other Diseases that for the
Honour of her Sex she orbears to commit
to Paper: And concludes thus, Your most
Affectionate Sister and Cousin; and the
most miserable Princess that ever wore a
Crown. When such Letters as these had
no influence upon Queen Elizabeth, it
may reasonably be concluded, That no|thing
but Self-Preservation could oblige
her to carry her Resentments so far as
she did.
To sum up the Character of this Re|nowned
Queen in a few words: She
found the Kingdom at her coming to the
Throne, in a most afflicted condition, em|broil'd
on the one side with a Scotch, and on
the other with a French War; the Crown
overcharg'd with her Father's and Brother's
Debts; its Treasure exhausted, the People
distracted with different Opinions in Reli|gion;
her self without Friends, with a con|troverted
Title, and strengthen'd with no
Alliance abroad. After one of the longest
Reigns that ever was, she died in Peace,
leaving her Countrey Potent at Sea, and
Rich in People and Trade; her Father's
and her Brother's Debts paid; the Crown
without any Incumbrance; a great Treasure
in the Exchequer; the Coin brought to a

true Standard; Religion settled upon a re|gular
and lasting Basis; her self having
been admir'd and fear'd by all her Neigh|bouring
Princes, and her Friendship courted
by Monarchs that had scarce ever before any
further knowledge of England, but the
Name. So that her Successor had good
reason to say of her, That she was one who
in Wisdom and Felicity of Government sur|pass'd
all Princes since the days of Au|gustus.
After all, To the Reproach of those
she had made great and happy, she was
but ill attended in her last Sickness; and
near her Death, forsaken by all but three
or four Persons; every body making haste
to adore the Rising Sun.
With Queen Elizabeth dy'd in a great
part the Glory and Fortune of the Eng|lish
Nation; and the succeeding Reigns
serv'd only to render hers the more Ilu|strious.
As she was far from invading
the Liberties of her Subjects, so she was
careful to maintain and preserve her own
just Prerogative; nor did ever any Prince
that sat upon the English Throne carry
the true and essential parts of Royalty
further: But at the same time the whole
Conduct of her Life plac'd her beyond
the Suspicion of ever having sought

Greatness for any other end, than to
make her People share with her in it.
It was not so with the Prince that suc|ceeded
her.The Reign of K. Iames. He was the more fond of
Prerogative, because he had been kept
short of it in his Native Country. He
grasp'd at an Immoderate Power, but with
an ill Grace; and if we believe the Hi|storians
of that time, with a design to
make his People little. If so, he had
his Wish; for from his first Accession to
the Crown, the Reputation of England
began sensibly to sink; and Two King|doms
which, disunited, had made each
of them apart a considerable Figure in
the World, now when united under one
King, fell short of the Reputation which
the least of them had in former Ages.
The latter Years of King Iames fill'd
our Annals with little else but Misfor|tunes
at home and abroad. The Loss of
the Palatinate, and the Ruin of the Pro|testants
in Bohemia through his Negli|gence;
the Trick that was put upon him
by the House of Austria in the business of
the Spanish Match; and the continued
Struggle betwixt him and his Parliament
about Redress of Grievances, were things
that help'd on to lessen his Credit abroad,

and imbitter the Minds of his Subjects at
home.
Repenting of these unlucky Measures
too late, King Iames went off the State,
not much lamented; and left in Legacy
to his Son, a discontented People; an
unnecessary, expensive War; an incumbred
Revenue, and an exhausted Treasury; to|gether
with the Charge of his Grand|children
by the Queen of Bohemia, that
were now divested of a large Patrimony,
deriv'd to them by a long Series of Illu|strious
Ancestors. In fine, he entail'd
upon his Son all the Miseries that befel
him; and left in the minds of his Sub|jects
those Sparks of Discontent, that
broke out some Years after into a Flame
of Civil War, which ended in the Ruin
of King Charles, and of the Monarchy
with him.
This Prince,His Cha|racter. though his Father and
Mother were esteemed the Handsomest
Couple of the Age they liv'd in, was
himself but a Homely Person, nor in any
of his Features was to be found the least
Resemblance of the Beautiful Mary Stu|art,
or Lord Darnly. No Prince had a
more Liberal Education: And it could
not well be otherwise, having the Cele|brated
Buchanan for his Tutor. He was

acquainted with most parts of Learning,
but valued himself upon his Knowledge
in Divinity above the rest; in which he
writ some things that were much
esteem'd at that time. He writ and
spoke well, but in a Stile that border'd
too much upon Pedantry, which was in|deed
the common Fault of that Age.
As to his Religion, notwithstanding
all his Advances to the Pope and Papists
upon the account, first of the Spanish, and
afterwards the French Match, he was
really Calvinist in most Points, but that
of Church-Government, witness some of
his Books, and his Zeal for the Synod of
Dort. But as to Episcopacy, he shew'd
so much Learning and Reading in his
Arguments for it at the Conference of
Hampton-Court, that Archbishop Whit|gift
said, He was verily persuaded the King
spake by the Spirit of God.
Notwithstanding his Mother was de|thron'd
to make room for him, and con|sequently
he could have no Right, but
the Consent of the People while she
liv'd; yet upon all occasions he was fond
of being thought to have a Divine Right
to the Crown. His Courage was much
suspected; and some would ascribe his
want of it to the Fright his Mother was

in upon the Death of David Rizio. The
Troubles of his Youth were various, oc|casion'd
chiefly by Factions of Great Men
that strove who should have the Manage|ment
of him: But when he came of Age
he sought all occasions to be reveng'd
upon such of them as were living, and
the Posterity of those that were dead.
Goury's Conspiracy being in it self so im|probable
a thing, and attended with so
many inconsistent Circumstances, was
disbeliev'd at the time it was said to have
been attempted: And Posterity has swal|low'd
down for a Truth, what their An|cestors
took for a mere Fiction.
He came to the Crown of England by
Lineal Descent, and the Verbal Designa|tion
of Queen Elizabeth upon her Death|bed.
And the Conspiracy wherewith
Cobham and Sir Walter Raleigh were char|ged
to set him by the English Throne,
was no less Mystery than that of Goury's
had been before. The only uncontro|verted
Treason that happen'd in his
Reign, was the Gunpowder Plot;The Gun|powder Plot. and
yet the Letter to the Lord Mounteagle,
that pretended to discover it, was but
a Contrivance of his own; the thing be|ing
discover'd to him before, by Henry
the Fourth of France, through the means

of Monsieur de Rhony, after Duke of Sully.
King Henry paid dear for his Friendship
to King Iames; and there is reason to
believe that it was upon this account,
among others, that a Party of the Church
of Rome employ'd Ravillac to murther
that Great Man.
King Iames was equally happy and
unhappy in every one of his Children.The Cha|racter of Pr. Henry.
Prince Henry was the Darling of Man|kind,
and a Youth of vast Hopes, and
wonderful Virtues; but was too soon
Man, to be long-liv'd. The Duke of
Sully being in England, to congratulate
King Iames upon his Accession to the
Crown, laid the Foundation of a strict
Friendship betwixt his Master and Prince
Henry; which was afterwards carried
on by Letters and Messages, till the
Death of that King. Though it's a Se|cret
to this day what was the real Design
of all those vast Preparations that were
made by Henry the Fourth for some time
before his Death; yet certain it is, those
Preparations were such as kept all Europe
in suspense: And I have seen some Papers
that make it more than probable, that
Prince Henry was not only acquainted
with the Secret, but was engag'd in the
Design. But whatever it was, it prov'd

abortive, by the Murther of that Excel|lent
King just at the time when it was to
have been declar'd, his Army being ready
to march. Prince Henry surviv'd him
but two years, and dy'd universally la|mented.
The World is very often wil|ling
to attribute the Untimely Death of
Princes to unfair Practices; and it was
the general Rumour at that time, that
this Prince was poison'd. Whatever was
in it, there is yet in Print a Sermon
preach'd at St. Iames's upon the Dissolu|tion
of his Family, that boldly insinua|ted
some such thing: And also Sir Francis
Bacon, Lord Chancellor of England,
in his Speech at the Trial of the Earl of
Somerset, had some Reflections upon the
Intimacy of that Lord with Sir Thomas
Overbury, which seem to point that way;
insomuch that there were several Expres|sions
left out of the printed Copy, that
were in the Speech. But after all, there
is an Account in Print of what was ob|servable
upon the Opening of Prince
Henry's Body, under the Hand of
Sir Theodore Mayerne, and Five other
Physicians,Appendix, Numb. 5. from which there can
be no Inference drawn, that he was
poyson'd.

The Second of King Iames's Children
was the Princess Elizabeth,Of Queen of Bohemia. married to
the Elector Palatine, who was afterwards
to his Ruin elected King of Bohemia. It
is hard to say whether the Virtues of this
Lady, or her Misfortunes were greater;
for as she was one of the best of Women,
she may be likewise reckon'd in the
number of the most unfortunate. King
Iames thought to retrieve his Son-in-law's
lost Fortune by the way of Treaty; but
in that, and in every thing else, the House
of Austria outwitted him; so that the
poor Prince Palatine gain'd nothing by
his Alliance with England, but the hard
Fate to be abandon'd by those whose Ho|nour
and Interest it was to support him.
Nor had the Crown of England any share
in the Honour of re-establishing the Pa|latine
Family, which happen'd Thirty
Years after; for at the time of the Trea|ty
of Munster, when that matter was set|led,
King Charles the First was so far
from being in a condition to mediate for
his Friends, that he was himself a Priso|ner
to those very Enemies that in a few
Months after the signing of that Treaty,
took his Life. Of whom, being the
Youngest of King Iames's Children, and
of his Misfortunes, there will be too

much occasion to speak in the following
Sheets.
But to return to King Iames; as he
was equally happy and unhappy in his
Children he was for the most part un|happy
in his Favourites; being oblig'd to
abandon one upon the account of Over|bury's
Murther; and coming to hate ano|ther
the latter part of his Life as much as
he had ever lov'd him before.
In order to obtain of the Emperor the
Restoration of his Son-in-Law,The Spa|nish Match. he was
wheedled into that Inglorious Counsel of
sending the Prince into Spain for a Match
that was either never design'd him, or
too late: And it was more owing to Phi|lip
the Third's Generosity, than to King
Iames's Politicks, that he ever saw Eng|land
again. To this Friendship with
Spain he sacrific'd his own Honour, with
the Life of that Excellent Person, Sir Wal|ter
Releigh. This Gentleman, after Four|teen
Years Imprisonment in the Tower,
upon the account of a Mysterious Trea|son,
during which time he did oblige the
World with one of the best Histories
that ever was writ, came to be set at li|berty,
and was sent with an ample Com|mission,
which was judg'd by Lawyers
equivalent to a Pardon, to discover and

take possession of new Countries and
Mines in America. He gave King Iames
the Plan of his Design, and of the Place
he was to land at; which prov'd the Ruin
of that Enterprize; for before he could
get ready to sail from England, the Court
of Spain had a Copy of it; which
Sir Walter Raleigh found to his sad Expe|rience
was got to America before him,
and had thereby enabled the Spaniards to
baffle the Attempt. At his return, to
please the Spanish Ambassador, who had
got a mighty Ascendent over King Iames,
this last of Queen Elizabeth's Favourites
lost his Head upon the former Sentence
of Treason, there being no other way to
reach it.
All our Histories have mention'd at
large the business of the Spanish Match;K. Iames's Conduct in the bu|siness of the Pala|tinate.
but few, or none, King Iames's Conduct
in that of the Palatinate; which can
hardly be express'd under a softer name
than one continued Infatuation on his part.
The Account of this Matter is writ with
the greatest Exactness, though as favou|rably
for King Iames as was possible, by
the Learned Spanhemius in his History of
Lowyse Iuliane Electrice Palatine, Daugh|ter
of William Prince of Orange, and Mo|ther
to the King of Bohemia, who out|liv'd

her Son, and was one of the greatest
Paterns of Virtue that any Age has pro|duc'd.
Referring the Reader to the Book
it self, I shall only mention a few things
out of it.
To make this Book and the matter of
the Palatinate better understood, it's to
be remembred, That the Elector after his
Marriage with King Iames's Daughter,
was elected King of Bohemia, as the
most powerful Prince, at that time, of the
Empire, to oppose the House of Austria,
and protect the Liberty of that Kingdom.
He was scarce Crown'd, but he lost both
his New Kingdom, and his Ancient In|heritance
of the Palatinate, by the Battel
of Prague, where his Army was entire|ly
defeated, and he himself forc'd to fly,
leaving Bohemia and the Palatinate both,
a Prey to the Emperor.
Though the Parliament of England
was zealous to restore the Palatine Fa|mily
by Force of Arms, as the most ef|fectual
means to do it, and had offer'd
great Supplies to that purpose; yet King
Iames was so lull'd asleep with the Insi|nuations
of Gundamor, the Spanish Am|bassador,
that he could be brought to no
other Methods but those of Treaty.
While he was sending one Embassy after

another to Vienna and Brussels, the poor
King of Bohemia seeing how little was
to be expected from them, ventur'd to
try his Fortune once more in the Palati|nate;
and with the Assistance of Count
Mansfield and the Duke of Brunswick,
beat the Imperialists in several Rencoun|ters,
and repossess'd himself of several
Towns. But when he was in a fair way
to be Master of the Whole, he was obli|ged
to retire, and disband his Army,
merely to please King Iames, who was
possess'd of this wild Notion, That to
lay down his Arms, was the only way to get
good Terms from the Emperor. Upon
which a Treaty was set a foot at Brussels,
where King Iames consented by way of
Preliminary, That his Son-in-Law should
not only wave the Title of the King of
Bohemia, but that of Elector Palatine,
which had not hitherto been question'd,
and which the poor Prince was forc'd to
comply with.
This Treaty, after a great many other
Mortifications put upon the Palatine Fa|mily,
and upon K. Iames himself, was by a
Contrivance of the Emperor transferr'd to
Ratisbon, and came to nothing at last, as
all the other Treaties had done. But
while the Imperialists were thus amusing

King Iames with Terms of Accommoda|tion,
and that the King of Bohemia had
disarm'd himself to please his Father-in-Law,
Heidleburgh, and all the other pla|ces
he had recover'd before, together
with the rest of the Palatinate, were all
seiz'd by the Emperor, except only Fran|kendale,
which continued to make a vigo|rous
Resistance. It would look like a
Dream, to imagine that King Iames should
oblige his Son-in-Law to quit this place
also, the only one left him of his whole
Countrey, and that as the only effectual
way to get back all the rest: Yet it's true
he did so, and that at the very time that
the Emperor had actually transferr'd the
Electoral Dignity from the Palatine Fa|mily
to the House of Bavaria.
For Frankendale being a Town then of
great Strength,The busi|ness of Franken|dale. and the Spaniards lying
expos'd to the daily Excursions of its Ga|rison,
they found a way to trick King
Iames out of it in this manner. Gundo|mar
represents to him, That it being the
only place left in the Palatinate, it could
not hold out much longer; and that there
was but one way to save it for his Son-in-Law,
which was, To put it into the
hands of the Governor of Flanders for
some time, till things might be brought

to an Accommodation by the Treaty then
on foot; and if there should happen any
Interruption in it, then the Town should
be render'd back to King Iames, for the
use of his Son-in-Law, in the same Con|dition,
together with a free Passage for
Fifteen hundred Foot, and Two hun|dred
Horse, to take possession of it, and
Six Months Provisions.
King Iames being willing to do any
thing, rather than break with Spain,
agreed to this strange Proposition, and
Frankendale was deliver'd up to the Go|vernor
of Flanders for Fifteen Months
under these Conditions. But the Treaty
being once more broke off, and the time
elaps'd, when King Iames demanded that
Frankendale should be restor'd, it was
told him, That he might have the Town,
but by the Terms of the Agreement he
was to have a Passage for his Troops
through the Spanish Low-Countries; but
that there was no Article, That he should
have a Passage through any other Places
that were in their possession in Germany.
And thus King Iames was once more
egregiously imposd upon, for there was
no way to come at the Town, but
through Parts of Germany that were in
the hands of Spain; and so the Spa|niards

continued Masters of Franken|dale.
When several other Princes were some
time after upon entring into a League
for Restitution of the Palatinate, and the
House of Austria was beginning to doubt
the Success, Gundomar play'd another En|gine
to break their Measures, by propo|sing
a Match with the Infanta of Spain,
for the Prince of Wales, as the easiest
and surest way to restore the Palatine Fa|mily;
which like all the rest, was only
to amuse King Iames, and was equally
unsuccessful.
It were too long to give the Detail of
King Iames's Conduct in this Affair,
which was all of a piece. The Author
sums up the ills that attended it, in this,
That thereby the Protestant Religion was
entirely rooted out of Bohemia, the Ele|ctoral
Dignity transferr'd from the Pala|tine
Family, the Palatinate it self lost,
the Liberty of Germany overthrown; and
which he mentions with a sensible Re|gret,
the famous Library of Heidelburgh
was carried to Rome, to the irreparable
Prejudice of Learning.
So that Gundomar had good reason to
say, in one of his Letters to the Duke of
Lerma, printed in the History of that

Duke's Life, That he had lull'd King
James so fast asleep, that he hop'd neither
the Cries of his Daughter nor her Children,
nor the repeated Sollicitations of his Par|liament
and Subjects in their behalf, should
be able to awaken him.
There are two Passages more very ob|servable
in this Author. The Court of
Spain finding King Iames had broke off
the Spanish Match, and was brought to
see how egregiously he had been abus'd
in it; they ventur'd upon a bold Attempt
to trouble his Affairs, by whispering in
his Ears some things to make him jealous
of his Son; And that a good while after,
when King Charles and his Parliament
were entring upon vigorous Measures to
espouse the Palatine Cause, they found
ways to sow Divisions between him and
his People, that in progress of time broke
out into a Civil War. The latter needs
no Commentary; and the former is suf|ficiently
explain'd,Hacket's Life of B William, by what a late Author
has writ in the Life of Bishop Williams,
concerning that Prelate's being instru|mental
in making up some secret differen|ces
betwixt King Iames and his Son the
Prince of Wales, a little before King
Iames's Death. Spanhemius sums up what
relates to this Affair, with this Remark,

That never Prince was more oblig'd to a Si|ster,
than King Charles the First was to
the Queen of Bohemia; since it was only
the Consideration of her and her Children,
who were then the next Heirs to the Crown
of England, that prevail'd with the Court
of Spain to permit him to see England
again.
As in most Foreign Transactions King
Iames was unhappy;In the In|terdict of Venice. so more particular|ly
in the difference between Pope Paul V.
and the Venetians. There appear'd at
that time a wonderful Disposition in that
State to work a Reformation in the
Church, and throw off the Papal Yoke.
In order to advance it, King Iames dis|patch'd
Sir Henry Wotton his Ambassador
to Venice; and hearing that Spain had
declar'd for the Pope, he declar'd for the
Venetians; and acquainted Iustiniani,
their Ambassador in England, That he
would not only assist Them with all the
Forces of his Kingdom, but engage all
his Allies in their Defence. At Sir Henry
Wotton's Arrival, the Breach between
the Pope and the Republick was brought
very near a Crisis; so that a total Separa|tion
was expected not only from the
Court, but the Church of Rome; which
was set on by the Learned Padre Paulo,

and the Seven Divines of the State, with
much Zeal, and conducted with as great
Prudence. The Ambassador at his Au|dience
offer'd all possible Assistance in his
Master's Name, and accus'd the Pope
and Papacy of being the chief Authors
of all the Mischiefs in Christendom. This
was receiv'd with great Deference and
Respect to King Iames: And when the
Pope's Nuncio objected, That King
Iames was not a Catholick, and so was
not to be rely'd upon; the Doge took
him up briskly, and told him, That the
King of England believ'd in Iesus Christ,
but he did not know in whom some others be|liev'd.
King Iames had sent with Wotton his
Premonition to all Christian Princes and
States,
translated into Latin, to be pre|sented
to the Senate; which Padre Paulo
and the other Divines press'd might be
done at his first Audience; telling him;
they were confident it would have a very
good effect. The Ambassador could not
be prevail'd with; alledging he had posi|tive
Orders to wait till St. Iames's Day,
which was not far off. This Conceit of
presenting K. Iames's Book on St. Iames's
Day, spoil'd all; for before that day came,
the Difference was made up, and that

happy Opportunity lost. So that when
he had his Audience on St. Iames's Day,
and had presented the Book, all the An|swer
he got, was, That they thank'd the
King of England for his good will, but
they were now reconcil'd to the Pope, and
that therefore they were resolv'd not to ad|mit
of any Change in their Religion, ac|cording
to their Agreement with the Court
of Rome. How little Reputation he
acquir'd in the Matter of the Venetian In|terdict,
appears yet more plainly in this,
That in all the numerous Collections we
have of Letters that pass'd on that Sub|ject
between the Cardinals of Ioyeuse and
Perron, the Marquis de Fresnes and Henry
IV. there is not the least notice taken
of King Iames or his Embassy.
To have done with King Iames; it
was said, That he divided his time be|twixt
his Standish, his Bottle, and his
Hunting. The last had his fair Weather,
the two former his dull and cloudy; and
therefore that it was no wonder his Wri|tings
were so variable; and that after he
had pleaded for Witchcraft, and the
Pope's being Antichrist, Somerset's Affair
and the Spanish Match cur'd him of both.
After having enjoy'd for the most part
of his Life a firm Health, he died of a

Quartan Ague, in the Fifty ninth Year of
his Age, and with such suspicious Cir|cumstances,
as gave occasion of Enqui|ry
into the manner of his Death, in the
two first Parliaments that were call'd by
his Son; all which came to nothing, by
reason of their sudden Dissolutions.
King Charles the First came to the
Crown under all the Disadvantages that
have been mention'd;The Reign of King Charls I. and yet the Nation
might have hop'd that their Condition
would be mended under a Prince of so
much Virtue, as indeed he was, if the
Seeds of Discontent which were sown in
his Father's time, had not every day ta|ken
deeper Root, and acquir'd new
Growth, through the Ill Management
of his Ministers, rather than any Wilful
Errors of his own.
Some of them drove so fast, that it
was no wonder the Wheels and Chariot
broke: And it was in great part to the
indiscreet Zeal of a Mitred Head, that
had got an Ascendant over his Master's
Conscience and Counsels, that both the
Monarchy and Hierarchy ow'd afterwards
their Fall.The Divi|sion be|twixt Archbi|shop Abbo and Bishop Laud.
To trace this matter a little higher;
there arose in the preceding Reign two
opposite Parties in the Church, which

became now more than ever exasperated
against each other; the one headed by
Archbishop Abbot, and the other by Bishop
Laud. Abbot was a Person of wonderful
Temper and Moderation; and in all his
Conduct shew'd an unwillingness to
stretch the Act of Vniformity beyond
what was absolutely necessary for the
Peace of the Church; or the Prerogative
of the Crown, any further than conduc'd
to the good of the State. Being not
well turn'd for a Court, though other|wise
of considerable Learning, and Gen|tile
Education, he either could not, or
would not stoop to the Humour of the
Times; and now and then by an unsea|sonable
Stiffness, gave occasion to his Ene|mies
to represent him as not well-inclin'd
to the Prerogative, or too much addicted
to a Popular Interest, and therefore not
fit to be employ'd in Matters of Govern|ment.
Upon the other hand, Bishop
Laud, as he was a Man of greater
Learning, and yet greater Ambition and
Natural Parts, so he understood nicely
the Art of pleasing a Court; and finding
no surer way to raise himself to the first
Dignitices of the Church, than by acting
a quite contrary part to that of Archbi|shop
Abbot, he went into every thing

that seem'd to favour the Prerogative of
the Crown, or enforce an Absolute Obe|dience
upon the Subject.
The King's urgent Necessities, and
the backwardness of the Parliament to
supply them, had forc'd him upon un|warrantable
Methods of raising Money;
and the readiness the Roman-Catholicks
express'd to assist him in his Wants, did
beget in him at first a Tenderness towards
them, and afterwards a Trust and Con|fidence
in them; which was unhappily
mistaken by his other Subjects, as if he
inclin'd to their Religion.
Among other means of raising Money,
that of Loan was fallen upon; which
met with great difficulties, and was ge|nerally
taken to be illegal. One Sibthorp,
an obscure Person, in a Sermon preach'd
at the Assizes at Northampton, would
make his Court by asserting not only the
Lawfulness of this way of imposing
Money by Loan, but that it was the in|dispensible
Duty of the Subject to comply
with it. At the same time Dr. Manwa|ring,
another Divine, preach'd two Ser|mons
before the King at Whitehall, in
which he advanc'd these Doctrines, viz.
That the King is not bound to observe the
Laws of the Realm, concerning the Subjects

Rights and Liberties; but that his Royal
Word and Command in imposing Loans and
Taxes without Consent of Parliament, does
oblige the Subject's Conscience, upon pain of
eternal Damnation. That those who refus'd
to pay this Loan, did offend against the Law
of God, and became guilty of Impiety,
Disloyalty, and Rebellion. And that the
Authority of Parliaments is not necessary
for raising of Aids and Subsidies.
Every body knew Abbot was averse to
such Doctrines: And to seek an advan|tage
against him, Sibthorp's Sermon,
with a Dedication to the King, was sent
him by Order of his Majesty to License.
Abbot refus'd, and gave his Reasons in
writing; which Bishop Laud answer'd,
and with his own hand Licens'd both
Sibthorp's and Manwaring's Sermons. Up|on
this Archbishop Abbot was confin'd to
his Countrey-House, and suspended from
his Function; the Administration of
which was committed to Bishop Laud,
and some others of his Recommenda|tion.
Archbishop Abbot died in disgrace, and
was succeeded in the See of Canterbury
by Bishop Laud; while in the mean time
things went on from bad to worse, and
hasten'd to a Crisis. The two first Par|liaments

King Charles had call'd, pressing
him hard for Redress of Grievances, and
pushing on the Resentments begun in the
preceding Reign, he was prevail'd with
not only to dissolve them, but to leave
the Nation without Parliaments for
Twelve Years together; and all this
contrary to the Advice of some of the
best and wisest men about him; who
foresaw the ill consequences that might
follow, if ever any unlucky Iuncture of
Affairs should necessitate him to call
one.
Such a Iuncture fell out,The Rise of King Charles's Troubles. and the worst
that could be; the manner thus: The
Scots had been of a long time sowr'd by
the Encroachments they said were made
upon their Rights and Liberties, and par|ticularly
in the matter of Church-Govern|ment.
Archbishop Laud's Zeal for an
Vniformity between the two Nations in
point of Liturgy, prov'd the fatal Torch
that put the Two Kingdoms into a flame.
And it was the sooner kindled, there
being so much Fuel laid up for many
Years, that the least Spark was enough to
set fire to the Pile.
In the Year 1637.The Scotch. Troubles. the Scots had not
only in a Tumultuous manner refus'd the
Liturgy that was sent them from England,

of Archbishop Laud's composing; but
had afterwards assum'd to themselves the
Liberty and Power of holding a General
Assembly of their Church, and in it to
abolish Episcopacy, and do several other
things that were judg'd inconsistent with
the Duty of Subjects. Upon which they
were declar'd Rebels; and King Charles
thought his Honour was concern'd to re|duce
them to Obedience by the Sword.
Instead of venturing to call a Parlia|ment,
to enable him to prosecute this
Design, he was necessitated to levy Mo|ney
another way. Great Sums were
rais'd by Loan and Benevolence, to which
the Roman Catholicks and the Clergy of
Laud's Faction contributed most. The
King thus supplied, march'd to the North
with a Gallant Army; and the Scots
came as far as the Borders in a posture of
Defence. To prevent matters coming
to extremity, the Scots presented his Ma|jesty
with their humble Supplication and
Remonstrance, setting forth their inviola|ble
Fidelity to the Crown; and that they
desir'd nothing more, but the peaceable en|joyment
of their Religion and Liberties;
and that all things may be determin'd and
settled by a Free Parliament, and General
Assembly. At length, through the Inter|cession

of the Moderate Party about the
King, and some of the highest Rank in
both Kingdoms, his Majesty was plea'd
to comply with the desires of the Scots,
by a solemn Pacification, sign'd in view of
both Armies near Berwick, in Iune 1638.
This Treaty was but short-liv'd, and
but ill observ'd on either side. The same
men that counsell'd the King to the first,
push'd him on to a second War against
the Scots. Parliaments had been now
discontinu'd for some Years together,
and there appear'd no great Inclination
in the King to call any more, if this emer|gent
occasion had not fallen out. But
his pressing Necessities, and this new
War, oblig'd him once more to try the
Affections of his People in a Parliamen|tary
way.
Accordingly a Parliament meets in
April, 1640. at the opening of which
the King acquainted them with the Af|fronts
he had receiv'd from the Scots, and
demanded a Supply to reduce them to their
Duty by force of Arms. Both Houses
show'd a Willingness to relieve the King's
Wants, and offer'd him a considerable
Supply; but with this Condition, That
their Grievances may be first redress'd;
which had swell'd up to a considerable

Bulk since the last Dissolution. Not only
so, but the Scots had Friends enough in
the Parliament to hinder any great matter
to be done against them; and the greater
part both of Lords and Commons were
but little inclin'd to a War of Archbishop
Laud's kindling.
The King being thus disappointed,
dissolv'd this Parliament as he had done
the rest, when they had scarce sat a
Month; and made what shifts he could
to raise a new Army against the Scots.
They upon the other hand being resolv'd
not to be behind in their Preparations,
enter'd into England with a numerous
Army, compos'd for the most part of
Veteran Officers and Troops, that had
serv'd in Germany under Gustavus Adol|phus,
and taking Berwick and Newcastle,
push'd their way as far as Durham.
King Charles came in Person to York,
and there found himself inviron'd with
perplexing Difficulties on all hands: The
Nobility and Gentry that attended him,
express'd on all occasions their dislike of
the Cause, and the War they were en|gag'd
in: The Scots stood firm to their
ground, being flesh'd with Success: And
the King was follow'd from the South
with Petitions from the City of London,

from several Counties, and from a consi|derable
Number of Lords, desiring him
to call a Parliament, as the only effectual
Means to quiet the Minds of the People,
and compose the present War without
Bloodshed.
To extricate himself out of this La|byrinth,
King Charles summon'd the
Great Council of Peers to meet at York,
to consult what was fit to be done in this
Juncture; who advis'd him unanimously
to enter into a Treaty with the Scots at
Rippon, and to summon a Parliament to
meet at Westminster; with both which
Advices the King comply'd, and imme|diately
issu'd out Writs for a Parliament
to sit down in November, 1640. and ad|journ'd
the Treaty with the Scots to
London.
No Age ever produc'd Greater Men
than those that sat in this Parliament:
They had sufficient Abilities and Incli|nations
to have render'd the ing and
their Countrey happy, if England had
not been through a Chain of concurring
Accidents ripen'd for destruction.
At their sitting down,The Par|liament, 1641. a Scene of Grie|vances
under which the Nation had long
groan'd, was laid open, and all Topicks
made use of to paint them out in liveliest

Colours. The many Cruelties and Ille|gal
Practices of the Star-Chamber, and
High-Comission-Court, that had alienated
Peoples Minds from the Hierarchy, were
now insisted on to throw down those two
Arbitrary Tribunals, and with them in
some time after, the Bishops out of the
House of Peers, and at length Episco|pacy
it self out of the Church. It was
not a few of either House, but indeed all
the Great Patriots, that concurr'd at first
to make Enquiry into the Grievances of
this Reign. Sir Edward Hyde, afterwards
Earl of Clarendon, and Lord Chancellor
of England; the Lord Digby; the Lord
Falkland; the Lord Capell; Mr. Grim|stone,
who was chosen afterwards Speaker
of the House of Commons that brought
in King Charles the Second, and was
Master of the Rolls; Mr. Hollis, since
Lord Hollis; all which suffer'd afterwards
on the King's side; and, in general, most
of those that took the King's part in the
succeeding War, were the Men that ap|pear'd
with the greatest Zeal for the Re|dress
of Grievances, and made the sharp|est
Speeches upon those Subjects. The
Intentions of those Gentlemen were cer|tainly
Noble and Just, and tended to
the equal advantage of King and People:

But the Fate of England urg'd on its own
Ruin step by step, till an open Rupture
between the King and Parliament made
the Gap too wide ever to be made up
again.
Sir Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Straf|ford,
and Dr. Laud, Archbishop of Can|terbury,
had too great a share in the Mi|nistry,
to escape being Censur'd; and
they were the first that felt the effects of
a Popular Hatred. These two Gentle|men,
and Iames Duke of Hamilton, first
advis'd King Charles to call this Parlia|ment;
and all Three fell by it, though
not at the same time.
The Earl of Strafford was a Gentleman
of extraordinary Parts,The Fall and Chara|cter of the Earl of Strafford. a great Orator,
and yet a greater Statesman: He made a
considerable Figure in the first Three
Parliaments of King Charles; and no man
appear'd with greater Zeal against Ship|money,
Tunnage and Poundage, and other
Taxes illegally impos'd upon the Subject.
The Court bought him off, and preferr'd
him to great Honours and Places, which
lost him his former Friends, and made
the Breach irreconcilable. There had
been a long and intimate Friendship be|twixt
Mr. Pym and him, and they had
gone hand in hand in every thing in the

House of Commons. But when Sir Tho|mas
Wentworth was upon making his
Peace with the Court, he sent to Pym
to meet him alone at Greenwich; where
he began in a set Speech to sound Mr. Pym
about the Dangers they were like to run
by the Courses they were in; and what
Advantages they might have, if they
would but listen to some Offers would
probably be made them from the Court.
Pym understanding his drift, stopt him
short with this expression, You need not
use all this Art to tell me that you have a
mind to leave us: But remember what I
tell you, You are going to be undone. But
remember, That though you leave us now,
I will never leave you while your Head is
upon your Shoulders. He was as good as
his word, for it was Pym that first ac|cus'd
him of High Treason in the House
of Commons, he carried up his Impeach|ment
to the House of Lords, and was the
chief Manager of his Tryal, and Bill of
Attainder.
There never was a more solemn Trial
than that of the Earl of Strafford, whe|ther
we consider the Accusers, or the Per|son
accus'd; the Accusation, or the Defence.
As in every thing else, so in this more
particularly, he express'd a wonderful

Presence of Mind, and a vast Compass
of Thought, with such nervous and mo|ving
Flights of Eloquence, as came no|thing
short of the most celebrated Pieces
of Antiquity. This did manifestly ap|pear
from his summing up the long An|swer
he made ex tempore to every one of
the Articles against him, with this Pa|thetick
Conclusion: My Lords, said he,
I have troubled you longer than I should have
done, were it not for the Interest of these
dear Pledges a Saint in Heaven hath left
me. At this word he stopt, pointing to
his Children, that stood by him, and dropt
some Tears; then went on, What I for|feit
for my self in nothing; but that my
Indiscretion should extend to my Posterity,
woundeth me to the very Soul. You will
pardon my Infirmity; something I should
have added, but am not able; therefore let
it pass. And now, my Lords, for my self,
I have been by the Blessing of God, taught,
That the Afflictions of this present Life
are not to be compar'd to that Eternal
Weight of Glory which shall be reveal'd
hereafter. And so, my Lords, even so,
with all Tranquility of Mind, I freely sub|mit
my self to your Iudgment: And whe|ther
that Iudgment be of Life or Death,
Te Deum laudamus.

It's believ'd that King Charles's ap|pearing
so heartily for him, did him no
good with the House of Commons: And
it's confidently said, that he wrote his
Majesty a Letter from the Tower, praying
him not to intercede in his Affair; and
that his not seeming to be concern'd in it,
would be the best Method to calm the
Rage of his Enemies. But notwith|standing
this Caution, the King came to
the House of Lords, and sending for the
House of Commons made a warm Speech
in favour of the Earl; which some of his
Friends took, for so good News, that
they went straight from Westminster to
give him an account of it: Stafford re|ceiv'd
it as his Doom, and told them, The
King's Kindness had ruin'd him; and that
he had little else now to do, but to prepare
himself for Death.
As King Charles was mistaken in his
Intercession for the Earl of Strafford, so
was the Earl himself much more, in ne|glecting
the Advice of his Friends against
his coming up to this Parliament. It
was easy to foresee there was something
design'd to his Prejudice; and he had fair
Warning given him not to come up at
that time; at least, till he saw how mat|ters
would go. He had two plausible

Pretences for his Absence, if he had
pleas'd to make use of them; the necessi|ty
of his Presence in Ireland, where he
was Lord Lieutenant; or in the North of
England, where he was Lieutenant-Ge|neral
of the Army that had been rais'd
against the Scots. But being too confi|dent,
not only of the King's Favour, and
his Interest among the Lords, but of the
good effects an Humble Honey Speech
might have with the House of Com|mons
(to use his own words), he came
late at Night to Town, and took his
place next Morning in the House of
Lords, with an Intention to ask leave
that very day to go down to the House of
Commons to clear himself of the Mis|representations
he lay under.
Mr. Pym hearing he was come, mov'd
to have the Doors lock'd, and the Keys
laid upon the Table, lest any Member
should give Intelligence of what they
were upon: Which being done, he accus'd
the Earl of Strafford of High-Treason;
and an Impeachment was immediately
drawn up, and agreed to by the House.
In the mean time, it fell out unluckily
for the Earl of Strafford, that at his
coming into the House of Lords, they
were upon a Debate that took them up a

considerable time; and while he was
waiting till that was over, the Commons
came up with their Impeachment.
As the Earl was strangely unfortunate
in most things that befel him in the latter
Period of his Life, he was no less in the
very Opinion of the King himself, and
those others that did all they could to save
his Life. For the King in the Speech he
made to both Houses in his favour, was
pleas'd to say, That he did not think my
Lord Strafford fit hereafter to serve him or
the Commonwealth in any Place of Trust,
no not so much as that of a Constable.
And the Lord Digby, in the Speech he
made in the House of Commons against
the Bill of Attainder, for which among
other things he was forc'd to fly, treats
the Earl in yet much harsher Terms:
The Name of the Earl of Strafford (says
he) is a Name of Hatred in the present
Age by his Practices, and fit to be made a
Terror to future Ages by his Punishment. I
am still the same in my Opinions and Affe|ctions
as to the Earl of Strafford (conti|nues
he after); I believe him to be the
most dangerous Minister, the most insup|portable
to free Subjects, that can be cha|racter'd.
I believe his Practices in them|selves
as high, as Tyranical, as any Subject

ever ventur'd upon; and the Malignity of
them highly aggravated by those rare Qua|lities
of his, whereof God has given him the
Vse, but the Devil the Application. In a
word (adds the Lord Digby) I believe
him still that Grand Apostate to the Com|monwealth,
who must not expect to be par|don'd
in this World, till he be dispatch'd
into the other. And yet let me tell you,
Mr. Speaker, my Hand must not be at that
Dispatch. Thus far a Nobleman that
was entirely in the King's Interest; and
for his Zeal to the Royal Cause became
the most obnoxious to the Parliament.
After all, there seems to have been
some Mistake about the main Article in
his Accusation, of his advising the King
to bring over the Army from Ireland to re|duce
England; which contributed more
to the undoing of this Minister, than all
the rest: For the Proof of this Article
being only Words contain'd in Mr. Se|cretary
Vane's Notes,Appendix, Numb. 6. (which are plac'd
in the Appendix) and said to be spoke at
the Council-Table, they do naturally refer
to the Kingdom of Scotland, and not to
England; the thing then under Debate,
being how to reduce Scotland. And
though Secretary Vane swore to the
Truth of his Notes, yet it was after

such a manner as left the matter still
more dubious: And though he had sworn
more positively, it was but the Testimo|ny
of One Witness, and that contradicted
by Four Lords, who were then present in
Council, and who declar'd upon their
Honours, That they did not remember they
heard the Earl of Strafford speak those
Words.
I cannot leave the Earl of Strafford,
without taking notice of a silly Mistake
that has gain'd some Credit in the World,
as if the Bill of Attainder against him
was of so extraordinary a nature, and so
much out of all the known Methods of
Justice, that the Legislators themselves
were oblig'd to insert a Clause into the
Body of it, That it should never be drawn
into President. Whereas that Clause does
expresly relate only to Judges in Inferior
Courts; and is conceiv'd in the following
words: Provided, That no Iudge or Iudges,
Iustice or Iustices whatsoever, shall adjudge
or interpret any Act or Thing to be Treason,
nor hear or determine any Treason, in any
other manner than he or they should or ought
to have done, before the making of this
Act.
As Archbishop Laud was nothing in|ferior
to the Earl of Strafford in Parts,

and much his Superior in Learning;The Fall and Cha|racter of Archbi|shop Laud. so
it is as hard to determine which of the
two made a Nobler Defence at their
Trial. The Fate of the former has been
the same with that of most Great Men,
to be represented to Posterity in Ex|tremes;
for we have nothing writ of
him, but what's either Panegyrick, or
Satyr, rather than History.
That Archbishop Laud was brought to
his Trial, and found Guilty during the
Heat of a Civil War, and when all things
were tending to Confusion, was nothing
strange: Nor was Serjeant Wild's Intro|duction
at the opening of his Charge, any
thing but what might have been expected
at such a time, when he told the Lors,
That it might be said of the Great Cause of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, as it was in
a like Case, Repertum est hodierno die faci|nus,
quod nec Poeta fingere, nec Histrio
sonare, nec Mimus imitari potuer it. But
it was indeed strange, and none of the
least of this Great Man's Misfortunes,
That Three Years before, he should be
declar'd by the House of Commons a
Traytor, Nemine contradicente at a time
when there was not the least Misunder|standing
betwixt the King and Parlia|ment,
being within the first Month after

they sat down: And which was yet
stranger, That no body was more severe
upon him, than some of those that after|wards
took the King's Part against the
Parliament, and were at last the chief In|struments
of his Son's Restoration. Who|ever
reads Sir Harbottle Grimstone's
Speech upon voting his Impeachment,
or Pym's upon carrying it up to the Lords,
will be apt to think, That scarce any Age
has produc'd a Man, whose Actions and Con|duct
have been more obnoxious to Obloquy,
or given greater occasion for it.
There was one Thread that run
through his whole Accusation, and upon
which most of the Articles of his Im|peachment
turn'd; and that was, his In|clination
to Popery, and his design to intro|duce
the Romish Religion: Of which his
Immortal Book against Fisher, and his
Declaration at his Death, do sufficiently
acquit him. And yet, not Protestants
only, but even Roman-Catholicks them|selves
were led into this Mistake; other|wise
they would not have dar'd to offer
one in his Post a Cardinal's Cap, as he
confesses in his Diary they did twice. The
Introduction of a great many Pompous
Ceremonies into the Church, the Licen|sing
some Books that spoke favourably of

the Church of Rome, and the refusing to
License others that were writ against it,
were the principal Causes of his being
thus misrepresented: And indeed his Be|haviour
in some of these matters, as like|wise
in the Star-Chamber, and High-Commission-Court,
can hardly be account|ed
for; and particularly his Theatrical
manner of Consecrating a New Church
in London;Appendix, Numb. 7. related at length in the Ap|pendix.
He was certainly, in spite of Malice,
a Man of an elevated Capacity, and vast
Designs; a great Encourager of Learn|ing,
and Learned Men; and spar'd no
Pains nor Cost to enrich England with
such a Noble Collection of Books and
Manuscripts in most Languages, as look'd
rather like the Bounty of a King, than of
a Subject. As he left behind him many
lasting Monuments of his Beneficence to
the Learned World, so was he in a way
to have carry'd it much further, if his
Misfortunes had not interven'd, and de|priv'd
Learning of so powerful a Bene|factor.
But after all; as there is seldom found
a Mind so Great but has some Allay, so
it seems Archbishop Laud, notwithstand|ing
his excellent Endowments, was not

Proof against either the Impression of
Dreams, or Revenge of Personal Affronts,
though never so trivial in themselves, nor
the Person never so mean: Of the one,
witness his taking so particular notice in
his Diary of several of his Dreams; and
of the other, his carrying his Resent|ments
so far against Archie the King's
Fool, for a mere Iest, that he had him
turn'd out of Court by an Order of Coun|cil:
Which being so unaccountable a
piece of Weakness in so great a Man, and
done at a full Board, the King and the
Archbishop present; the Order is plac'd
in the Appendix,Appendix, Numb. 8. for a remarkable Instance
how far the Greatest of Men may at some
times be left without a Guard against Pas|sion.
To return to King Charles, he did eve|ry
thing that was possible, to give satis|faction
to the Parliament, or could be
reasonably expected from a Gracious and
Beneficent Prince. He pass'd the Bill for
Attainting the Earl of Strafford, though
with reluctancy, as believing he deserv'd
not such hard measure: He took away
Monopolies, that had been a great Discou|ragement
to Trade: He express'd him|self
to their Contentment in the matters
of Loan, Ship-money, Tunnage and Poun|dage,

and other unwarrantable Methods
that had been us'd in raising Money; and
show'd a settled Resolution to comply
with them in every thing that might tend
to the Ease and Security of the Subject.
As in the preceding Parliament he had
past the Petition of Right, so in the be|ginning
of this he had agreed to the Acts
for Triennial Parliaments, and for abolish|ing
the Star-Chamber and High Commission
Courts, which had been great Grievances;
and with Chearfulness pass'd that Act
which seem'd inconsistent with his own
just Prerogative, That that Parliament
should not be dissolv'd, but by Act of Par|liament;
nor prorogu'd or adjourn'd, but by
their own Consent.
The King having upon these Concessi|ons
receiv'd the Publick Thanks of Both
Houses, and the loud Applauses of his
People, took a Journey for Scotland in
August, 1641. to settle matters there,
that requir'd his Presence; leaving the
Parliament sitting, which they continued
to do for some time, and then adjournd
themselves to October following. At the
King's going away, Affairs had been al|ready
settled betwixt the two King|doms
by an Act of Pacification, and
both Armies order'd to be disbanded,

the Scots returning home for that pur|pose.
While the King was in Scotland,The Irish Rebellion. the
Irish Rebellion broke out, which became
a new Bone of Contention between the
King and the Parliaments of both Nati|ons.
He took what Measures were pos|sible
in Scotland about suppressing that
Rebellion, and made what haste he could
back to England to concert with the Par|liament
there, what was further to be
done towards it; leaving the Scots, as he
said himself, a contented People, and eve|ry
thing settled to their mind both in
Church and State.
He return'd to London the latter end of
November, and was receiv'd with all de|monstrations
of Affection. The Lord-Mayor
and Aldermen, the Nobility, Gen|try,
and Train'd-Bands met him without
the City, and conducted him in great
State, with the Acclamations of the
People (the City-Companies in their
Formalities lining the Streets on each
side) to Guildhall, where he was Royally
Feasted, and after Dinner conducted
with the same Pomp to Whitehall.
What man that had seen a Prince thus
receiv'd into his Capital City, could have
imagin'd, that within less than Seven

Weeks he should be oblig'd to leave it
upon the account of Tumults, never to
see it again, but as a Prisoner brought thi|ther
to dye upon a Scaffold? Yet this
was King Charles's hard Fortune: And
it's here I would willingly draw a Veil
over the remaining part of his Reign,
that ended in one of the most dismal
Tragedies that ever was acted upon the
English Stage. His Virtues and Morals
deserv'd a better Fate, and he suffer'd for
the Faults of others, rather than Errors
of his own.
The House of Commons had begun
some few days before his Return, to fall
into new Heats about Innovations in Reli|gion;
the Rebellion in Ireland; Plots said
to be laid in Scotland; the disabling the
Clergy to exercise Temporal Iurisdiction;
and excluding the Bishops from Votes in
Parliament: All which matters, together
with Reports that were buzz'd about of
some Designs against the Parliament, led
the House into that Remarkable Petition
and Remonstrance of the State of the Na|tion;The Peti|tion and Remon|strance of the II of Commons to King Charls.
in which they ript up again all the
Mismanagements in the Government
since the King's coming to the Crown;
and attributed all to Evil Counsels and
Counsellors, and a Malignant Party about

the King. This Remonstrance was roughly
penn'd, both for Matter and Expression,
and met with great Opposition in the
House; the Debate lasting from Three
a Clock in the Afternoon till Ten a Clock
next Morning; and was presented to his
Majesty the Eighth Day after his Return
from Scotland.
It was no wonder King Charles was
surpriz'd at this Petition and Remon|strance,
considering how much he had
done to comply with his Parliament in all
they desired. And since from these two
Papers, and from the King's Answer to it
at its delivery, and the Declaration he
publish'd more at large afterwards to the
same purpose, the Reader will be better
enabled to make a Judgment of the Cause
and Arguments on both Sides for the
Civil War that ensued, I have plac'd all
the Four in the Appendix:Appendix, Numb. 9. The Length
of them may be more easily pardon'd,
since upon the Matters contain'd in them,
the whole almost of all the Differences
that came to be decided by the Sword,
happen'd to turn.
Things were now going fast on to|wards
lessening the Confidence betwixt
the King and Parliament:K. Charles's coming to the II. of Commons to demand the Five Members. And yet there
were not wanting Endeavours on both

Sides to accommodate Matters by soft
and healing Methods, when the King's
coming to the House of Commons in Per|son
to demand Five of their Members,
whom he had order'd the day before to
be impeach'd of High-Treason, did put
all into a Combustion, and gave occasion
to the House to assert their Privileges with
a greater Warmth than ever. This was
the most unlucky Step King Charles could
have made at that Juncture: And the
Indiscretion of some that attended the
King to the Lobby of the House, was in|sisted
upon as an Argument that the King
was resolv'd to use Violence upon the Par|liament,
which it's to be presum'd was a
thing far from his thoughts. The Five
Members had hardly time to make their
Escape just when the King was entring;
and upon his going away, the House ad|journ'd
in a Flame for some days, order|ing
a Committee to sit in Guildhall in the
mean time, as if they were not safe at
Westminster.
Whoever they were that advis'd the
King to this rash Attempt, are justly
chargeable with all the Blood that was
afterwards spilt; for this sudden Action
was the first and visible Ground of all
our following Miseries. It was believ'd,

That if the King had found the Five
Members in the House, and had call'd in
his Guards to seize them, the House
would have endeavour'd their defence,
and oppos'd Force to Force; which
might have endanger'd the King's Per|son.
But the Consequences were bad
enough without this; for immediately
upon it there was nothing but Confusion
and Tumults, Fears and Iealousies every
where, which spread themselves to
Whitehall in the rudest manner; so that
his Majesty thinking himself not safe
there, he retir'd with his Family to
Hampton Court.
The King leaving the Parliament in
this manner, there were scarce any hopes
of a thorough Reconciliation. But when
after a great many Removes from place
to place,The Be|ginning of the Ci|vil Wars. his Majesty came to set up his
Standard at Nottingham, there ensued a
Fatal and Bloody War; which it's rea|sonable
to believe was never design'd at
first by either Side.
Each Party blam'd the other for be|ginning
this War; and it's not easy to
determine which of them began it.
Though the King made the first Steps
that seem'd to tend that way; such as
raising a Troop for a Guard to his Person;

summoning the Gentlemen and Freeholders
of several Counties to attend him in his Pro|gress
to the North, and ordering Arms
and Ammunition to be bought in Holland
for his use: Yet the Parliament did as
much at the same time; for they likewise
rais'd Guards of their own, and took care
that the Magazine of Hull should not fall
into the King's hands. So that the King
and Parliament prepar'd themselves in|sensibly
for War, without considering
that these Preparations must gradually
and inevitably come to Blows in the end.
The King's setting up his Standard at
Nottingham was not the first publick No|tice
of this War, as has been commonly
reported by Historians that should have
known better; for that was not done till
August 22. 1642. and yet the House of
Commons past these Two Votes the 12th
of Iuly before; 1. That an Army should be
forthwith rais'd for the Safety of the King's
Person, Defence of both Houses of Parlia|ment,
and of those who have obey'd their
Orders and Commands; and preserving of
the true Religion, Laws, Liberty, and
Peace of the Kingdom. And 2. That
the Earl of Essex should be General, and
the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse.
To which Votes the House of Lords
agreed.

Whoever begun the War, it was car|ried
on in the beginning with equal Suc|cess,
and it was hard to determine which
Side had the better: Till in the Sequel,
the Loss of Essex's Army in the West,
and other disadvantages, brought the
Parliaments Affairs to a low Ebb, and
seem'd to promise the King an entire
Mastery. To retrieve their sinking For|tune,
the Parliament was oblig'd to call
in the Scots to their Assistance; which so
far turn'd the Scale, that the King lost
ground every day after: And the Defeat
of his Army at the Battels of Marston-Moor,
and Naseby, put him out of capa|city
to keep the Field, and broke entirely
all his Measures.
During the whole Course of this Vn|natural
War, it was hard to divine what
would be the Fate of England; whether
an Absolute Vnlimited Monarchy; a new
huddled-up Commonwealth; or a down|right
Anarchy. If the king should pre|vil,
the first was to e feard, consider|ing
that the many Indignities put upon
him, might imbitter him against the Par|lament:
If the Parliament should pre|vail,
the second was to be apprehended:
And if the Army should set up for them|selves,
as afterwards they did, the last

was inevitably to follow. All which
some of the best men about the King
wisely foresaw, and trembled at the
Event of every Battel that was fought,
whoever, happen'd to be Victors. It was
the dread of these Misfortunes that hin|der'd
the Lords and Commons whom the
King call'd to Oxford, to assume to them|selves
the Name of The Parliament of
England, and from declaring those met
at Westminster, Rebels; though the King
again and again importun'd them to it,
and took their Refusal so ill, that in one
of his Letters to Queen, intercepted
at Naseby, he reflects heavily upon them
for it, and calls them in derision his Mun|grel
Parliament. It was likewise the
dismal Prospect he had of this War, even
in the beginning of it, that mov'd that
Accomplish'd Gentleman the Lord Falk|land
to throw away his Life, rather than
be a witness of the Miseries were coming
upon the Nation. For though he was
Secretary of State to the King, and fol|low'd
his Fortune; yet seeing all his En|deavours
for promoting a Peace were in
vain, he went on with a Party to skir|mish
with the Enemy, the day before the
first Battel of Newbury; and being dissua|ded
by his Friends, as having no Call to

it, being no Military Person, he said,
He was weary of the Times, and foresaw
much Misery to his Countrey, and hop'd he
should be out of it e're night. So pushing
into the Battel, he was slain.
Many Endeavours were us'd from
time to time to bring Matters to an Ac|commodation
by way of Treaty;Endea|vours that were us'd for an Ac|commo|dation. but
still some one unlucky Accident or ano|ther
render'd them all abortive. At the
Treaty of Vxbridge, though the Parlia|ment's
Demands were high, and the King
show'd a more than ordinary Aversion to
comply with them; yet the ill posture of
the King's Affairs at that time, and the
fatal Consequences they fear'd would
follow upon breaking off of the Treaty,
oblig'd a great many of the King's Friends,
and more particularly that Noble Person
the Earl of Southampton, who had gone
Post from Vxbrige to Oxford for that pur|pose,
to press the King again and again
upon their Knees, to yield to the necessity
of the Times; and by giving his Assent
to some of the most material Propositions
that were sent him, to settle a lasting
Peace with his People. The King was at
last prevail'd with to follow their Coun|sel;
and the next Morning was appoint|ed
for signing a Warrant to his Commis|sioners

to the effect. And so sure were
they of a happy end of all differences,
that the King at Supper complaining his
Wine was not good, one told him merri|ly,
He hop'd that his Majesty would dink
better before a Week was over, at Guildhall
with the Lord Mayor. But so it was,
that when they came early next morning
to wait upon him with the Warrant that
had been agreed upon over Night, they
found his Majesty had chang'd his Reso|lution,
and was become inflexible in these
Points.
The unhappy Occasion this Altera|tion
has lain hitherto a Secret in History,
and might have continued such still, if a
Letter from the Marquess of Montross in
Scotland,Montross's Fatal Let|ter. whereof I have seen a Copy
under the Duke of Richmond's Hand, did
not give a sufficient Light into it. To
make the Matter better understood, it's
necessary to say something of Montross
and his Actions in Scotland. This No|bleman
had been at first very active and
zealous for the Liberties of his Countrey;
and was the first man that past the River
Tweed at the Head of Five hundred Horse,
upon the Scots First Expedition into Eng|land.
But being afterwards disoblig'd,
or as some say, repenting of his former

Error, he left that Side, and came in to
the King at the breaking out of the War
between Him and the Parliament. When
the Scots came into England the second
time to assist the Parliament, Montross
apply'd himself to the King for a Commis|sion
to levy War against his Rebel Sub|jcts,
as they were call'd, of Scotland;
assuring his Majesty, he was able with
the Assistance of his Friends, and Con|currence
of the rest of the Royal Party,
to make at least a very considerable Di|version,
if not to reduce the whole Coun|trey
to his Majesty's Obedience. Ac|cordingly
the Marquess was made Gover|nor
of Scotland; where in the space of
five Months, with a handful of raw un|disciplin'd
Men, and those not half arm'd,
he did over-run a great part of the Coun|trey,
and gain'd three very considerable
Battels; the last of which was that of
Inverlochy, fought the second of Februa|ry,
1644. according to the English, and
1645. according to the Scotch Account.
In this Battel the Earl of Argyle was en|tirely
defeated, and the Prime of the No|ble
Family of the Campbells cut off, with
inconsiderable Loss on Montross's side;
who next day dispatch'd an Express to
the King with the News of this and his

two former Victories: And in his Letter
express'd his utter Aversion to all Treaties
with his Rebel-Parliament in England, as
he calls them: Tells the King, he is hear|tily
sorry to hear that his Majesty had con|sented
to Treat; and hopes it is not true:
Advises him not to enter into Terms with
his Rebellious Subjects, as being a thing un|worthy
of a King: And assures him, That
he himself was now so much Master of
Scotland, that he doubted not but to be able
within a few Months to march into England
to his Majesty's assistance, with a brave Ar|my.
And concludes with this odd Ex|pression,
When I have conquer'd from Dan
to Beersheba, as I doubt not I shall very
quickly, I hope I may have then leave to say
as David's General said to his Master, Come
thou, lest this Countrey be call'd by my
Name.
This Letter, writ with such an Air of
Assurance, and by a Person that was
thought capable to make good his Promi|ses;
and the Matter contain'd in it, suit|ing
but too well with the King's Inclina|tions,
was unluckily deliver'd to the King
but a few Hours before he was to have
sign'd the Warrant before-mention'd;
and had as ill effects as the worst of King
Charles's Enemies could have wish'd; for

it dash'd out in a moment all the Im|pressions
his best Friends had been ma|king
upon him for a considerable time,
towards a full Settlement with his Peo|ple.
It look'd as if there was some secret
Fatality in this whole matter; for it
could hardly have been imagin'd, that a
Letter writ the Third of February, in the
furthermost North Corner of Britain,
should come so soon to Oxford, consider|ing
the length of the Journey, the bad|ness
of the Roads at that time of the
Year, especially through the Mountai|nous
parts of Scotland, together with the
Parliament's and Scotch Armies and Ga|risons
that were posted all along the
Road: And yet certain it is, it came
through all these Dangers and Inconve|niences
in very few days; for it's indors'd
upon the Copy I have seen, That it was
deliver'd to the King during the Treaty of
Vxbridge; which every body knows
began the 30th of Ianuary, and ended the
22d of February: And further, it must
have been deliver'd before the 19th of
February, because King Charles takes no|tice
of it in a Letter to the Queen, of that
Date, found among others at Naseby;
where he says, Though I leave News to

others, yet I cannot but tell thee, That even
now I have received certain Intelligence of
a great Defeat given by Montross to Ar|gyle,
who upon surprize totally routed those
Rebels, and kill'd Fifteen hundred upon the
place. And it's remarkable, That in the
same Letter to the Queen, immediately
after the mentioning Montross's Victory,
the King adds, That as for trusting the
Rebels, either by going to London, or dis|banding
my Army before a Peace, do no
ways fear my hazarding so cheaply or folish|ly;
for I esteem the Interest thou hast in me
at a far dearer rate; and pretend to have a
little more Wit (at least, by the Sympathy
that's betwixt us) than to put my self into
the Reverence of Persidious Rebels. Which
Words being compar'd with Montross's
Letter, it will be found the one is a Com|mentary
upon the other.
I have plac'd Montross's Letter it self
in the Appendix;Appendix, Numb. 10. and cannot leave it,
without making this Observation, That
considering the time it was writ, the Critical
Minute it was deliver'd, with the sad Con|sequences
that attended it; it makes this
Axiom true, That oftentimes the Fate of
Princes and States is chiefly owing to very
minute and unforeseen Accidents.

The Treaty of Vxbridge being thus
broke off, the War was renew'd with
greater Fury than ever; till at last the
Parliament's Army having beaten the
King out of the Field, came to kick their
Masters out of the House; and having
modell'd the Parliament and Army to
their own minds, did set up for them|selves,
and at one Blow compleated the
Ruin of their Countrey in the Murther of
King Charles I. and the Extirpation of
Monarchy. In short, a continued Series
of Misfortunes attended the Royal
Cause; and several favourable Accidents
that seem'd from time to time to promise
better Events, did concur in the end to
the King's undoing: Till at last, that
Unhappy Prince, in being brought be|fore
a Tribunal of his own Subjects, and
submitting his Neck to the Stroke of a
Common Executioner, taught the World
an astonishing Example of the Instability
of Human Greatness; and in that and
the rest of his Sufferings, a lasting Patern
of Christian Magnanimity and Patience.
The Character of King Charles I.The Cha|racter of King Charles I.
may be taken in a great part from what
has been already said; and I shall only
add a few things more. He was a Prince

of a Comely Presence, of a Sweet, Grave,
but Melancholy Aspect. His Face was
Regular, Handsome, and well-comple|xion'd;
his Body Strong, Healthy, and
well-made; and though of a low Stature,
was capable to endure the greatest Fa|tigues.
His Face, contrary to that of
his Son's Charles II. was easily taken,
either in Painting or Sculpture; and
scarce any one, though never so indiffe|rently
skill'd in their Art, fail'd do hit it.
He had something in the Lines and Fea|tures
which Physiognomists account un|fortunate:
And it's commonly reported,
that his Picture being sent to Rome to
have a Busto done by it; a famous Statua|ry
not knowing whose it was, told the
Gentleman that brought it, He was sorry
if it was the Face of any Relation of his;
for it was one of the most Vnfortunate he
ever saw; and according to all the Rules of
Art, the Person whose it was, must dye a
violent Death. In his Temper he was
Brave, Magnificent, Liberal, and Constant;
but more affable to Strangers than his
own Subjects. It was his Noble and
Generous Behaviour that took so much
with the King of Spain, when he went
thither to court the Infanta, that he re|jected
the repeated Solicitations of his

Council to seize him; and paid him more
Respect than could have been well ex|pected,
if he had been King of England
at that time. Of his Composure of
Mind in time of greatest danger, he gave
a Noble Instance in his Behaviour in that
great Storm in the Road of St. Andrees,
which was worthy the Ancient Philo|sophers:
Nor did he fall short of the
Bravest in Personal Courage; having ex|pos'd
his Person in every Battel he was
in, and oftentimes charging at the Head
of his Squadrons.
He had a good Taste of Learning, and
a more than ordinary Skill in the Liberal
Arts, especially Painting, Sculpture, Ar|chitecture,
and Medals; and being a Ge|nerous
Benefactor to the most Celebrated
Masters in those Arts, he acquir'd the
Noblest Collection of any Prince in his
time, and more than all the Kings of
England had done before him. It's said,
notwithstanding his Natural Generosity,
That he bestow'd Favours with a worse
Grace than his Son King Charles the Se|cond
denied them; and many times ob|literated
the sense of the Obligation by
the manner of it: But indeed he had sel|dom
much to give, being kept short of
Money a great part of his Reign. The

Essentials of Divinity he was as much
Master of, as ever his Father had been,
but without the Allay of Pedantry: Of
this among other things, the Papers that
past betwixt him and Mr. Henderson at
Newcastle, will be a lasting Monument.
He was a great Patron of the Clergy;
but his employing them in the highest
Offices of Trust in State Matters, created
Envy against them, and lessen'd the Love
of the Nobility towards him. Yet such
was the Honesty and Integrity of one of
them in the greatest and most obnoxious
Post in the Kingdom, that when some
Years after he had resign'd the Treasu|rer's
Staff, and when the Parliament
wanted not Will to crush him, they could
not find upon the narrowest Scrutiny, any one
thing to object either against his Accounts,
or his Behaviour in that Place.
King Charles was a passionate Lover of
his Queen, who was a Beautiful Lady,
and in all things very well accomplish'd;
insomuch that his Friends regretted the
Ascendant she had over him on some oc|casions,
while others tax'd him with the
Character of an Uxorious Husband. He
was fond of his Children, and kind to his
Servants; though these last felt sometimes
the hasty Sallies of his Passion. He was

not mistaken of himself, when he said
before the High-Court of Justice, That
he understood as much Law as any private
Gentleman in England: And pity it was
that any of his Ministers should have ad|vis'd
him to make Breaches in what he so
well understood.
He spoke several Languages very well,
and with a singular good Grace; though
now and then, when he was warm in
Discourse, he was inclinable to stammer.
He writ a tolerable Hand for a King, but
his Sense was strong, and his Stile Laco|nick;
and yet he seldom wrote in any
Language but English. Some of his
Manifestoes, Declarations, and other Pub|lick
Papers he drew himself, and most
of them he Corrected. In comparing
those of the King's with the Parliament's,
one will be easily inclin'd to prefer, for the
most part, the King's, for the Strength
of Reasoning, and the Force of Expres|sion.
I have seen several Pieces of his
own Hand, and therefore may the better
affirm, That both for Matter and Form
they surpass those of his Ablest Mini|sters,
and come nothing short of Strafford
or Falkland, the Two most Celebrated
Pens of that time.

As to his Religion, he was Protestant,
and in the strictest sense, of the Church
of England, and for the Divine Right of
Episcopacy. But his consenting perso|nally
to the total Abolition of that Order
in Scotland, does not well agree with this
part of his Character; especially consi|dering
his repeated Protestations at the
Treaties of Vxbridge and Newport, That
he could not supersede it, but for a time
in England. What his Opinion was,
about Subjects defending their Religion and
Liberties by Force of Arms, appear'd in the
business of Rochell. For though some
would have had us believe of late, That
Defensive Arms were inconsistent with
the Principles of the Church of England;
it's hop'd they will not deny but King
Charles I. understood the Doctrine and
Principles of that Church as well as any
other Person can pretend to do; and yet
its certain, that in his Practice and De|clarations
he allow'd of the People of
Rochell's vindicating their Religion and
Liberties from the Encroachments made by
their Sovereign, and that by Force of
Arms; and assisted them in so doing.
King Charles did not only assist the
Rochellers after the War was actually be|gun,His assist|ing the Rochellers.
but we have reason to believe that

he encourag'd them to it at first, if we
look into the Duke of Rhoan's Memoirs
and Apology; where that Great Man
acquaints the World in what manner he
was brought into that War, in these
words, as near as I can translate them
from the Original: When all our Privi|leges
(says he) were violated, and our
Religion brought to Ruin, and the City of
Rochell in the greatest Danger, I could see
no possibility to escape, but was upon the sad
thoughts of submitting our selves to the
Mercy of the King (meaning Lewis the
XIIIth.) Being in this desperate state,
there came a Gentleman to me from the
King of England; who told me from his
Master, That he seeing our Privileges were
violated, and our Religion in danger of
being subverted, had taken compassion on our
Sufferings, and thought himself oblig'd in
Honour and Conscience to assist and protect
us; which he was resolv'd to do, by employ|ing
all his Kingdoms, and his own Person,
in so just a War: Provided, we would join
our Arms with his, and not enter into any
Treaty with the King (meaning the
French King) without him; and for that
effect he would make War against the French
King both by Sea and Land Intreating
me (continues the Duke of Rhoan) not

to abandon my Party in so just and honoura|ble
a War. And a little after, in the same
Apology, he has these words; I refer it
to all the World, if I can be justly call'd the
Author of the Third War, considering I was
sollicited to it by the King of Great Bri|tain.
But suppose there were no Credit to be
given to the Duke of Rhoan, whose Ho|nour
and Veracity even his very Enemies
never call'd in question; and suppose it
were false, which all the World knows
to be true, that King Charles did actually
assist the Rochellers again and again against
their Prince; yet we have Authentick
Accounts of several Speeches made by
the Duke of Buckingham's Secretary to the
Rochellers, and of several Messages sent
to them from the Duke, in name of the
King his Master, all to the same purpose:
And likewise a Manifesto publish'd by
him, and sign'd with his own Hand,
dated Iuly 21. 1627. aboard the Admiral
Ship; in which he has this Expression:
No private Interest (says he) has oblig'd
my Master to make War against the French
King, but merely the Defence of the Prote|stant
Church: My Master's design is the Re|establishment
of the Church; their Good is
his Interest, and their Contentment his End.

We have also Authentick Copies of the
League betwixt King Charles and the Peo|ple
of Rochell; in which there is this
Expression, That the Rochellers may be
deliver'd from the Oppressions they groan un|der.
And to sum up all, there were two
Letters writ by King Charles with his
own Hand to the Rochellers, which are
mention'd by Monsieur Mervault, a Syn|dic
of that Town, and who was active
in the whole matter, and present during
the whole Siege; of which the Copies
follow.

To the Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers, and Burgesses
of the City of Rochell.
Gentlemen,
BE not discouraged, though my Fleet be
return'd. Hold out to the last; for
I am resolv'd that my whole Fleet shall pe|rish,
rather than you be not reliev'd. For
this effect I have order'd It to return back to
your Coasts, and am sending several Ships
to reinforce it. With the Help of God the
Success shall be happy for you.
At Westminster, May
19. O. S. 1628.
Your Good Friend,
CHARLES R.


The other Letter, directed as before,
runs thus:

Gentlemen,
I Have been very much troubled to hear
that my Fleet was upon the point of re|turning
home, without obeying my Orders
in supplying you with Provisions, cost what
it will. I have commanded them to return
to your Road, and not to come away until
you are supply'd, or at least till they are re|inforc'd,
which I have order'd to be done
with all diligence. Assure your selves, That
I shall never abandon you; and that I shall
employ the whole Power of my Kingdom for
your deliverance, until God assist me to ob|tain
for you an assured Peace.
Given at our Palace of
Westminster, May 27.
O. S. 1628.
Your Good Friend,
CHARLES R.

I have dwelt the longer upon this Sub|ject,
because it is easy to draw a Parallel
betwixt this Case of King Charles's assist|ing
Subjects against their King in the De|fence
of their Religion and Liberties,
and that of another Prince's doing the
same upon a late occasion. But as the
former had no other Right to interpose

in the one, but the common Interest of
Religion; so the other had over and above
that, the Right of a Prince of the Blood,
and the Interest of the Presumptive Heir
of the Crown; all which alter'd the Case
greatly to the advantage of the latter.
King Charles was as unfortunate in this
War with France, as he was in all others
he engag'd in. The poor City of Rochell,
after a long and Cruel Siege, amidst the
Horrors of Famine and Death, was at
last forc'd to submit to the Will of the
Conqueror; and the loss of that Bul|wark
of the French Liberty, was in
some time follow'd by the total Ruin of
the Protestant Interest in France. The
English Fleet lay within view of the
Town when it was taken; and which
added to the Misfortune, that mighty
Dyke, that had been rais'd at inestimable
Charges to block up the Harbour, fell
down the very next day after the Surren|der,
and open'd a Passage for the Fleet
that came to relieve it, when it was now
too late.
During this War, he lost his Favou|rite,The Cha|racter of the D of Bucking|ham.
George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham.
This Gentleman was one of the greatest
Prodigies of Fortune that any Age has
produc'd; and gave us a signal Instance

how far it is possible for the same Person
to be the Favourite of two Successive
Monarchs. He possess'd King Iames's
Favour without a Rival, and without
any other Interruption, but that Cloud
which the Intrigues of Spain rais'd against
him in the King's mind, which has been
already hinted at; wherein the Son
shar'd equally with the Favourite, and
which Bishop Williams's dexterity soon
dissipated. King Charles out-did his
Father in his Kindness to Buckingham,
and had no Favourite after him. He
had all the Qualities that are requisite for
a Court, and fit to acquire and preserve
his Master's Affection. Notwithstand|ing
he was in his Temper highly Generous
and Beneficent, and that there were few
Great Families in England but he had
some way or other oblig'd, either in
themselves or their Relations, yet he fell
under the Misfortune that attends Favou|rites;
but it must be own'd he was rather
envied than hated. He had the ill luck
to be charg'd with a great many things
of which he was innocent, and particu|larly
in relation to the Spanish Match.
By all that I have seen, he deserv'd the
Thanks of the Nation upon that account,
rather than an Impeachment in Parlia|ment:

For it was he chiefly that broke
off that Match, when he saw how much
King Iames suffer'd in his Honour,
through the manner he was treated in it,
which he found out sooner than the
King did himself. It's none of the least
Proofs of the Duke of Buckingham's In|nocency
in these matters, that Spanhemius
in his History of the Electrice Palatine,
(writ long after Buckingham's Death)
speaks always honourably of him in the
Business of the Palatinate; whereas at
the same time he exposes King Iames's
Conduct.
It's a vulgar mistake, That he came to
be the First Minister, merely through
the Caprice of King Iames; for the
Court unanimously promoted his Inte|rest,
and recommended him to the highest
Favour, in opposition to Somerset, whose
Arrogancy, Covetousness, and Pride,
had disoblig'd every body, and made
both the King and the Court weary of
him. No Servant did his Master more
Honour in the Magnificence of his Train,
and the splendid Manner of his living;
especially in his Embassy to France;
whre in the Gracefulness of his Person,
and Nobleness of his Behaviour and Equi|page,
he out-did any thing that ever was

seen of that kind before. He was more
form'd for a Court than a Camp; and
though very Brave in his Person, he was
Unsuccessful in the only Military Expedi|tion
he was engag'd in, which was that
of Rochell: And when he was upon the
embarking a second time to repair that
Disgrace, he was basely murder'd amidst a
Croud of his Friends, and in the height of
his Glory.
To return to King Charles's Character.
If he had any Personal Faults, they were
much over-weigh'd by his Virtues: But
an Immoderate Desire of Power, beyond
what the Constitution did allow of, was
the Rock he split upon. He might have
been happy, if he had trusted more to
his own Judgment, than that of those
about him; for as in his nature he was
an Enemy to all violent Measures, so was
he apt to submit his own Reason to that
of others, when any such things came
under consideration. There was another
Error that run through the whole Ma|nagement
of his Affairs, both Domestick
and Publick, and which occasion'd a
great part of his Misfortunes: He ap|pear'd
many times stiff and positive in
denying at first, what he granted after|wards
out of time, and too late to give

satisfaction; which encourag'd ambiti|ous
and interested Persons to ask more
than they thought of at first, and lost him
the fruits of his former Concessions. So
that in the whole Conduct of his Life he
verified this Maxim, That Errors in Go|vernment
have ruin'd more Princes than
their Personal Vices.
I shall have done with this Melancholy
Subject, after the Reader has been ac|quainted
with one remarkable Accident,
not hitherto mention'd with that Exact|ness
it deserves, by any Author I know
of; which considering its Consequences,
is an extraordinary Instance, upon what
small Hinges the greatest Revolutions may
turn.
That the principal Rise of all King
Charles's latter Troubles,The true Cause of the Scots coming first into England. was from the
Second War with the Scots, has been alrea|dy
show'd. But what the Motives were
that embolden'd the Scots to alter their
Measures from those they had observ'd
in the first War, continues in great part a
Mystery to this day. In the first War
they stood upon the Defensive only, and
came no further than their own Borders;
but in the second they acted so much in
the offensive, that they march'd into Eng|land
as far as Durham, and were coming

on further, if the Treaty that was set a|foot
at Rippon had not stopt them. All
the Accounts we have of this proceeding
of the Scots, do seem to be grounded up|on
the Informations they had of the
Backwardness of England to assist the King
in this War; and that they were well
assur'd of Friends all over the Kingdom,
and some of nearest access to the King's
Person, who they knew would interpose
in their behalf, rather than Matters
should come to Extremities. But these
general Encouragements can hardly be
thought to have had such weight with
the Scots, as to make them venture upon
so bold an Attempt; and therefore it's
but reasonable to believe they went upon
surer Grounds, when they made this In|vasion.
This matter will be set in a clearer
Light, when the Reader is acquainted,
That a Forg'd Letter (pretended to be
sent from some of the most Leading Men
of the Nobility of England), came to
have the same effects as if it had been a
True One, and really sign'd by the same
Persons whose Names were affix'd to
it. Which fell out in this manner.
After the Pacification at Duns, which
put an end to the first War, the King at

his Return to London was prevail'd with,
upon the account of several things the
Scots were said to have done contrary to
the Articles of the Treaty, and the Duty
of Subjects, to order the Pacification to
be burnt by the hands of the Common
Hangman. To reduce them to obedi|ence,
he was meditating a New War,
and in order thereto was levying another
Army, and was pleas'd to call a Parlia|ment
to assist him in it. The Scots had
their Commissioners at London at that
time, who wanted not Friends in both
Houses to inform them of every thing
that happen'd in Parliament and Council,
which they fail'd not to write home to
their Countrey; advising them to be on
their Guard, and to put themselves in a
posture not to be surpriz'd.
The Scots knowing how matters went
in England, and that a new Storm was
like to break out upon them, were resolv'd
to put themselves into a Posture of De|fence;
and to the Forces they had not
yet disbanded, they added considerable
new Levies both of Horse and Foot.
Their Preparations went faster on than
the King's, and with the more cheer|fulness;
for by this time he had parted
on ill terms with his Parliament, and

without obtaining a Supply. While the
King was advancing towards the North,
the Scots drew to their Borders; and it
was debated at several Councils of War,
where a Committee of Estates assisted,
Whether they should expect the King
upon the Borders, as they had done before,
or march into England, and carry the
War out of their own Countrey. But
they had taken no Resolution in the mat|ter,
before the King was got as far as
York.
In this nice Juncture there came a
Gentleman to the English Border, who
sent a Message to the Earl of Rothes,
That he desir'd to acquaint him with a
Matter of the greatest Importance and
Secresy, if he might privately and with
safety speak with him alone. Rothes
thereupon sent a Trusty Servant with a
Passport, to conduct him to his Quarters;
where the Gentleman told him, That he
was directed particularly to him as a Per|son
of great Honour, and whom they
could safely trust, with a Message from
several Great Men of England; who
were griev'd for the Ruin they foresaw
must necessarily attend their Country, if
the King should make himself Absolute Ma|ster
of Scotland; seeing after that, they

were to expect the same Fate, considering
how little to the King's satisfaction things
had been carried in the Parliament of Eng|land,
and how much he had resented their
refusing a Subsidy to carry on this War. He
told him, That nothing was so much desir'd
in England, as a Free Parliament to re|dress
their Grievances: And if the Scots
would march immediately into England,
the King must necessarily be straitned to that
degree in his Affairs, as to be oblig'd to call
a Parliament: And that upon their March,
the City of London, and the greatest part
of the Nobility and Gentry would not only
petition the King for a Free Parliament,
but likewise mediate between the King and
them, and bring matters to such an Accom|modation,
as might be for the good of both
Nations: Adding withal, That if the
Scots slipt this Opportunity, they were never
to expect the like again. The Gentleman
having deliver'd this Message, gave the
Earl a Letter directed to him, and sign'd
by about Twelve Noblemen, much to the
same purpose, but writ more cautiously,
and in more general terms; desiring him
for a further Explanation, to give entire
Credit to the Bearer, whom they had
fully inform'd of their Intentions.

Rothes, with the Gentleman's leave,
acquainted General Lesley, afterwards
Earl of Leven, and one or two of the
most Leading Men of the Committee of
Estates, with this Message; and upon so|lemn
Promises of Secrecy, show'd them
the Letter; both which agreeing so well
in the main with the Intelligence they
had receiv'd from England, and suiting
with their own Inclinations, determin'd
them in the Point: And next morning,
in the Council of War, It was resolv'd to
march into England that Afternoon;
which accordingly they did. Rothes in
the mean time dispatch'd back the Mes|senger
with an Answer to the Noblemen
he suppos'd had writ to him; Thanking
them for their Advice, and acquainting
them with the Resolution had been taken
thereupon.
It fell out afterwards at the Treaty of
Rippon, when the English and Scotch
Commissioners grew familiar with one
another, that the Earl of Rothes came
from Newcastle to the Place of Treaty;
and one of the English Noblemen making
him a Visit, they fell into Discourse about
the present Juncture of Affairs. The
English Nobleman express'd how much
he had been surpriz'd upon the first News

of the Scots entring into England; and
told him, That though he hop'd it would
now turn to the Advantage of both Na|tions,
yet it was in it self a dangerous
and rash Attempt, and might have been
fatal to the Scots, if the King had not
been pleas'd to enter into a Treaty for an
Accommodation of Maters in dispute
between them. Rothes was at a stand
what to make of this Discourse, consi|dering
this Nobleman was one of those
whose Name was to the Letter formerly
mention'd; and therefore answer'd, That
he wondred his Lordship was surpriz'd at an
Action he had so much influenc'd: And that
if it had not been for the Invitation of him|self
and his Friends, perhaps the Scots r|my
might have continued still on the other
side of Tweed The Two Lords being
equally in the dark as to one another's
meaning, were at length, upon produ|cing
of the Letter, both of them unde|ceiv'd,
and found it was a mere Forgery;
which was afterwards acknowledg'd by
the Contriver, who was the Lord Savile,
created some time after Earl of Sussex.
This Letter, though forgotten now,
was much talk'd of during the Civil
Wars: And I have seen several O|riginal
Papers of those Times, that

mention'd it. A Noble Lord, lately dead,
whose Name was to the Letter, never
made any scruple of telling this Passage
to his Friends, in the manner I have re|lated
it. And I once had a Copy of
the Letter it self (from the Original,
which was then, and I believe is still
among the Papers of the Noble Family of
Rothes), which I have since lost. I must
confess I have dwelt longer upon this
matter, than consists with the Brevity
I intended, and that it might have been
more properly mention'd in another
place: Yet thus it was, that a Counterfeit
Invitation brought the Scots into England,
in the Year 1640. And considering the
Consequences, it may be said, That Pro|vidence
many times seems to play with Hu|man
Affairs, and influences the Fate of
Kingdoms by Counsels and Measures the
most improbable to succeed, if he had not de|sign'd
them to be subservient to his great
Ends.
There is an Historian for whom I have
the highest Veneration,Bishop of Salisbury's Memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton. who in his Me|moirs
of the Dukes of Hamilton, mentions
a Passage not unlike to this, and perhaps
it may be the very same, though his Re|lation
and mine differ in the time, and
some other Circumstances. And seeing I

happen'd to look into that Book some
time after I had writ these Sheets; that I
may do Justice to its Reverend Author,
whose Information I am willing to be|lieve
may be better than my own, though
I had mine from no common Hands, I
shall give his Account of it in his own
words; and the rather, for that I do not
remember the Date of the Letter upon
which the Passage turns, though I do the
main Design and Contents of it.
But that the Reader may not be
wholly in the dark, says this Great Hi|storian,
about the Grounds of this Con|fidence
the Covenanters had, I shall set
down what I had from some Persons
of Great Honour, who were fully in|form'd
about it. When the Earls of
Dumfermling and Loudon came to Lon|don,
a Person of Quality of the English
Nation (whose Name is suppress'd
because of the Infamy of this Action)
came to them, and with great Vehe|mence
press'd them to engage in a new
War; and among other Motives
brought them Engagements in writing
from most of the greatest Peers of
England, to join with them, and assist
them when they should come into Eng|land

with their Army. This did much
animate them; for they had not the
least doubt of the Papers brought them.
But all this was discover'd at the Treaty
of Rippon, to have been a base Forgery:
For there the Scttish Lords looking
very sullenly upon some of the English
Lords, as on Persons of no Faith or
Truth, the Lord Mandevil came to the
Earl of Rothes, and asked the reason
of that change of their Countenances
and Behaviour in them; who after
some high Reflections, at length chal|leng'd
him and the other Lords of not
keeping what they engag'd to them.
Upon which that Lord stood amaz'd,
and told him, and so did the other
Lords there, That they had sent no
such Messages nor Papers to them; and
that they had been abus'd by the black|est
Imposture that ever was. Thus it
appear'd (concludes this Author) how
dangerous it may be to receive some
things that seem to have the highest
probabilities in them, easily and upon
trust.
To leave this Subject, it may not be
improper to add another Passage out of
the same Book; where that Reverend
Prelate speaking of the Inlucements

that prevail'd with the Scots to come into
the Assistance of the Parliament Three
Years after; tells us, That among other
Arguments That Paper which was sent
down in the Year 1640, as the Engage|ment
of Twenty eight of the Peers of
England, for their Concurrence with
the Scottish Army that Year, was shown
to divers, to engage them into a grate|ful
Return to those to whom it was
pretended they were so highly oblig'd.
For though the Earl of Rothes (and a
few more) were well satisfied about
the Forgery of that Paper, yet they
thought that a Secret of too great Im|portance
to be generally known; there|fore
it was still kept up from the Body
of the Nation.
To shut up what relates to K. Charles I.K. Charles's thoughts of Resign|ing the Crown to his Son.
After the Treaty of Newport was broke
off, and he once more carried away by
the Army, he found his Case was despe|rate,
and thereupon began to have some
Thoughts of Resigning the Crown to the
Prince of Wales, as the only means in
that unhappy Condition, to preserve it
for his Family. But before he had time
to digest this Resolution, or an opportu|nity
to acquaint the Parliament with it,

he was hurried on to his Trial. The last
day of that Trial he earnestly propos'd,
That before Sentence pass'd, he might be
heard before the Lords and Commons in the
Painted Chamber, where he had something
to offer for the Peace of the Kingdom, and
the Liberty of the Subject, which might
settle all differences. It is probable he
meant by this, to have resign'd the
Crown; which his Enemies having some
Intimation of, and fearing it might be
accepted, they were the more forward to
proceed to Sentence and Execution.
Likewise some days before his Death,About setting up the Duke of Glouce|ster King.
the prevailing Party had thoughts of set|ting
up the Duke of Gloucester King.
This was not kept so secret, but King
Charies had some notice of it; for the
Duke and his Sister having leave to wait
upon him the Night before the Executi|on,
he took the Young Duke in his
Arms, and told him, They were going to
take off his Father's Head, and may be they
would set the Crown upon his Head; which
he forbad him to accept of while his Two
Elder Brothers were Living.
There befel him an Accident, which
though a Trifle in it self, and that no
Weight is to be laid upon any thing of
that nature; yet since the best Authors,

both Ancient and Modern, have not
thought it below the Majesty of History
to mention the like, it may be the more
excusable to insert it.
The King being at Oxford during the
Civil Wars, went one day to see the
Publick Library, where he was show'd
among other Books, a Virgil nobly Print|ed,
and exquisitely bound. The Lord
Falkland, to divert the King, would have
his Majesty make a Trial of his Fortune
by the Sortes Virgilianae;His con|sulting the Sortes Virgilianae. which every
body knows was an usual kind of Augury
some Ages past. Whereupon the King
opening the Book, the Period which hap|pen'd
to come up, was that part of Di|do's
Imprecation against Aeneas; which
Mr. Dryden translates thus:
Yet let a Race untam'd, and haughty Foes,
His peaceful Entrance with dire Arms oppose.
Oppress'd with Numbers in th' unequal
Field,
His Men discourag'd, and himself expell'd,
Let him for Succonr sue from place to place,
Torn from his Subjects, and his Son's em|brace.
First let him see his Friends in Battel slain,
And their untimely Fate lament in vain:

And when at length the cruel War shall cease,
On hard Conditions may he buy his Peace.
Nor let him then enjoy Supreme Command,
But fall untimely by some hostile Hand,
And lye unburi'd in the common Sand.
It is said K. Charles seem'd concern'd
at this Accident; and that the Lord Falk|land
observing it, would likewise try his
own Fortune in the same manner;
hoping he might fall upon some Passage
that could have no relation to his Case,
and thereby divert the King's Thoughts
from any Impression the other might
have upon him: But the place that Falk|land
stumbled upon, was yet more suited
to his Destiny, than the other had been
to the King's; being the following Ex|pressions
of Evander, upon the untimely
Death of his Son Pallas, as they are tran|slated
by the same Hand.
O Pallas! thou hast fail'd thy plighted Word,
To fight with Reason; not to tempt the
Sword.
I warn'd thee but in vain, for well I knew
What Perils Youthful Ardor would pursue;
That boiling Blood would carry thee too far,
Young as thou were't in Dangers, raw to
War.

O curst Essay of Arms, disast'rous Doom,
Prelude of Bloody Fields and Fights to
come.
To return to our History: Upon the
Death of King Charles I. there was a
Total Eclipse of the Royal Family for
Twelve Years: During a great part of
which time an unusual Meteor fill'd the
English Orb, and with its surprizing In|fluences
over-aw'd not only Three King|doms,
but the powerfullest Princes and
States about us. A Great Man he was,
and Posterity might have paid a just Ho|mage
to his Memory, if he had not em|brued
his Hands in the Blood of his Prince,
or had not usurp'd upon the Liberties of his
Countrey.
It being as natural a Curiosity in man|kind
to know the Character of a Fortu|nate
Vsurper, as of a Lawful King, it
may not perhaps be much amiss to say
something of Oliver Cromwell.
By Birth he was a Gentleman,The Usur|pation and Cha|racter of Oliver Cromwell. and
bred up for some time at the Vniversity,
though nothing of a Scholar. When the
Civil Wars broke out, he took the Par|liaments
Side; and his first Employment
in the Army was a Captain of Horse,
whence by degrees he rose to be Lieute|nant-General

under the Earl of Manche|ster:
In which Post he was the chief In|strument,
together with Lieutenant Ge|neral
Lesley, of gaining the Battel of
Marston-Moor, which prov'd the first re|markable
Stop to the King's Success.
Some time after, the Earl of Manchester
having refus'd to give an Order to Crom|well,
to charge a Party of Horse where
the King was personally present, he came
up to London to complain against him,
though he ow'd his Advancement chiefly
to his Favour. Which the Earl having
notice of, and being by this time weary
of a War, of which he foresaw the fatal
Consequences, he took that opportunity
to lay down his Command; wherein he
was succeeded by Cromwell.
Sir Thomas Fairfax also laying down
his Commission some time after, he was
declar'd General of all the Forces rais'd or
to be rais'd by the Parliament; and having
modell'd the Parliament and Army to his
mind, he dismiss'd the former, when he
had no more use for them; and upon
their forc'd Resignation, he assum'd the
Supreme Power, under the Title of Pro|tector.
Being thus mounted to so high a Pina|cle
of Fortune, he became more formi|dable

both at Home and Abroad, than
most Princes that had ever sat upon the
English Throne. And it was said that
Cardinal Mazarine would change Coun|tenance,
whenever he heard him nam'd;
so that it pass'd into a Proverb in France,
That he was not so much afraid of the De|vil,
as of Oliver Cromwell. He had a
Manly stern Look, and was of an Active,
Healthful Constitution, able to endure
the greatest Toil and Fatigue. Though
Brave in his Person, yet he was Wary in
his Conduct; for from the time he was
first declar'd Protector, he always wore a
Coat of Mail under his Cloaths. His Con|versation
among his Friends was very di|verting
and familiar, but in publick re|serv'd
and grave. He was sparing in his
Diet, though sometimes would drink
freely, but never to Excess. He was mo|derate
in all other Pleasures, and for what
was visible, free from Immoralities, espe|cially
after he came to make a Figure in
the World. He writ a tolerable good
Hand, and a Stile becoming a Gentleman;
except when he had a mind to wheedle,
under the Mask of Religion; which he
knew nicely how to do, when his Affairs
requir'd it. He affected for the most part
a Plainness in his Cloaths; but in them,

as well as in his Guards and Attendance,
he appear'd with Magnificence upon
Publick Occasions. No man was ever
better serv'd, nor took more pains to be
so. As he was severe to his Enemies, so
was he beneficent and kind to his Friends.
And if he came to hear of a Man fit for
his purpose, though never so obscure, he
sent for him, and employ'd him; suiting
the Employment to the Person, and not the
Person to the Employment. And upon this
Maxim in his Government depended in a
great measure his Success.
In matters of greatest Moment, he
trusted none but his Secretary Thurlo, and
oftentimes not him. An Instance of
which Thurlo us'd to tell of himself;
That he was once commanded by Cromwell
to go at a certain hour to Grays-Inn, and
at such a place deliver a Bill of Twenty
thousand Pound, payable to the Bearer at
Genoa, to a Man he should find walking in
such a Habit and Posture as he describ'd him,
without speaking one word. Which accord|ingly
Thurlo did; and never knew to his
dying day either the Person or the Oc|casion.
At another time the Protector coming
late at Night to Thurlo's Office, and be|ginning
to give him directions about

something of great Importance and Se|crecy,
he took notice that Mr. Moreland,
one of the Clerks, afterward Sir Samuel
Moreland, was in the Room, which he
had not observ'd before; and fearing he
might have over-heard their Discourse,
though he pretended to be asleep upon
his Desk, he drew a Ponyard, which he
always carried under his Coat, and was
going to dispatch Moreland upon the Spot,
if Thurlo had not with great Intreaties
prevail'd with him to desist, assuring him
that Moreland had sat up two Nights to|gether,
and was now certainly asleep.
There was not the smallest Accident
that befel King Charles the Second in his
Exile, but he knew it perfectly well; in|somuch
that having given leave to an
English Nobleman to Travel, upon con|dition
he should not see Charles Stuart;
he ask'd him at his Return, If he had
punctually obey'd his Commands?
Which the other affirming he had;
Cromwell replied, It's true, you did not see
him; for to keep your Word with me, you
agreed to meet in the dark, the Candles
being put out for that end: And withal,
told him all the Particulars that pass'd in
Conversation betwixt the King and him
at their Meeting.

That he had Spies about King Charles,The Busi|ness of Dunkirk.
was not strange; but his Intelligence
reach'd the most secret Transactions of
other Princes; and when the Matter was
communicated to but very few. Of
which we have a notable Instance in the
Business of Dunkirk. There was an Ar|ticle
in the Treaty between France and the
Protector, That if Dunkirk came to be
taken, it should be immediately deliver'd
up to the English; and his Ambassador
Lockhart had Orders to take Possession of
it accordingly. When the French Army
being join'd with the English Auxiliaries,
was in its March to Invest the Town,
Cromwell sent one Morning for the French
Ambassador to Whitehall, and upbraided
him publickly for his Master's design'd
Breach of Promise, in giving secret Or|ders
to the French General to keep Posses|sion
of Dunkirk, in case it was taken,
contrary to the Treaty between them.
The Ambassador protested he knew no|thing
of the matter, as indeed he did
not, and begg'd leave to assure him that
there was no such thing thought of. Up|on
which Cromwell pulling a Paper out of
his Pocket, Here (says he) is the Copy
of the Cardinal's Order: And I desire you
to dispatch immediately an Express, to let

him know, That I am not to be impos'd upon;
and that if he deliver not up the Keys of
the Town of Dunkirk to Lockhart within
an hour after it shall be taken, tell him, I'll
come in Person, and demand them at the
Gates of Paris. There were but Four
Persons said to be privy to this Order,
the Queen-Mother, the Cardinal, the
Mareschal de Turenne, and a Secretary,
whose Name it is not fit at this time to
mention. The Cardinal for a long time
blam'd the Queen, as if she might pos|sibly
have blabb'd it out to some of her
Women: Whereas it was found, after
the Secretary's Death, That he had kept
a secret Correspondence with Cromwell for
several Years; and therefore it was not
doubted but he had sent him the Copy of
the Order above-mention'd.
The Message had its effect; for Dun|kirk
was put into the Possession of the
English. And to palliate the matter, the
Duke and Mareschal of Crequy was di|spatch'd
into England Ambassador Extra|ordinary,
to Compliment Cromwell, at|tended
with a Numerous and Splendid
Train of Persons of Quality; among
whom was a Prince of the Blood, and
Muncini, Mazarine's Nephew, who
brought a Letter from his Uncle to the

Protector, full of the highest Expressi|ons
of Respect; and assuring his High|ness,
That being within view of the Eng|lish
Shore, nothing but the King's Indispo|sition
(who lay then ill of the Small-Pox
at Calais) could have hinder'd him to come
over to England, that he might enjoy the
Honour of waiting upon one of the Greatest
Men that ever was; and whom next to his
Master, his greatest Ambition was to serve.
But being depriv'd of so great a happiness,
he had sent the Person that was nearest to
him in Blood, to assure him of the profound
Veneration he had for his Person, and how
much he was resolv'd, to the utmost of his
power, to cultivate a perpetual Amity and
Friendship betwixt his Master and him.
Few Princes ever bore their Character
higher upon all occasions, than Oliver
Cromwell, especially in his Treaties with
Crown'd Heads. And it's a thing with|out
Example, that's mention'd by one of
the best-inform'd Historians of the Age,
Puffendorf, in the Life of the late Elector
of Brandenburgh, That in Cromwell's
League with France against Spain, he
would not allow the French King to call
himself King of France, but of the
French; whereas he took to himself not
only the Title of Protector of England,

but likewise of France. And which is
yet more surprizing, and which can
hardly be believ'd, but for the Authority
of the Author,Puffendorf de Rebus Gestis Fre|drici Wil|helmi Ele|ctoris Bran|denburgici, p. 313. Id porro Bellum Protecto|ris in Hi|spanos ad|eo oppor|tunum, Gallo ac|cedebat, ut summo Studio istum faedore sibi innectere studeret, eti|am concesso, ut Cromwellus eundem, Gaorum Regem, non Gallia|rum nuncuparet, alis ipse Protectoris quoque Franciae, vocabulum, ficut Angliae assumpturus: Simul pateretur Cromwellum Instru|mento suo Nomen titulumque ante Gallicum ponere. whose own Words are
in the Margin, In the Instrument of the
Treaty, the Protector's Name was put
before the French King's. It's true, France
was then under a Minority, and was not
arriv'd at that Greatness to which it has
since attain'd. Towards which, Cromwell
contributed not a little, by that League
with France against Spain; being the
falsest Step he ever made, with respect to
the Tranquility of Europe.
As every thing did contribute to the
Fall of King Charles I. so did every thing
contribute to the Rise of Cromwell. And
as there was no design at first against the
King's Life, so it's probable that Crom|well
had no thoughts, for a long time, of
ever arriving at what he afterwards was.
It is known he was once in Treaty with
the King, after the Army had carried his
Majesty away from Holmby House, to
have Restor'd him to the Throne; which

probably he would have done, if the
Secret had not been like to take Vent, by
the Indiscretion of some about the King;
which push'd Cromwell on to prevent his
own, by the Ruin of the King.
It's likewise certain, that the Title of
Protector did not satisfy his Ambition,
but that he aim'd to be King. The Mat|ter
was for some time under Considerati|on,
both in his Mock-Parliament, and
Council of State; in-so-far, that a Crown
was actually made, and brought to
Whitehall for that purpose. But the
Aversion he found in the Army against
it, and the fear of the Commonwealth-Party,
oblig'd him to lay the Thoughts
of it aside, at least for that time. Yet
it's probable these high Aims did not dye,
but with himself: For to be able with the
help of Spanish Gold to carry on his
Design in England, without depending
upon a Parliament for Money, is thought
was the true Motive of his Attempt upon
St. Domingo; which was the only Action
of War he fail'd in.
But notwithstanding his specious Pre|tences
to the contrary, Cromwell invaded
and betrayed the Liberties of his Coun|trey,
and acted a more Tyrannical and Ar|bitrary
Part, than all the Kings of Eng|land

together had done since the Norman
Conquest. And yet after all, his Good
Fortune accompanied him to the last;
for after a long Chain of Success, he died
in Peace, and in the Arms of his Friends;
was buried among the Kings with a Roy|al
Pomp, and his Death condol'd by the
Greatest Princes and States of Christen|dom,
in Solemn Embassies to his Son.
But this is not all; for whatever Rea|sons
the House of Austria had to hate the
Memory of Cromwell, yet his causing the
Portugal Ambassador's Brother to be Exe|cuted
for a Tumult in London, notwith|standing
his Plea of being a Publick Mini|ster
as well as his Brother, was near
Twenty Years after Cromwell's Death,
brought as a Precedent by the present
Emperor, to justify his Arresting and car|rying
off the Prince of Furstenburgh at
the Treaty of Cologne, notwithstanding
Furstenburgh's being a Plenipotentiary for
the Elector of that Name. And in the
Printed Manifesto publish'd by the Empe|ror
upon that occasion, this Piece of
Cromwells Justice in executing the Por|tuguese
Gentleman, is related at large.
To sum up Cromwell's Character, it's
observable, That as the Ides of March
were equally Fortunate and Fatal to Iu|lius

Caesar, another Famous Invader of
the Liberties of his Countrey; so was
the Third of September to Oliver Crom|well;
For on that Day he was Born; on
that Day he fought the Three Great Battels
of Marston-Moor, Worcester, and Dun|bar;
and on that Day he died.
Cromwell died in the peaceable Possessi|on
of the Sovereign Power, though dis|guis'd
under another Name, and left it to
a Son that had neither Heart nor Abilities
to keep it. The Genius of the Nation
return'd to its Natural Byass; and Mo|narchy
was so much interwoven with the
Laws, Customs, and the first Threads of
the English Constitution, that it was alto|gether
impossible it could be ever totally
worn out. Our Ancestors had wisely
settled themselves upon that Bottom; and
those very men that some Years before
had justled out Monarchy, upon the ac|count
of its Encroachments upon the
Rights of the People, were become as
zealous now to restore it again, upon the
Encroachments that the assuming part of
the People had made of late, upon the
Rights of their Fellow-Subjects. For
near Two Years together after Cromwell's
Death, the Government of England un|derwent
various Shapes, and every Month

almost produc'd a New Scheme; till in
the end all these Convulsions co-opera|ted
to turn the Nation again upon its
True and Ancient Basis. Thence it was,
that the Son of King Charles the First,The Re|storation of King Charles II.
after Ten Years Exile, was restor'd to
his Father's Throne in the Year 1660,
without Blood, or any remarkable Oppo|sition.
This Revolution was the more to be
admir'd, since not only all Attempts to
bring King Charles back by Force of
Arms, prov'd ineffectual; but that not|withstanding
upon Cromwell's Death, eve|ry
thing at home seem'd to concur to his
Restoration; yet the bare Name of an
English Parliament, though but the Sha|dow
of what formerly it was, continued
to be so Terrible abroad, that neither
France nor Spain durst venture to give
King Charles the least Assistance to regain
his Throne; but on the contrary, were
oblig'd to treat him in a manner altoge|ther
unworthy of a Crown'd Head: As
appears by the following Instance at the
Treaty of the Pyrenees.The Beha|viour of the French and Spani|ards to K Charles II at  Treaty of the Pyre|nces.
King Charles after having in vain
sought a Sanctuary in France, was neces|sitated
to throw himself upon the Friend|ship
of Spain. He was at Brussels when

he receiv'd the News of the Disposition
that was in England to Restore him, just
at the time the Conferenes were to begin
between Cardinal Mazarine, and Lewis de
Haro, the Two Plenipotentiaries of France
and Spain, in order to a General Peace.
This determin'd King Charles to take Post
from Brussels through France, to the Place
of Treaty, that he might in Person repre|sent
his Interests to these Two Ministers.
He judg'd the Spaniards had reason to be
Enemies to the then Government in Eng|land,
for not only having taken Dunkirk
and Iamaica from them, and enterd into
a League with Portugal against them,
but for endeavouring all that was possi|ble
to persuade the French to continue the
War. Upon the other hand, it was but
reasonable to think that France could not
be well pleas'd to see the English Master
of such a Frontier Town as Dunkirk; or
that Mazarine, the most Ambitious Man
upon Earth, would not be willing to raise
his own Glory, by espousing the Cause
of an Exil'd Prince, especially when
there was so great probability of Suc|cess.
Notwithstanding all these plausible
Appearances, King Charles made this
long Journey to no purpose. It's true,

Lewis de Haro receiv'd him with all pos|sible
Marks of Respect: But the Cardinal
positively denied him Access. All he
could be brought to, after several Messa|ges
from the King, was to allow the
Duke of Ormond to talk to him upon
the Road from St. Iean de Luz to the
Place of Treaty, as if it had been but an
accidental Rencounter. Ormond obtain'd
nothing of the Cardinal, but general and
ambiguous Answers: Till being press'd,
he told Ormond plainly, That all his Ma|ster
could do for his Cousin the King of
England, was to compassionate his Misfor|tunes;
as not being in a condition himself
to break with the Government of England,
with which his Affairs oblig'd him to keep a
good Correspondence. Over and above this
Neglect of Mazarine's, King Charles had
the Mortification to see Ambassador
Lockhart receiv'd at the same time with
the greatest Pomp and Splendor, having
the Cardinal's Coaches and Guards sent a
day's Journey to receive him, and the
Cardinal giving him the Right Hand,
which was a Respect he denied the Am|bassadors
of Crown'd Heads. Nor was
Lewis de Haro kinder upon the matter to
King Charles, notwithstanding all his
Civilities; for having ask'd the Com|mand

of the Army in Flanders, which
the Prince of Conde was by the Treaty
oblig'd to quit, Don Lewis refus'd it. All
which will be a lasting Example to Po|sterity,
how little Trust is to be repos'd in
Foreign Aid, when a Prince comes to need
it, for recovering his Throne.
It were the highest Injustice to deny
General Monk the greatest share of the
Honour in Restoring King Charles II.Monk's part in the Restora|tion.
and yet it is a question whether his De|sign
to do it, was of so long standing,
as some have reported. It's probable he
had not Thoughts that way, till about the
time that Richard Cromwell was depriv'd
of the Government: In which he was
afterwards the more confirm'd, upon the
Army in England's setting up once more
for themselves. If he had really a form'd
Intention at that time to bring back the
King; it must be confess'd he acted the
part of a Politician, much better than
that of a Christian; for he declar'd once
again at that time, for a Commonwealth,
without the King, a Single Person, or
House of Lords; and formally Renounc'd
the Family of the Stuarts. All which
will appear by a Letter, sign'd by him and
his Officers, to the Parliament, upon Ri|chard's
Abdication, and the Declaration

it self,Appendix, Numb. 11. mention'd at length in the Ap|pendix.
It's hardly to be imagin'd he had a
mind to set up for himself, as his Ene|mies
have given out; for he could not
but see the whole Nation was returning
apace to their Ancient Monarchical Princi|ples;
and therefore he had little else to do,
but to comply a while with the Times,
till by declaring for a Free Parliament, he
pav'd the way for the King's Return.
It's certain the People that then assum'd
the Supreme Power, were jealous of his
Intentions; and it was within an Ace he
escap'd a Trap laid for him, just at the
time when he was ready to march from
Scotland; which would have inevitably
ruin'd his Design, if a mere Accident
had not interven'd.
For Monk keeping his ordinary Resi|dence
at Dalkeith, some four Miles on
this side of Edinburgh, the London Packet
touch'd constantly there, that the Gene|ral
might have his Letters before it
reach'd Edinburgh. The Committee of
Safety being resolv'd to secure Monk,
dispatch'd secret Orders to Scotland by
the ordinary Packet, lest an Express
might give suspicion; and instead of di|recting
the Label for Dalkeith, as was

usual, it was order'd straight for Edin|burgh.
It happend that one of Monk's
Lifeguard met accidentally the Post
turning out of the Road that led to Dal|keith,
and finding he had not touch'd
there, he brought him back, not|withstanding
the Label was directed
otherwise. Monk suspecting something,
open'd all the Letters that he found di|rected
to the Officers of the Army; among
which there was one from the Committee
of Safety to Colonel Thomas Wilks,
ordering him to use the most effectual, spee|dy,
and secret way to secure the Person of
General Monk, and to send him up to Lon|don
under a strong Guard, in a Frigat that
lay in Leith Road; and then to take upn
him the Command of the Army, till further
Order.
Having taken out this, and what other
Letters he thought fit, together with his
own from the same Committee, full of
high Compliments, and Expressions of
Trust, he sent away the Packet as it was
directed. But having communicated the
matter to some of his particular Friends,
he gave Orders for a General Review of
the Army to be made next morning at
Edinburgh, where he arrested Colonel
Wilks, and some other Officers he

had reason to suspect, and sent them Pri|soners
to the Castle; filling up their Com|missions
with others of his own Crea|tures.
Monk in his March through England,
and after he came to London, carried on
the Thread of Dissimulation with won|derful
dexterity, till all things were fully
ripe for throwing off the Mask, and cal|ling
home the King. As he was singu|larly
happy in being the Chief Instru|ment
of that Revolution, he was no less
in the Sense King Charles continued to
express, of so great an Obligation. And
it show'd him to be a Man of true Judg|men,
That the Duke of Albemarle be|hav'd
himself in such a manner to the
Prince he had thus oblig'd, as never to
seem to overvalue the Services of General
Monk.
King Charles the Second prov'd one of
the Finest Gentlemen of the Age, and
had Abilities to make one of the Best of
Kings. The first Years of his Reign
were a continued Iubilee. And while
we were reaping the Fruits of Peace at
Home, after the Miseries of a long Civil
War, a Potent Neighbour was laying the
Foundation of a Power Abroad, that has

since been the Envy and Terror of Europe.
One might have thought that his Parlia|ment
had glutted his Ambition to the
full, by heaping those Prerogatives upon
him, which had been contested for with
his Father, at the Expence of so much
Blood and Treasure: But he grasp'd
early after more; and from his first Ac|cession
to the Cron, show'd but little
Inclination to depend upon Parliaments.
Of which we have a remarkable Instance
in an Affair that was one of the true
Causes of the Disgrace of that Great
Man, Chancellor Clarendon, which hap|pen'd
a few Years after.
It looks as if Heaven took a more than
ordinary Care of England, that we did
not throw up our Liberties all at once,
upon the Restoration of that King; for
though some were for bringing him back
upon Terms, yet after he was once come,
he possess'd so entirely the Hearts of his
People, that they thought nothing was
too much for them to grant, or for him
to receive. Among other Designs to
please him, there was one form'd at
Court, to settle such a Revenue upon him
by Parliament during Life, as should
place him beyond the Necessity of asking
more, except in the Case of a War, or

some such extraordinary Occasion. The
Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasu|rer,
came heartily into it, out of a mere
Principle of Honour and Affection to the
King; but Chancellor Clarendon secretly
opposd it. It happend that they two
had a private Conference about the mat|ter;
and the Chancellor being earnest to
bring the Treasurer to his Opinion, took
the freedom to tell him, That he was
better acquainted with the King's Tem|per
and Inclinations, than Southampton
could reasonably expect to be, having
had long and intimate Acquaintance with
his Majesty abroad; and that he knew
him so well, that if such a Revenue was
once settled upon him for Life, neither of
them Two would be of any further use; and
that they were not in probability to see many
more Sessions of Parliament during that
Reign. Southampton was brought over;
but this Passage could not be kept so se|cret,
but it came to King Charles his Ears,
which together with other things where|in
Clarendon was misrepresented to him,
prov'd the true reason why he abandon'd
him to his Enemies.
Notwithstanding this disappointment,
King Charles made a shift, partly by his
obliging Carriage, partly by other Induce|ments,

to get more Money from his first
Parliament towards the Expence of his
Pleasures, than all his Predecessors of the
Norman Race had obtain'd before, to|wards
the Charges of their Wars. This
Parliament had like to have been Perpe|tual,
if the Vigor wherewith they began
to prosecute the Popish Plot, and the Re|sentment
they express'd against his Bro|ther,
had not oblig'd him, much against
his Will, to part with them, after they
had sat near Nineteen Years.
That there was at that time a Popish
Plot,The Dis|covery of the Popish Plot. and that there always has been one
since the Reformation, to support, if not
restore the Romish Religion in England,
scarce any body calls in question. How
far the near Prospect of a Popish Successor
ripen'd the Hopes, and gave new Vigor
to the Designs of that Party; and what
Methods they were then upon, to bring
those Designs about, Coleman's Letters
alone, without any other concurring Evi|dence,
are more than sufficient to put the
matter out of doubt. But what Super|structures
might have been afterwards
built upon an unquestionable Foundati|on;
and how far some of the Witnesses
of that Plot might come to darken Truth
by subsequent Addttions of their own,

must be deferr'd till the Great Account,
to be made before a Higher Tribunal: And
till then, a great part of the Popish Plot,
as it was then sworn to, will in all human
probability lye among the darkest Scenes of
our English History. However, this is
certain, the Discovery of the Popish Plot
had great and various Effects upon the
Nation: And it's from this remarkable
Period of Time, we may justly reckon a
New Aera in the English Account.
In the first place,Its Effects. it awaken'd the Na|tion
out of a deep Lethargy they had
been in, for Nineteen Years together;
and alarm'd them with Fears and Iealou|sies
that have been found to our sad Expe|rience
but too well grounded. In the
next, it gave the Rise too, at least settled
that unhappy distinction of Whig and
Tory among the People of England, that
has since occasion'd so many Mischiefs.
And lastly, the Discovery of the Popish
Plot began that open Struggle between
King Charles and his People, that occa|sion'd
him not only to dissolve his first
Favourite Parliament, and the Three
others that succeeded; but likewise to
call no more during the rest of his Reign.
All which made way for bringing in que|stion
the Charters of London, and other

Corporations, with a great many dismal
Effects that follow'd. It was likewise
about this time, that a certain Set of
Men began a second time to adopt into
our Religion a Mahomet an Principle, un|der
the Names of Passive Obedience and
Non-Resistance; which since the time of
the Impostor that first broach'd it, has been
the means to Enslave a great part of the
World.
The great share which the Duke of
York was suppos'd to have had very early,The Bill of Exclu|sion.
in a Design to overturn our Religion and
Liberties; and the mighty Hopes which
the near Prospect of a Popish Successor
gave the Roman Catholicks, of bringing
about their Grand Project of rooting out
the Northern Heresy, were the Reasons
why a great part of Both Houses of Par|liament
had recourse to a Bill of Exclusion
against the Duke, as the only effectual
means they could think on in that Jun|cture,
to prevent our intended Ruin.
This Prince had been privately reconcil'd
to Rome in the time of his Exile: But it
seems it was not thought convenient he
should declare himself till several Years
after. And though he had abandon'd
the Worship of the Church of England,
it was accounted a heinous Crime to say

he was a Roman-Catholick, when every
body knew that he was one; and some
were Fin'd in great Sums of Money for
saying it. King Charle's Conversion (if
we believe Huddleston the Priest) was of
an older Date: But, if true, he either
wanted Courage, or thought it not his
Interest to declare himself in his Life|time.
If he had any design of introdu|cing
Popery, he knew the Temper of the
Nation too well, to imagine it could be
brought about in a short time, or by such
open and barefac'd Methods as his Brother
was pleas'd afterwards to put in practice.
But the truth is, King Charles was nei|ther
Bigot enough to any Religion, nor
lov'd his Ease so little, as to embark in a
Business that must at least have disturb'd
his Quiet, if not hazarded his Crown.
The Romish Emissaries knowing this,
were resolv'd to make sure of one of the
Brothers: And the Duke was now the
Rising Sun; King Charles having no pro|spect
of Issue by the Queen. It was not
the Roman-Catholiks alone, that began to
pay him their Early Devotions; there
were others that came nothing short of
them in their Addresses to him. He had
in the time of his Banishment, and after
the Restoration, acquir'd the Reputation

of being Brave, and skill'd in the Art of
War: Flanders and the Ocean were the
Theatres on which he had given unque|stionable
Proofs of both; having Com|manded
the Spanish Horse in the one, and
the English Fleet on the other. From a
Prince thus possess'd of a Warlike Cha|racter,
and thus devoted to the See of
Rome, it was no wonder the Roman Ca|tholicks
expected, and the Protestants
fear'd some extraordinary Change in Eng|land,
if ever he should come to wear the
Crown. And therefore as it was the
Interest of the first to have him upon the
Throne, so it was equally the Interest of
the latter to exclude him from it.
It's said King Charles came in at first to
the Bill of Exclusion, or seem'd to do so.
The Favourite Mistress was prevail'd
with, from secret Motives and Prospects
of her own, to concur with others in
persuading him to abandon his Brother;
and waving the Duke's Right, to accept
of an Act of Parliament in his own fa|vour,
like that made in the Reign of
Henry VIII. by which he should have a
Power invested in him, to dispose of the
Crown at his Death, under such Restricti|ons
and Limitations as should be agreed on.

Whether any such Act was really in|tended,
it's hard to determine; but it's
certain such an Offer was made to King
Charles, with a Promise of a considerable
Sum of Money, towards the supplying
his pressing Wants. It's likewise certain,
that King Charles seem'd willing to accept
of it; till it happen'd that a Foreign
Court, whose Interest it was to support
the Duke of York, struck up a Bargain
with the King, to give him more Money
for refusing, than had been offer'd him for
consenting to the Bill of Exclusion.
Some time before the Popish Plot came
upon the Stage, King Charles had been
prevail'd with to Marry the Eldest of his
Nieces to the Prince of Orange, as he did
afterwards the Youngest to the Prince of
Denmark: The happiest Actions of his
Life, and by which he made a sufficient
Attonement for all the Errors of his
Reign. It were Ingratitude to enquire
too narrowly into the Motives that in|duc'd
him to these Matches: It's enough
to entail a lasting Honour on his Name,
that he did it, and did it against the Ad|vice
of his Brother, and in spight of all
the Sollicitations that were made to him
from Abroad, to marry them to Princes
of the Romish Religion. The Parliament

had in their view the Princess of Orange,
in the Bill of Exclusion; and it was She
and the Prince her Husband that were to
have fill'd the Throne, upon the Death
of their Uncle. But King Charles either
not daring, or not willing to consent to
the Bill, he dissolv'd both that and the
next Parliament at Oxford, merely to
ward off the Blow that threaten'd his
Brother.
After the Dissolution of the Oxford
Parliament, King Charles shew'd but
little Inclination to call any more; and
was prevail'd with to enter into harsher
Measures than hitherto he had taken;
and which seem'd contrary to his Natu|ral
Goodness and Temper. The Char|ters
of the City of London, and other
Corporations, stood in the way of an Ab|solute
Government; and it was resolv'd to
break through this Barrier. In order to
which, Quo Warranto's were brought
against them; and in progress of time
they were either surrendred by the Corpo|rations
themselves, or vacated in West|minster-Hall,
by a Set of Iudges pickt out
for that purpose. And it was resolv'd
thereby to make one of the Estates of
Parliament depend entirely upon the
Will and Nomination of the Prince.

While these Quo Warranto's were go|ing
on, whole Peals of Anathema's were
rung out against those Patriots that had
stood up for the Liberties of their Coun|trey
in the preceding Parliaments. And
it was look'd upon as a Crime against the
State, for any one to regret the approach|ing
Fate of his Countrey. Even the
Holy Scriptures themselves were made a
Stale for Arbitrary Power; and the Laws
which were given to the Iews as they
were a Political State, were now brought
in upon every occasion, to countenance
the Designs of the Court. As if those
Laws which were intended only to sup|port
the Political Government of the
Iews, were the real Foundation of the
Christian Religion; or that the Consti|tution
of England was founded upon the
Iewish Doctrine. All which was not much
for the Honour of those Gentlemen that
broach'd that Notion. This was a Time
never to be forgot, when to wish well to
our Countrey, was a Crime; and when
Heaven it self was rank'd upon our Ene|mies
side, by some that pretended to ex|pound
its Will. In some places a new
kind of Funeral Harangues came in fa|shion:
Our Laws, our Liberties, our Par|liaments,
our Native Rights were to be

buried; but instead of dropping a Tear
at their Funeral, fulsom Panegyricks were
made upon their Murtherers, and Curses
denounc'd against those that would have
retriev'd them from Destruction.
All these Transactions were attended
with the Publick Disgrace of the Duke of
Monmouth.The Dis|grace of the Duke of Mon|mouth, and its Conse|quences; This Gentleman stood pos|sess'd
of all the Qualities requisite to gain
the Love of the People, and stir up the
Jealousy of the Duke of York. King
Charles had heap'd Honours upon him;
and nothing pleas'd him so much as to see
him Great. He had been sent to Scotland
in the Year 1678, to suppress an Insurre|ction
which the Severity of Lauderdale's
Administration had occasion'd; where
his Lenity towards a People made by Op|pression
mad, gain'd him the ill will of a
Predominant Party at Court. The Zeal
he shew'd some time after in the prose|cution
of the Popish Plot, and his Friend|ships
with some that were profess'd Ene|mies
to the Duke, concurr'd to his Fall.
Yet King Charles still continued under|hand
the same Tenderness for him;
though he was declar'd in Publick to be
in Disgrace. The Duke's Faction at
home, and a Foreign Interest abroad,
were too powerful for King Charles to

grapple with, even though the Fortune
of a Favourite Son was at stake.
The more he was depress'd by the En|vy
of his Uncle, the higher he rose in the
Affections of the People; till the break|ing
out of what was call'd the Protestant
Plot,The Pro|testant Plot. overwhelm'd not only him, but a
whole Party with him. This Plot was
in some part a greater Mystery than the
Popish Plot had been before, and had
more dismal Effects. The shatter'd Re|mains
of English Liberty were then at|tack'd
on every side; and some of the
Noblest Blood in the Nation was offer'd
up a Sacrifice to the Manes of Popish
Martyrs, and made to atone for the Bill
of Exclusion. Swearing came once more
into Fashion, and a New Evidence-Office
was erected at Whitehall. But whereas
the Witnesses of the Popish Plot were
brow-beaten and discourag'd, those of
the Protestant Plot were highly encou|rag'd;
and instead of Iudges and Iuries
that might perhaps boggle at half-Evi|dence,
as it fell out in the Prosecution of
the former; care was taken in this to pick
out such as should stick at nothing to
serve a Turn. It was by such Iudges
and Iuries that the Lord Russel and
Mr. Sidney fell; and the cutting off those

Two Noble Lives, may be reckon'd
among the first Triumphs of the Duke's
Party in England.
It's true, King Charles seem'd inclin'd
to pardon both the one and the other;
and the very day the Lord Russel was
executed, some Words escap'd him, that
show'd sufficiently his Irresolution in that
matter: But by this time he was too far
gone, to make a handsome Retreat on a
sudden; and there was observable ever
after, a sensible Change in his Temper;
for from an Easiness and Debonairness
that was natural to him, he came at
length to treat men with Hard Names,
and upon some occasions to express a Se|verity
in his Disposition, that he had been
ever averse to before.
The rest of that Reign was one conti|nued
Invasion upon the Rights of the Peo|ple;
and the Nation seem'd unwilling
now to contend for them any more.
King Charles, notwithstanding his great
Abilities and Fitness for business, appear'd
to be quite lull'd asleep with the Charms
of a new swell'd-up Prerogative; while
some of our Neighbours were playing their
Game, to the Prejudice of England abroad,
and the Duke's Creatures were managing
all things to their own mind at home.

Nature prevail'd upon King Charles at
length; and the shame of seeing himself
impos'd upon by others far short of him
in Parts; and that the Court was antici|pating
his Death, by their Addresses to
his Brother, as if he had been already
King, did help to awake him out of his
Slumber, and brought him to lay a Pro|ject
for a mighty Change in the Affairs
of England, which probably might have
made both him and the Nation happy.
If he had liv'd but a few Weeks longer,
Monmouth had been recall'd to Court, the
Duke of York had been sent beyond Sea,
and a New Parliament conven'd. But
what further was to follow, must be bu|ried
with his Ashes, there being nothing
left us, but bare Suspicions of what might
have been. This is certain, his Death
came opportunely for the Duke; and in
such a Manner, and with such Circum|stances,
as will be a Problem to Posterity,
whether he died a Natural Death, or
was hasten'd to his Grave by Treachery.
In so nice a Point as this is,The Death of King  II. it becomes
one that would write Impartially, to set
down with the exactest Fidelity, every
thing of Moment of either side, that
may determine the Reader in his Judg|ment,
without venturing to give his own.

This Rule I have set to my self, in laying
down the following Particulars.
It's confest,The Suspici|ons about the Man|ner of it consider'd few Princes come to dye a
sudden Death, but the World is apt to
attribute it to Foul Play, especially if at|tended
with unusual Circumstances in
the Time and Manner of it. King
Charles had a healthful Constitution be|yond
most men, and took great care to
preserve it by Diet and Exercise, which
naturally promise a long Life. And it
was more extraordinary to see such a
Man dye before Threescore, than ano|ther
in the Bloom of Youth. Now if
he died a Natural Death, it's agreed by
all, that it must have been an Apoplexy.
This Disease seizes all the Vital Faculties
at once; and yet for the most part, does
not only give some short Warnings of its
Approach, by unusual Affections of the
Head, but many times is occasion'd by
some evident preceding Cause. In King
Charles's Case, there appear'd no visible
Cause, either near or remote, to which
with any certainty of Reason, his Dis|ease
could be ascrib'd; and the Forerun|ners
of it were rather to be found in the
Stomach and Bowels, than in the Head.
For after he was abed, he was over|heard
to groan most of the Night: And

both then, and next Morning, before he
fell into the Fit, he complain'd first of a
heavy Oppression in his Stomach, and
about his Heart, and afterwards of a sharp
Pain in those Parts; all which Symptoms
had but little relation to an Apoplexy.
That Morning there appear'd to every
body about him a Ghastliness and Paleness
in his Looks: And when he sat down to
be shav'd, just before the Fit took him,
he could not sit straight, as he us'd to do,
but continued in a stooping Posture, with
his Hand upon his Stomach, till the Fit
came. After he had been brought out of
it by opening a Vein, he complain'd of a
Racking Pain in his Stomach, and of no
Indisposition any where else: And du|ring
the whole Time of his Sickness, and
even when he seem'd most Insensible, he
was observ'd to lay his Hand for the most
part upon his Stomach, in a moaning Po|sture,
and continued so to his Death.
And so violent was the Pain, that when
all hopes were gone, the Physicians were
desir'd to use all their Art to procure him
an Easy Death.
So much for the Distemper it self:
There remains some things to be taken
notice of, that fell out before and after his
Death. A few days before he was taken

ill, King Charles being in Company
where the present Posture of Affairs was
discours'd of, there escap'd him some
warm Expressions about the uneasy Cir|cumstances
he was plung'd into, and the
ill Measures had been given him: And
how in a certain particular Affair he was
pleas'd to mention, he had been abus'd:
Adding in some Passion, That if he liv'd
but a Month longer, he would find a way to
make himself easy for the rest of his Life.
This Passage was whisper'd abroad next
day; and the Rumour of recalling the
Duke of Monmouth, and sending away
the Duke of York, came to take Air about
the same time. Indeed all things were
making ready, to put the latter in execu|tion;
and there is reason to believe the
King had intimated as much to the Duke
himself; for some of his Richest Furni|ture
was put up, and his chief Servants
order'd to be in a readiness to attend their
Master upon an Hour's warning; and
Yatchts were waiting to Transport some
Person of Quality, without mentioning
who it was, or whither bound. The
Romish Party that manag'd about Court,
were observ'd to be more than ordinary
diligent and busy up and down Whitehall
and St. Iames's, as if some very important

Affair was in agitation; and a new and
unusual Concern was to be seen on their
Countenances. Nor was it any won|der;
for in this suspected Change they
were like to be the only Losers, and all
their teeming Hopes were in a fair way
to be disappointed. How far the Princi|ples
of some of that Party might leave
them at liberty to push on their Revenge
for this design'd Affront, as well as to
prevent the Blow that threaten'd them,
though without the Privacy, much less
the Consent of the Duke of York, is left
to the Reader to judge.
There was a Foreign Minister, that
some days before the King fell ill, order'd
his Steward to buy a considerable Parcel
of Black Cloth, which serv'd him and
his Retinue after for Mourning: And
the late Ambassador Don Pedro Ranquillor,
made it no Secret, that he had a Letter
from Flanders the Week before King
Charles died, that took notice of his
Death, as the News there. But both
these might fall out by mere Accident.
There remains two things more, that
deserve some Consideration in this mat|ter.
When his Body was open'd, there
was not sufficient time given for taking
an exact Observation of his Stomach and

Bowels; which one would think ought
chiefly to have been done, considering
the violent Pains he had there: And
when a certain Physician seem'd to be
more inquisitive than ordinary about the
Condition of those Parts, he was taken
aside, and reprov'd for his needless Curio|sity.
In the next place, his Body stunk
so extremely within a few Hours after
his Death, notwithstanding the Coldness
of the Season, that the People about him
were extremely offended with the Smell:
Which is a thing very extraordinary, in
one of his strong and healthful Constitu|tion;
and is not a proper Consequent of
a mere Apoplectical Distemper.
There was some Weight laid upon an
Accident that fell out at Windsor some
Years before his Death: For the King
drinking more liberally than usual, after
the Fatigue of Riding, he retir'd to the
next Room, and wrapping himself up
in his Cloak, fell aslep upon a Couch.
He was but a little time come back to the
Company, when a Servant belonging to
one of them, lay down upon the same
Couch, in the King's Cloak, and was
found stabb'd dead with a Ponyard. Nor
was it ever known how it happen'd, but
the matter hush'd up, and no Enquiry
made about it.

To conclude; Dr. Short, who was a
Man of great Probity and Learning, and
a Roman-Catholick, made no scruple to
declare his Opinion to some of his inti|mate
Friends, That he believ'd King
Charles had foul Play done him. And
when he came to dye himself, express'd
some suspicion that he had met with the
same Treatment, for opening his mind
too freely in that Point.
So much for the Circumstances of
King Charles's Death, that seem to have
an Ill Aspect. There are others that
seem to destroy all Suspicions of Treache|ry
in the matter.
As First, He had liv'd so fast, as might
enervate in a great measure the Natural
Force of his Constitution, and exhaust
his Animal Spirits; and therefore he
might be more subject to an Apoplexy,
which is a Disease that weakens and locks
up these Spirits from performing their
usual Functions. And though in his
later Years he had given himself more
up to the Pleasures of Wine than of Wo|men,
that might rather be the effect of
Age, than of Choice.
Next, it's known he had been once or
twice attack'd before, with Fits that
much resembled those of which he after|wards

died: And yet as the manner of
them is told, they look rather to have
been Convulsive Motions, than an Apo|plexy;
seeing they were attended with
violent Contorsions of his Face, and
Convulsions of his whole Body and
Limbs. This is the more confirm'd, by
a Passage that happen'd during the Heat
of the Popish Plot. King Charles had
some secret Matter to manage at that
time, by the means of a Romish Priest
then beyond Sea, whom he order'd to be
privately sent for: And the Gentleman
employ'd betwixt the King and him
(from whom I had the Story) was di|rected
to bring him in a Disguise to White|hall.
The King and the Priest were a
considerable time together alone in the
Closet, and the Gentleman attended in
the next Room: At last the Priest came
out with all the marks of Fright and
Astonishment in his Face; and having
recover'd himself a little, he told the
Gentleman, That he had run the greatest
Risque ever man did; for while he was
with the King, his Majesty was suddenly
surpriz'd with a Fit, accompanied with
violent Convulsions of his Body, and
Contorsions of his Face, which lasted
for some Moments; and when he was

going to call out for help, the King held
him by force till it was over, and then
bid him not to be afraid, for he had been
troubled with the like before; the Priest
adding, what a condition he would have
been in, considering his Religion, and
the present Juncture of Affairs, if the
King had died of that Fit, and no body
in the Room with him besides himself.
But leaving this Story to the Credit
of the Priest; there might be another
Natural Cause assign'd for King Charles's
falling into such a Fit as that of which
he died; which is this: He had had for
some time an Issue in his Leg, which
run much, and consequently must have
made a great Revulsion from his Head,
upon which account it's probable it was
made. A few Weeks before his Death,
he had let it be dried up, contrary to the
Advice of his Physicians, who told him
it would prejudice his Health. Their
Prognostick was partly true in this, that
there came a painful Tumor upon the
place where the Issue had been, which
prov'd very obstinate, and was not tho|roughly
heal'd up when he died.
In fine, it is agreed on all hands, that
King Charles express'd no Suspicion of his
being poyson'd, during all the time of

his Sickness: Though it must be also ob|served,
that his Fits were so violent, that
he could not speak when they were upon
him, and show'd an Aversion to speaking
during the Intervals. And there was not
any thing to be seen upon opening his
Body, that could reasonably be attributed
to the force of Poyson. Yet to allow
these Considerations no more weight than
they can well bear, this must be acknow|ledg'd,
That there are Poysons which
affect originally the Animal Spirits, and
are of so subtle a nature, that they leave
no concluding Marks upon the Bodies of
those they kill.
Thus Reign'd,The Cha|racter of King Charles II. and thus Died King
Charles the Second; a Prince endow'd
with all the Qualities that might justly
have rendred him the Delight of Man|kind,
and entitled him to the Character
of one of the Greatest Genius's that ever
sat upon a Throne, if he had not sullied
those Excellent Parts with the soft Plea|sures
of Ease, and had not entertain'd a
Fatal Friendship, that was incompatible
with the Interest of England. His Reli|gion
was Deism, or rather that which is
call'd so: And if in his Exile, or at his
Death, he went into that of Rome; the
first was to be imputed to a Complaisance

for the Company he was then oblig'd to
keep, and the last to a lazy Diffidence
in all other Religions, upon a Review of
his past Life, and the near Approach of
an uncertain State. His Person was Tall
and well-made, his Constitution Vigo|rous
and Healthy; and it's hard to deter|mine,
whether he took more pains to
preserve it by Diet and Exercise, or to
impair it by Excess in his Pleasures. In
Health he was a great Pretender to Phy|sick,
and Encourager of Quacks, by
whom he was often cheated of conside|rable
Sums of Money for their pretended
Secrets: But whenever he was indispos'd,
he consulted his Physicians, and depend|ed
on their Skill only.
His Face was compos'd of harsh Fea|tures,
difficult to be trac'd with the Pen|cil;
yet in the main it was agreeable;
and he had a Noble Majestick Mien. In
contradiction to all the common receiv'd
Rules of Physiognomy, he was Merciful,
Good-natur'd, and in the last Twenty
four Years of his Life, Fortunate, if to
succeed in most of his Designs, may be
call'd so. Never Prince lov'd Ceremony
less, or despis'd the Pageantry of a Crown
more; yet he was Master of something
in his Person and Aspect, that com|manded

both Love and Veneration at
once.
He was a great Votary to Love, and
yet the easiest and most unconcern'd Ri|val.
He was for the most part not very
nice in the choice of his Mistresses, and
seldom possess'd of their First Favours;
yet would sacrifice all to please them;
and upon every Caprice of theirs, denied
himself the use of his Reason, and acted
contrary to his Interest. He was a Re|spectful,
Civil Husband; a Fond Father;
a Kind Brother; an Easy Enemy; but
none of the Firmest or most Grateful
Friends: Bountiful by Starts; one day
lavish to his Servants; the next, leaving
them to starve: Glad to win a little Mo|ney
at Play, and impatient to lose but
the thousandth part of what within an
hour after he would throw away in gross.
He seem'd to have had nothing of Jea|lousy
in his Nature, neither in Matters of
Love nor Power. He bore patiently Ri|vals
in the one, and Competitors in the
other; otherwise he would not have con|tributed
to a Foreign Greatness at Sea;
nor given his Brother so uncontroul'd a
share in the Government.
Though his Understanding was quick
and lively, with a vast Compass of

Thought, yet he would submit his Judg|ment
in greatest Matters, to others of
much inferior Parts: And as he had an
extraordinary Share of Wit himself, so
he lov'd it in others, even when pointed
against his own Faults and Mismanage|ments.
He had read but little, yet he had
a good Taste of Learning, and would
reason nicely upon most Sciences. The
Mechanicks were one of his peculiar Ta|lents,
especially the Art of building and
working of Ships; which no body under|stood
better, nor if he had liv'd, would
have carried it farther. He had a strong
Laconick way of Expression, and a Gen|tile,
Easy, and Polite way of Writing:
And when he had a mind to lay aside the
King, which he often did in select Com|panies
of his own, there were a thou|sand
irresistible Charms in his Conversa|tion.
He lov'd Money only to spend it:
And would privately accept of a small
Sum paid to himself, in lieu of a far
greater to be paid into the Exchequer.
He lov'd not Busis; and sought eve|ry
occasion to avoid it; which was one
reason that he past so much of his time
with his Mistresses: Yet when Necessity
call'd him, none of his Council could rea|son
more closely upon Matters of State;

and he would often by fits outdo his Mi|nisters
in Application and Diligence. No
Age produc'd a greater Master in the
Art of Dissimulation; and yet no man
was less upon his Guard, or sooner de|ceiv'd
in the Sincerity of others. If he
had any one fix'd Maxim of Government,
it was to play one Party against another,
to be thereby the more Master of both:
And no Prince understood better how to
shift hands upon every Change of the
Scene. To sum up his Character, he
was dextrous in all the Arts of Insinuati|on;
and had acquir'd so great an Ascen|dant
over the Affections of his People,
in spite of all the unhappy Measures he
had taken, that it may in some sense be
said, He died opportunely for England;
since if he had liv'd, it's probable we
might in compliance with him have com|plimented
our selves out of all the Re|mains
of Liberty, if he had had but a
mind to be Master of them; which it's
but Charity to believe he had not, at least
immediately before his Death.
There is one thing more that may help
to make up the Character of this Prince,
That in the Lies and Shape of his Face
(all but the Teeth) he had a great Re|semblance
of the Ancient Bustoes and

Statues we have of the Emperor Tiberius:
Insomuch that one of the most Learned
Men of this Age told me, That walk|ing
in the Furnesian Gardens at Rome,
with a Noble Italian that had been at the
Court of England, he took notice of this
Resemblance in an Antique Statue of Ti|berius;
and asking the Italian if he re|membred
any Prince he had seen that re|sembled
it, the other immediately nam'd
King Charles. As there was a great
Likeness betwixt these Two Princes in
their Faces, there was likewise some in
their Maxims of Government, the Time
of their Age in which they came to govern,
the Length of their Reigns, and the Suspi|cions
about the manner of their Death.
And indeed, excepting Tiberius's Tem|per,
his Cruelty, Jealousy, and unnatu|ral
Lusts, any one that's acquainted with
both their Stories, will easily find some|thing
of a Parallel betwixt them. Nor
is this any Reflection upon the Memory
of King Charles; for except in what I
nam'd, Tiberius may be reckon'd among
the Wisest and the Bravest of those that
wore the Imperial Purple.
Upon King Charles's Death,The Reign of King Iames II. Iames
Duke of York mounted the Throne, by
the Name of King Iames the Second. All

the former Heats and Animosities against
him, and even the very Memory of a
Bill of Exclusion, seem'd to be now quite
forgot, amidst the loud Acclamations of
his People at his Accession to the Crown.
He had many Years of Experience when
he came to it; and few of his Predeces|sors
could boast of the like Advantages:
In most of the Transactions of the pre|ceding
Reign, he had born a considerable
Share as to Action, but much more as to
Counsel and Influence. In the Post of
Lord High Admiral of England, he had
large opportunities to be fully acquainted
with the Native Strength, and peculiar
Interest of the Nation, I mean the Af|fairs
of the Navy; in which he had
acquir'd deservedly a great Reputation.
He had met with but too many occasions
to understand the Genius and Temper of
the People he was to govern, and to
know how far it was impracticable to
overturn the Establish'd Religion, or to
introduce a New one, for he had wrestled
through a great many Difficulties upon
the account of his own. He could not
but have a true value for hs Brother's
great Parts and Abilities, and be acquaint|ed
with the Arts by which he gain'd and
preserv'd the Affections of his People,

notwithstanding all the Hardships he had
been induc'd sometimes to put upon
them: And he had seen how fearful and
averse he had been to push things too
far, or to drive his Subjects to Extremiti|ties.
He had before him the Fatal Example
of a Father, who though he was a Pro|testant,
yet upon a false Suspicion of ha|ving
a Design to introduce Popery, was
sent to his Grave by a violont Death; and
he was almost a Man when that Tragedy
happen'd, and had suffer'd Ten Years
Banishment, among other Consequences
that attended it. He had been acquainted
abroad with a Princess fam'd for Parts and
Learning, who Resign'd her Crown,
apprehending she might be divested of it
for embracing the Romish Religion, by
those very Subjects that held her before in
the greatest Veneration, both upon her
own account, and that of a Father, who
had rais'd them to the highest Pitch of
Glory that ever the Suedish Nation ar|riv'd
to. And he might have remembred
what his Mother said upon her Return to
Somerset-house after the Restoration, That
if she had known the Temper of the Peo|ple
of England some Years past, as well as
she did then, she had never been oblig'd to

leave that House. But the History of
his Ancestors might have more fully in|form'd
him, Tat those that grasp'd at
Immoderate Power, or a Prerogative above
the Law, were always Unfortunate, and
their Reigns Inglorious.
There was also a Passage at his Father's
Death, which he would have done well
to have observ'd: He deliver'd his George
to Dr. Iuxon upon the Scaffold, and bid
him Remember, without saying more:
The Council of State was willing to
know the meaning of that Expression,
and call'd the Doctor before them, to
give them an Account of it; who told
them, That the King immediately before
his coming out to the Place of Execution,
had charg'd him to carry to the Prince his
Son, his George, with these his Two last
Commands, That he should forgive his Mur|therers:
And, That if he ever came to the
Crown, he should so govern his Subjects,
as not to force them upon Extremities.
Over and above all this; one of the
best Historians of the Age,Puffendorf ut supra. who had the
advantage of all the late Elector of Bran|denburgh's
Papers and Memoirs, acquaints
us, That King Charles the Second deli|vering
to King Iames at his Death the
Key of his Strong Box, advis'd him not

to think upon introducing the Romish Re|ligion
into England, it being a thing that
was both dangerous and impracticable. And
that the late Don Pedro Ronquillor, the
Spanish Ambassador, at his first Audience
after the Death of King Charles, having
ask'd leave to speak his mind freely upon
that occasion, made bold to tell him,
That he saw several Priests about him,
that he knew would importune him to alter
the Establish'd Religion in England; but
he wish'd his Majesty would not give Ear to
their Advice; for if he did, he was afraid
his Majesty would have reason to repent of it
when it was too late. This Author tells
us, That King Iames took ill the Free|dom
of the Spanish Ambassador; and
ask'd him in Passion, Whether in Spain
they advis'd with their Confessors? Yes,
Sir, (answer'd Ronquillor) we do, and
that's the reason our Affairs go so ill.
The same Historian does likewise in|form
us (but he does not tell us upon
what grounds),Pope Inno|cent XIth's Letter to K Iames. That Pope Innocent XI.
writ a Letter to King Iames upon his Ac|cession
to the Crown, to this purpose,
That he was highly pleas'd with his Majesty's
Zeal for the Catholick Religion; but he
was afraid his Majesty might push it too far,
and instead of contributing to his own Great|ness,

and to the Advancement of the Ca|tholick
Church, he might come to do both It
and himself the greatest Prejudice, by at|tempting
that which his Holiness was well
assur'd from long Experience, could not suc|ceed.
This Letter does very well agree
with what I shall have occasion to men|tion
afterwards, concerning the Earl of
Castlemain's Embassy to Rome.
How far he profited by all these Advan|tages
on the one hand, and Examples
and Advices on the other, will appear in
the Sequel.
The first Speech he made as King, the
day his Brother died, gave hopes of a
Happy Reign; and even those that had
appear'd with the greatest Warmth
against him before, were willing now to
own themselves to have been mistaken,
and were ready to express their Repen|tance
for what was past. For he told
them, That since it had pleas'd Almighty
God to place him in that Station, and that
he was now to succeed to so good and gracious
a King, as well as so very kind a Brother,
he thought fit to declare to them, That he
would endeavour to follow his Example, and
especially in that of his great Clemency and
Tenderness to his People: And that though
he had been reported to be a Man for Arbitra|ry

Power, yet he was resolv'd to make it his
Endeavour to preserve the Government of
England both in Church and State, as it
was then Establish'd by Law. That he knew
the Principles of the Church of England
were for Monarchy; and that the Members
of it had show'd themselves good and Loyal
Subjets; therefore he would always take
care of it, and defend and support it. That
he knew that the Laws of England were suf|ficient
to make the King as Great a Mo|narch
as he could wish: And that as he would
never depart from the just Rights and Pre|rogatives
of the Crown, so he would never
invade any mans Property. Concluding,
That as he had often hitherto ventur'd his
Life in defence of this Nation, so he was
resolv'd to go as far as any man in preser|ving
it in all its just Rights and Liberties.
If a Trajan or an Antoninus had been
to lay down a Scheme of Government to
make their People happy, they could not
have done it in better Terms; nor could
the Nation well desire, or in reason wish
for more. If his subsequent Actions had
come up to it, he had eterniz'd his Name,
and might have reviv'd in himself the
Memory of those of his Ancestors who
have deservedly given them by Posterity,
the Character of Good and Great.

This promising Speech was not many
days old, nor King Charles's Ashes well
cold, when the Nation was alarm'd with
a Proclamation for levying that part of the
Customs that had been granted to his Brother
only for Life, an was expir'd at his Death.
This was not only an open Violation of
his Promise in his foremention'd Speech,
but of our Fundamental Constitution, by
which no Money can be levied on the
Subject, but by their Consent in Parlia|ment.
As it was contrary to Law, so
it was altogether needless at that time,
since a Parliament was to meet within a
few days, which no body doubted would
in a Parliamentary way continue the same
Customs for his Life, as they had been
for his Brother's.
He was not the first Prince that did ille|gally
seize what he had no right to: But
few Instances can be given of a King
that did openly violate the Constitution
of his Countrey, to obtain that which
he was certain would be granted him in
a Legal Manner, and with the Good|will
of his People.
Notwithstanding this unusual Stretch
of Power upon his entring into the Ad|ministration,
yet the Parliament he had
call'd sat down in a good Humour, and

with a hearty Inclination to do every
thing in compliance with him, that
might tend to his Honour or Safety.
His Speech to both Houses was much of
the same Strain with his former to the
Council upon his Brother's death, but
more full. He demanded the setling of
his Revenue during Life, as it was in his
Brother's time; and acquainted them with
the Earl of Argyle's Landing in Scotland;
and threaten'd to reward his Treason as it
deserv'd.
This Speech buoy'd up the Minds of
the People that had been sufficiently
stunn'd before with the Unpresidented
Proclamation for levying the Customs:
And so earnest was the Parliament to
give the King no just occasion of Dis|pleasure,
and so great a Confidence did
they place in a Royal Promise from the
Throne, that they immediately complied
with him in the matter of the Revenue,
thank'd him for his Speech, and resolv'd
by an Unanimous Vote, To assist him with
their Lives and Fortunes against the Earl
of Argyle, and all other his Enemies what|soever.
Some few days after, the Bill for set|ling
his Revenue, was presented to him
for his Assent; upon which Occasion he

made them another Memorable Speech:
He thank'd them for the Bill; told them
of want of Stores in the Navy and Ord|nance;
of the Anticipations that were upon
several Branches of the Revenue; of the
Debts due to his Brother's Servants and
Family; which he said were such as de|serv'd
Compassion; and of the extraordina|ry
Charges he must be at in suppressing the
Rebellion in Scotland: Upon all which
accounts he demanded an Extraordinary
Supply; and summ'd up all, with recom|mending
to them the Care of the Navy,
which he was pleas'd to call the Strength
and Glory of the Nation: And in the
end told them, He could not express his
Concern upon that occasion more suitable to
his own thoughts of it, than by assuring
them, He had a true English Heart, as
jealous of the Honour of the Nation, as
Theirs could be: And that he pleas'd him|self
with the Hopes,Appendix, Numb. 12. His  Speech to the Parlia|ment. That by God's Bles|sing
and the Parliament's Assistance, he
might carry the Reputation of it higher in
the World, than ever it had been in the
time of any of his Ancestors.
It was no wonder that a Speech of this
Strain, so becoming an English Monarch,
did meet with a kind Reception from an
English Parliament, and be answer'd as it

was, with a large Supply; since a Neigh|bouring
Court was thereupon at a stand
what to think of a Prince they had rec|kon'd
upon as their own, and of whose
real Friendship this unexpected Speech
gave them ground to doubt. They well
knew that a true English Heart was dia|metrically
opposite to their Designs; and
that a King jealous of the Honour of the
English Nation, must needs be an Ene|my
to all Encroachments of any Neigh|bouring
State. To plunge that Court
yet the more into a Maze of Thoughts
about King Iames upon this Occasion,
the carrying the Reputation of England
yet higher in the World than ever it had
been in the time of any of his Ancestors,
were Words that seem'd to promise no
less than the imitating, or rather out|doing
of an Edward III. or a Henry V.
that had rais'd to themselves immortal
Trophies, at the Expence of their Neigh|bours,
and wrote their own Panegyricks
with their Enemies Blood.
How this Speech was relish'd abroad,
cannot be better express'd, than in Two
Letters writ at that time by a certain
Great Minister, to an Ambassador here,
which being communicated to me by a
Noble Person, into whose hands many of

that Ambassador's Papers happen'd to fall
upon the late Revolution, they are plac'd
at length in the Appendix,Appendix, Numb. 13. in English.
In the first of these Letters, That
Minister discovers a sort of diffidence in
King Iames, as if he were not the Man
they had taken him for. Expresses his
Fears, that a Cordial Agreement between
him and the Parliament, might unhindge
all the Measures had been so long a concert|ing
betwixt him and his Master, when King
James was but Duke of York. He re|commends
to the Ambassador, to enquire
narrowly into the Motives and the Advisers
of this Speech to the Parliament, as the
most considerable Service that could be
done in that Juncture.
The other Letter chides the Ambassa|dor,
for not being yet able to sound King
James's Intentions; and tells him, They
had receiv'd from a sure hand better News
than what it appears the Ambassador had
writ. And which is most remarkable in
the whole Letter, there is in it a plain In|sinuation,
That there was in that Court
some great matter under consideration, con|cerning
the Edict of Nants, which was not
to be declar'd until King James's Intenti|ons
were fully known. And concludes with
a Command to the Ambassador, to sift out

how King James stood affected to the Prince
of Orange.
What discoveries were made in obe|dience
to these Letters, can be no other|wise
guess'd at but by the Event; for at
this very time the Unfortunate Duke of
Monmouth, by a desperate, ill-tim'd At|tempt
to overturn King Iames's Throne,
did all that in him lay, to fix it the
faster.
King Charles, as I have said, lov'd
Monmouth tenderly; and all the Disgra|ces
and Hardships that had of late Years
been put upon him, were rather the ef|fects
of Fear and Policy, than Inclinati|on
or Choice. He was fond of him to
that degree, that though he was the
greatest Master in the Art of Dissimula|tion,
yet he could not refrain sometimes
in Company where he might be free,
from regretting his own hard Fortune,
which necessitated him to frown upon a
Son, whose greatest Crime was to have
incurr'd his Brother's Displeasure.
His Fondness was yet more express'd
in his Behaviour to the Duke of Mon|mouth,
upon the Discovery of that which
was call'd the Protestant Plot, and in the
manner he brought him back to Court,
after the Ferment was a little abated. All

the time Monmouth was absconding, and
when there was a Proclamation out for
apprehending him, King Charles not only
knew where he was, and sent him Messa|ges
every day, but saw him several times
in private. When the Duke's Anger was
a little appeas'd by the Sacrifices that
were offer'd up to it, King Charles
thought it was then time to have
his Son once again about him. In
order to which, he so manag'd the mat|ter,
that Monmouth should owe the Fa|vour
to the Duke of York, and that his
Pardon should be granted merely at the
Duke's Intercession.
The Night he appear'd first at Court
upon his Reconciliation, King Charles
was so little Master of himself, that he
could not dissemble a mighty Joy in his
Countenance, and in every thing he did
or said. Insomuch, that it was the pub|lick
Talk about Town, and strongly in|sinuated
to the Duke of York, That all the
King's former Proceedings against the
Duke of Monmouth, were but Grimace,
and that his Royal Highness being made
the Instrument of the Reconciliation,
was all but a Trick put upon him. This
so far incens'd the Duke, that he never
rested till King Charles was prevail'd with

to demand of Monmouth the Publication
of a Paper which he had sign'd under
Trust, and with an Assurance given him
that it should never be made publick;
which the Party about the Duke knew
Monmouth would not consent to, as being
against his Honour. They were not mi|staken,
for Monmouth refus'd it; and up|on
his Refusal was disgrac'd once again.
King Charles's Kindness ended not
here, but attended him to Holland, whi|ther
he was oblig'd to retire. He found
secret means to furnish him with Money,
and sent him Messages from time to time,
and sometimes writ to him with his own
Hand. He could not bear any hard thing
to be said of him in his absence; and
some officious Courtiers found to their
Cost that it was not the way to make
their Fortune, to aggravate Monmouth's
Crimes: Nor did the King take any thing
more kindly, than the Noble Reception
Monmouth receiv'd from a Prince of his
Blood in a Foreign Countrey, when he
was forc'd to abandon his own.
King Charles, tir'd out at last with
the uncontroul'd Hardships that were
every day put upon him by the Duke's
Creatures, and asham'd to see his own
Lustre obscur'd, and his Power lessen'd

by a Party that had rais'd themselves upon
Monmouth's Ruin, he resolv'd to shift the
Scene; and in order to make himself easy
for the rest of his Life, as he express'd it,
he determin'd to send away the Duke of
York, and recall the Duke of Monmouth.
April was the time agreed on to put
this Resolution in practice; but there is
little left us, by which we can judge
whether Monmouth was to be recall'd to
Court by a formal Invitation of the
King's, or whether King Charles's usual
Thread of Dissimulation was to be spun
out to that length, that Monmouth was
to Land with an Arm'd Force. The first
seems more probable, if it were but for
what he has writ himself in the Pocket-Book,
which there will be occasion to
mention hereafter. It's true, the last
looks more of a piece with the rest of his
Behaviour towards his Brother and Son,
and more agreeable to his Natural Biass,
which seldom inclin'd him to chuse the
High Road, when there could possibly be
found a By-Path to tread in.
But Death put a sudden stop to all King
Charles's Designs and Monmouth's Hopes;
and at the same time warded off a Blow
that threaten'd the Duke of York so near.
And Monmouth being just ready to rise

higher than ever, was left by all his good
Stars, which set with that Royal Sun that
gave them Birth and Heat.
I would not be mistaken here, as if I
were of opinion that in this New Turn
that was upon the Anvil immediately be|fore
the Death of King Charles, there
was any Design of altering the Succession,
or bringing Monmouth within the View
of a Crown: The whole Course of King
Charles's Actions does sufficiently contra|dict
any such thought: And though Mon|mouth
was afterwards prevail'd with by
a headstrong Party about him, to assume
the Title of King, yet it's next to a Cer|tainty,
that all that was originally aim'd
at by King Charles and the Duke of Mon|mouth,
was only to weaken the Duke of
York's Faction, which was then become
insupportable, by playing Monmouth's
Party against it; which was consistent
with the only fix'd Maxim of Govern|ment
in that Reign, That when any one
Party grew too strong, to throw in the Royal
Weight into the lightest Scale.
Monmouth was sufficiently stunn'd with
this unexpected Change in his Fortune,
by the Death of King Charles: But his
great Courage and vain Confidence in a
Popular Affection and Assistance, bore

him up against all Difficulties, and
prompted him on to attempt by Force of
Arms, what was never design'd him by
King Charles.
With Three small Ships, and about an
Hundred and fifty Men, the Duke landed
in the West of England, the Parliament
sitting. A Romantick kind of Invasion,
and scarce parallel'd in History: Yet
with this Handful of Men, and the com|mon
People that join'd him, without
Arms, Provisions, Martial Discipline,
Money, or any one Place of Strength to
retire to, in case of Accidents, did this
Brave Unfortunate Man bid fair for a
Crown: And if his Ill Fate had not
plac'd a Battalion of Dumbarton's Regi|ment
in his way, he had in all probabi|lity
surpriz'd the King's Army in their
Camp, and perhaps at that single Blow
decided the Fortune of England for once.
Yet this Attempt may be said to have
pav'd the Way for a Nobler Change in
the Throne, by leaving King Iames at
liberty through this Success to act with|out
Controul, what at length tumbled
him down.
Monmouth paid the Price of his Rebel|lion
with his Blood: And King Iames in
ordering him to be brought into his Pre|sence

under the Sentence of Death, was
pleas'd to make one Exception against a
General Rule observ'd inviolably among
Kings, Never to allow a Criminal under
the Sentence of Death, the sight of his
Prince's Face, without a design to pardon
him.
There is nothing deliver'd concerning
this Unfortunate Gentleman, but what
I have unquestionable Grounds for, and
which some Persons yet alive, of the
First Quality, know to be true. But of
the most things above mention'd, there is
an infallible Proof extant under Mon|mouth's
own Hand, in a little Pocket-Book
which was taken with him, and de|liver'd
to King Iames; which by an Ac|cident
is needless to mention here, I had
leave to copy, and did it in part. A great
many dark Passages there are in it, and
some clear enough, that shall be eternally
buried for me: And perhaps it had been
for King Iames's Honour to have com|mitted
them to the Flames, as Iulius
Caesar is said to have done upon a like oc|casion.
All the use that shall be made of
it,Appendix, Numb. 14. is only to give in the Appendix some
few Passages out of it, that refer to this
Subject, and confirm what has been above
related.

Monmouth seem'd to be born for a bet|ter
Fate;Monmouths Character. for the first part of his Life
was all Sunshine, though the rest was
clouded. He was Brave, Generous, Af|fable,
and extremely Handsome: Con|stant
in his Friendships, just to his Word,
and an utter Enemy to all sort of Cruelty.
He was easy in his Nature, but fond of
Popular Applause, which led him insen|sibly
into all his Misfortunes: But what|ever
might be the hidden Designs of some
working Heads he embark'd with, his own
were Noble, and chiefly aim'd at the
good of his Countrey, though he was
mistaken in the means to attain it. Am|bitious
he was, but not to the degree of
aspiring to the Crown, till after his Land|ing
in the West; and even then, he was
rather Passive than Active in assuming
the Title of King. It was Importunity
alone that previal'd with him to make
that Step; and he was inflexible, till it
was told him, That the only way to pro|vide
against the Ruin of those that should
come into his Assistance, in case he fail'd
in the Attempt, was to declare himself
King; that they might be shelter'd by the
Statute made in the Reign of Henry VII.
in favour of those that should obey a King
de Facto. Those that advis'd him, had

different Ends in it: Some to render the
Breach betwixt King Iames and him irre|concilable,
and thereby pave a way for a
Commonwealth, in playing them against
one another. Others, to prevent a possi|bility
of his being reconcil'd to King
Iames, by the merit of delivering up
those that should join him; which was a
Thought unworthy of that nice Sincerity
he had shown in all the former Conduct
of his Life.
To confirm this, I remember to have
heard Rumbold say openly at his Execu|tion
in Scotland, upon the account of Ar|gyle's
Invasion, That Monmouth had
broke his Word with them, in declaring him|self
King. And I have reason to know
that he was so far from a Design upon
the Crown before he left Holland, that it
was not without great difficulty he was
persuaded to come over at all: And that
upon King Charles's Death he express'd a
firm Resolution to make no such At|tempt,
but to live a retir'd Life, without
giving King Iames any disturbance.
In his latter Years he us'd to complain
of the little Care had been taken of his
Education; and in his Disgrace endea|vour'd
to make up that Want, by apply|ing
himself to Study, in which he made

in a short time no inconsiderable Progress.
He took the occasion of his Afflictions to
inform his Mind, and recollect and
amend the Errors of Youth; which it
was not strange he should be tainted
with, being bred up in all the Pleasures
of a Luxurious Court. What sedate
Thoughts his Retirement brought him
to; and, which is in a great part hitherto
a Secret, how little Inclination he had to
make a Bustle in the World (to give it in
his own Words) is best express'd in a
Letter of his own, to one that after|wards
lost his Life in his Quarrel:
Which though without a Date, appears
to be writ after King Charles's Death, and
is plac'd in the Appendix;Appendix, Numb. 15. which was de|liver'd
me by a Gentleman yet alive, that
was intrusted with the Key of that and
other Letters that were writ at that time:Mr. Spence, Secretary to the late Ear of Argyle.
Which rather than discover, he chose to
submit himself to be thrice cruelly tor|tur'd;
all which he bore with a Courage
worthy of the Ancient Romans.
The Duke of Monmouth, when he was
brought Prisoner to King Iames's Pre|sence,
made the humblest Submissions
for his Life; and it's a Mystery what
could move King Iames to see him, when
he had no mind to pardon him: But the

Manner of his Death Three Days after,
did more than acquit him of any Mean|ness
of Spirit in desiring to live, since he
died with the greatest Constancy and
Tranquility of Mind, and such as be|came
a Christian, a Philosopher, and a
Soldier.
The Storm being thus blown over
that threatn'd his Crown, King Iames
thought it time to cast off the Mask,
and to act without disguise what till
then he had in some part endeavour'd
to dissemble. This Parliament had ex|press'd
a more than ordinary Zeal in
Attainting Monmouth, and had readily
granted him a competent supply to sup|press
that Rebellion. Not only so, but
to testify the Confidence they had in
his Promises mention'd in the former
Speeches, the House of Commons Pass'd
a Vote, nemine contradicente, That they
did acquiesce, and intirely rely and rest
wholly satisfied on His Majestys Gracious
Word, and repeated Declarations to sup|port
and defend the Religion of the Church
of England as it is now by Law Establish'd,
which was dearer to them than their Lives.
So that they had reason to expect some
suitable Returns to all this Kindness and
Confidence on their sides. But they

were mistaken; for King Iames began
to talk to them in a quite other strain
than he had done before. And in ano|ther
Speech from the Throne, gave them
to understand by a plain Insinuation, That
he was now Master, and that for the fu|ture
they must expect to be govern'd,
not by the known Laws of the Land,
but by his own sole Will and Pleasure.
No part of the English Constitution was
in it self more sacred, or better secur'd by
Law, then That by which Roman Catho|licks
were declar'd incapable of Places of
Trust either Civil or Military in the Go|vernment:
And he himself, when Duke
of York, was forc'd by the Test-Act to
lay down his Office of Lord High-Admiral,
even at a time when he had not
publickly own'd his Reconciliation to
the Church of Rome. But he did what
lay in his power to break down this
Barrier upon Monmouth's Defeat. And
in a Speech to his Parliament, told them,
That after the Storm that seem'd to be co|ming
when he parted with them last, he
was glad to meet them again in so great
Peace and Quietness. But when he re|flected
what an inconsiderable number of
Men began the late Rebellion, and how
long they carry'd it on without any Opposi|tion;

He hop'd ev'ry body was convinc'd
that the Militia was not sufficient for such
Occasions; but that nothing but a good Force
of Disciplin'd Troops was sufficient to defend
Vs from Insults at Home and Abroad: And
therefore he had increas'd the number of
Standing Forces to what they were:K. Iames's Speech to the Par|ment after Monmouth's defeat. Appendix, Numb. 16. And
demanded a supply to support the Charge
of them, which he did not doubt they would
comply with. Then, as the main End of
his Speech, and to let them know what
he was positively resolv'd to do; He
adds, Let no man take Exception that
there are some Officers in the Army not
qualified according to the late Test for
their Employment: The Gentlemen, I must
tell you, are most of them well known to
me; and having formerly serv'd me on
several Occasions, and always approv'd the
Loyalty of their Principles by their Pra|ctices,
I think them now fit to be Employ'd
under me, and will deal plainly with you,
That after having had the benefit of their
Services in such time of need and danger, I
will neither expose them to Disgrace, nor
my self to the Want of them, if there
should be another Rebellion to make them
necessary to me. And at last he tells them,
That he was afraid some may hope that a
difference might happen betwixt Him and

his Parliament on that occasion; which he
cannot apprehend can befal him, or that
any thing can shake them in their Loyalty to
him, who will ever make all returns of kind|ness
and protection, and venture his Life
in the Defence of the true Interest of the
Nation.
It was no wonder, That this Speech
surpriz'd a people who valu'd themselves
so much upon their Liberties, and thought
themselves secure of them, both from
the Constitution of their Government,
and the solemn repeated promises of their
Prince. They found too late, that their
fears in the former Reign, of a Popish
Successor, were too well grounded, and how
inconsistent a Roman Catholick King is
with a Protestant Kingdom. The Par|liament
did in humble manner represent
the inconvenience that might attend such
Measures,The Par|liaments Address to K. Iames upon that Speech. at least to render him inexcu|sable
for what might Ensue. And that
they might not be wanting to themselves
and their Posterity, they Voted an Ad|dress,
wherein they told him, That they
had with all duty and readiness taken into
Consideration His Majesty's Gracious Speech.
And as to that part of it relating to the
Officers of the Army not qualified for their
Employment according to the Act of Parlia|ment,

they did out of their bounden duty
humbly Represent to His Majesty, That these
Officers could not by Law be capable of their
Employments; and that the Incapacities they
bring upon themselves that way, could no
ways be taken off, but by an Act of Parlia|ment:
Therefore out of that great Reve|rence
and Duty they ow'd to His Majesty,
they were preparing a Bill to indemnify them
from the inconveniences they had now in|curr'd.
And because the continuing them in
their Employments may be taken to be a
dispensing with Law without an Act of Par|liament,
the consequence of which was of
the greatest concern to the Rights of all
his Subjects, and to all the Laws made for
the security of their Religion; Therefore
they most humbly beseech His Majesty, That
he would be graciously pleas'd to give such
Directions therein, that no Apprehensions
or Iealousies might remain in the hearts of
his Subjects.
Over and above what was contain'd in
this Address, the House of Commons
were willing to capacitate by an Act of
Parliament, such a Number of the Roman
Catholick Officers, as King Iames should
give a List of. But both this Offer and
the Address was highly resented; and
notwithstanding that, they were prepa|ring

a Bill for a considerable Supply to An|swer
his extraordinary Occasions, and
had sent to the Tower one of their Mem|bers
for speaking indecently of his Speech,
King Iames was influenc'd to part with
this his first and only Parliament in dis|pleasure,
upon the Fourth day after
they presented the Address.
As his former Speeches to his Council
and Parliament had put a Foreign Court
to a Stand what to think of him; so
this last put them out of pain, and con|vinc'd
them he was intirely Theirs. Their
sense of it can hardly be better express'd
than in a Letter from Abroad contain'd
in the Appendix;Appendix, Numb 17. which by its Stile
though in another Hand, seems to be from
the same Minister that writ the two for|mer:
In which he tells the Ambassador
here, That he needed not a surer Character
of King James and his Intentions, than
this last Speech to the Parliament, by which
they were convinc'd of his former Resolu|tion
to throw off the Fetters which Hereticks
would impose upon him, and to act for the
time to come En Maistre, as Master: A
word till then altogether Foreign to the
English Constitution.
What other Effects this Speech had up|on
the Minds of People at Home and

Abroad, may be easily guess'd from the
different Interests they had in it: Nor
is it to be pass'd over without some Re|mark,
That the Revocation of the Edict
of Nants, which probably had been some
time under Consideration before, was
now put in Execution to the Astonish|ment
of all Europe.
The Parliament being dissolv'd, and no
visible means left to retrieve the Liberties
of England, King Iames made haste to
accomplish the Grand Design which a
head strong Party about him, push'd on
as the certain way in their opinion to
Eternize his Name in this World, and to
merit an Eternal Crown in the other. They
foresaw that this was the Critical Iun|cture,
and the only one that happen'd since
the days of Queen Mary, to Restore their
Religion in England. And if they were
wanting to themselves in making use of
it, the prospect of a Protestant Successor
would infallibly prevent their having any
such opportunity for the future: King
Iames was pretty far advanc'd in years,
and what was to be done requir'd Expe|dition;
for all their labour would be
lost, if he should die before the accom|plishment.
If he had been Younger, or
the next presumptive Heir had not been

a Protestant, there had been no such ab|solute
necessity for Dispatch: But the
Uncertainty of the King's Life call'd for
more than ordinary diligence in a De|sign
that depended meerly upon it.
The Party being resolv'd for these
Reasons to bring about in the Compass
of one Single Life, and that already far
spent, what seem'd to be the Work of a
whole Age, they made large steps to|wards
it. Roman-Catholicks were not
only Employ'd in the Army, but brought
into Places of greatest Trust in the State:
The Earl of Clarendon was forthwith re|mov'd
from the Office of Privy-Seal, and
the Government of Ireland, to make
room for the Earl of Tyrconel in the one,
and the Lord Arundel in the other. Fa|ther
Peters, a Iesuit, was sworn of the
Privy Council. And though by the Laws
it was High-Treason for any to assume
the Character of the Pope's Nuncio;A Pope's Nuncio in England.
yet these were become too slender Cob|webs
to hinder a Roman Prelate to ap|pear
publickly at London in that Quality;Duke of Somerset.
and one of the greatest Peers of England
was disgrac'd for not paying him that
Respect which the Laws of the Land
made Criminal.

To bear the Publick Character of Am|bassador
to the Pope,An Am|bssador sent to Rome: was likewise an open
Violation of the Laws: But so fond was
the governing Party about King Iames
to show their new-acquir'd Trophies at
Rome, that the Earl of Castlemain was
dispatch'd thither Extraordinary Ambassa|dor,
with a Magnificent Train, and a
most Sumptuous Equipage. What his
Secret Instructions were, may be partly
guess'd by his Publick ones, which were,
To Reconcile the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, to the Holy See,
from which they had for more than an Age
fallen off by Heresy.
Innocent XI.And slighted by the Pope. receiv'd this Embassy as
one that saw further than those who sent
it. The Ambassador had but a cold Re|ception
of the Holy Father; and none of
the Cardinals, but those of a particular
Faction, and the good-natur'd Cardinal
of Norfolk, took any further notice of it,
than Good Manners oblig'd them. The
Court of Rome were too refin'd Politici|ans
to be impos'd upon with Show and
Noise; and knew the World too well, to
expect great Matters from such hasty, ill-tim'd
Advances as were made to them.
Not only so, but Innocent having an Aver|sion
in his Nature to a Faction he knew

King Iames was embark'd in, which he ne|ver
took pains to dissemble, was not over|fond
of an Embassy from a Prince who
was in an Interest he had long wish'd to
see humbled. King Iames met with no|thing
but Mortifications at Rome in the
Person of his Ambassador, which occa|sion'd
his making as short a Stay as was
possible. In which may be seen the vast
difference there was at that time betwixt
the Politicks of Italy, and those of a head|strong
Party in England. And however
the World has been impos'd upon to be|lieve
that the Pope's Nuncio at the English
Court, who is since made a Cardinal,
was an Instrument to push on things to
extremities, yet certain it is he had too
much good sense to approve of all the
Measures that were taken; and therefore
desir'd often to be recall'd, lest he should
be thought to have a hand in them.
Although the Earl of Castlemain was
pleas'd upon his Examination before the
Parliament, to say that his Embassy to
Rome was only such as is between Two Tem|poral
Princes, about Compliment and Com|merce;
yet Father Warner in his Manu|script
History, quoted by a Learned Au|thor,Dr. Gee's Animad|versions on the Iesuits Memorial for the In|tended Re|formation of England, under the first Popish Prince. London, 1690.
gives us another account of it, in
these words; Things being thus setled

(says he) within the Realm, the next
care his Majesty had, was to unite his Coun|tries
to the Obedience of the Bishop of
Rome, and the Apostolick See, which had
been cut off by Heresy about an Age and a
half before. To try the Pope's Inclinati|on,
In the Year 1685. he sent Mr. Carryl
thither, who succeeding according to his
Wishes, and being recall'd, the Earl of
Castlemain was sent the next Year, as
Extraordinary Ambassador to the Pope, in
the Name of the King and the Catholicks
of England, to make their Submission to
the Holy See.
Castlemain had several Audiences of the
Pope, but to little purpose; for when|ever
he began to talk of Business, the
Pope was seasonably attack'd with a Fit
of Coughing, which broke off the Am|bassador's
Discourse for that time, and
oblig'd him to retire. These Audiences
and Fits of Coughing continued from
time to time, while Castlemain continued
at Rome, and were the subject of diver|sion
to all but a particular Faction at that
Court. At length he was advis'd to come
to Threats, and to give out that he would
be gone, since he could not have an op|portunity
to treat with the Pope about
the Business he came for. Innocent was

so little concern'd for the Ambassador's
Resentment, that when they told him
of it, he answer'd with his ordinary
Coldness, E bene, se vuol andarsene dite|gli
adonque che si levi di buon matino al
fresco e che a mezzo giorno si reposi, per che
in questi paesi non bisogna viaggiare al caldo
del giorno. Well! let him go; and tell him,
It were fit he rise early in the Morning, that
he may rest himself at Noon; for in this
Countrey it's dangerous to travel in the
Heat of the Day.
In the end, he was recall'd; being
able to obtain of the Pope two trifling
Requests only, that could hardly be de|nied
to an ordinary Courier; The one was
a License for the Mareschal d' Humiers's
Daughter to marry her Vncle:Mercure Historick, pour Iune, 1687. And the
other, a Dispensation of the Statutes of
the Iesuits Order, to Father Peters, to en|joy
a Bishoprick: The want of which, says
my Author, was the reason that the Arch|bishoprick
of York was kept so long va|cant.
Though the Pope carried himself in
this manner towards the English Ambassa|dor,The Jesu|its Noble Entertain|ment of the English Ambassa|dor at Rome.
yet the Iesuits paid him the highest
Respect imaginable; which did him no
service with the Old Man, for He and

That Order were never hearty Friends.
They entertain'd him in their Seminary
with the greatest Magnificence; and
nothing was wanting in Nature or Art,
to grace his Reception. All their Stores
of Sculpture, Painting, Poetry, and Rhe|torick,
seem to have been exhausted upon
this Entertainment. And though all the
Inscriptions and Emblems did center upon
the Triumph of the Romish Religion, and
the Ruin of Heresy in England, yet Care
was taken not to omit such particular
Trophies and Devices, as were adapted to
their new-acquir'd Liberty of setting up
their Publick Schools at London. Among
a great many other Panegyricks upon
King Iames, the following Distich was
plac'd below an Emblem of England:
Restituit Veterem tibi Religionis honorem
Anglia, Magnanimi Regis aperta sides.
The open Zeal of this Magnanimous King,
has restor'd to England its Ancient Re|ligion.
There was also this Inscription put
round King Iames's Picture:

Potentissimo  Religiosissimo
Magnae Britanniae
REGI
JACOBO II.
Generos
Catholicae Fidei Confessione
Regnum Auspicanti.
ET
INNOCENTIO XI. P. M.
Per Legatum
Nobilissimum  Sapientissimum
D. Rogerium Palmerium
Comitem de Castelmain
Obsequium deferenti.
Collegium Romanum
Regia Virtutm Insignia dedicat.
To the most Potent and most Religious
JAMES the Second, King of Great
Britain; beginning his Reign with the
Generous Confession of the Catholick
Faith.
AND
Paying his Obedience to Pope
INNOCENT XI.
By the most Noble and most Wise
D. Roger Palmer, Earl of Castlemain,
The Roman College
Dedicates
These Royal Emblems of his Virtues.

In the Great Hall the Ambassador was
Harangued by the Rector of the College in
a Latin Speech; which, to show the vain
Hopes they had of King Iames and their
own Fortune at that time, is plac'd in
the Appendix,Appendix, Numb. 18. Nouveau Voyage d' I|talie, Edit. 3. Tom. 2. Par Mon|sicur Misson. with a Translation of it
into English: Referring the Reader for
the rest of that Solemnity, to an Ingeni|ous
Gentleman that was then upon the
Place, and has given a particular Ac|count
of it.
But yet it may not be amiss to mention
what the same Gentleman tells us, of a
Device that related to King Iames's having
a Son; which was, A Lilly, from whose
Leaves there distill'd some Drops of Water,
which as the Naturalists say, becomes the
Seed of new Lillies; and the Motto was,
Lachrimor in Prolem: I weep for Children.
Underneath was this Distich:
Pro Natis, Iacobe, gemis, Flos candide
Regum?
Hos Natura Tibi si neget, Astra dabunt.
Dost thou sigh for Children, O James! thou
best of Kings? If Nature denies, Hea|ven
will grant them.

There was one Inscription more this
Author takes notice of; which being one
of the most unaccountable things of that
kind, afforded matter for the Wits of
Rome to descant upon. Though the
Words are ill chose, and strangely harsh,
yet it's certain the Fathers had a good
meaning in them; and they refer to King
Iames's Influence upon his Brother to
turn Roman-Catholick at his death. The
Inscription runs thus,
Jacobo Secundo Angliae Regi
Quod ipso Vitae Exemplo preunte,
Et impellente Consiliis,
Carolus Frater  Rex
Mortem obierat admodum piam:
Regnaturus a tergo frater
Alas Carolo addidit;
ET
Vt Coelo dignum,
ET
Dignum se Rege Legatum, eligeret,
Fratrem Misit.
To King James II. King of England;
for having by his Example and his Coun|sel,
prevail'd with Charles his Brother
to dye a Pious Death.

And being 'to succeed him,
He gave Wings to Charles; and that he
might make choice of an Ambassador
worthy of Heaven and himself, he sent
his Brother.
I will not pretend to give the nice Sense
of these words; and tho I would, I cannot,
there being such a perplexity in them.
But for the Expressions that follow, I
may venture to give them in English,
though they seem to be as much out of the
ordinary Road as the former.
Nuncii ex Anglia proceres
Retulerunt Regibus aliis Jacobum Regnan|tem.
Coelo
Primus omnium retulit Carolus.
Nec Immerito;
Reges alii Legatos suscipiunt
Mittuntque Principes,
Legatos Reges Deum Excipere decuit;
Jacobum mittere.
English Noblemen were sent to other Kings,
to acquaint them with King James's
Accession to the Crown: But Charles
first of all brought the News of it to
Heaven.

It was but reasonable,
For Kings to send and receive Princes as
Ambassadors:
But
It became God Almighty to receive, and
James to send no Ambassadors but Kings.
To see King Iames neglected at Rome
in the Pontificat of Innocent XI.The Mor|tifications K. Iames met with at Rome, about his Marriage with the Princess of Es. was not
so strange, considering what has been said
of his Antipathy to a Faction wherein
that Prince was concern'd: But that in
the time of Innocent's Predecessor, and
when he was Duke of York, he should be
denied a common Favour, which that
Court seldom or never refuses to any one,
was a thing altogether unaccountable:
Yet so it was, That he having sent the
late Earl of Peterborough to Italy, to
Espouse the Princess of Modena in his
Name, all the Interest he could make,
was not able to obtain a Dispensation for
the Marriage.Genealo|gies of the Family of Mordant, c. in a large Fol. p. 427, 428. The account of this mat|ter
being so little known, and that Earl's
Book wherein he mentions it, being so
rare, and, as I am told, but Twenty four
Copies printed, I shall give it in the Earl's
own Words:

But now from Rome there was Ad|vice
(says he) by the Abbot of Angeo,
of the great difficulties that arose in
the Consultations of this Affair (mean|ing
the Marriage.) The French Am|bassador,
the Duke d' Estrees, favour'd
the Marriage with all the Power of the
French Faction; so did Cardinal Barbe|rini,
and all the other Friends and Al|lies
of the House of Est. But his Ho|liness
himself was very averse, and
Cardinal Altieri, who was the Govern|ing
Nephew, a profess'd and violent
Opposer. The main pretence for this
Obstinacy, was the Duke of York's not
declaring himself publickly of the Ro|mish
Church, though they knew that he
was of a long time reconcil'd to it.
But now at last (continues the Earl
of Peterborough) came from Rome the
Abbot of Angeo without the Dispensa|tion,
which he could by no means ob|tain,
by reason that Cardinal Altieri
was inflexible, and Threats of Excom|munication
were issued out against any
that should undertake to perform or
celebrate the Marriage. Whereupon
we were all upon the fears and expecta|tions
of a total Rupture. The Duchess
of Modena her self, a Zealous, if not a

Bigot Woman, was in great pain about
the part that might seem offensive to
his Holiness, or neglective of his Au|thority:
And the Young Princess took
occasion from hence to support her un|willingness.
But in truth, Cardinal
Barberini, upon whom the Duchess had
great dependance, and all the other
Adherents and Relations of the House
of Est, being every day more and
more possess'd of the Honour and Inte|rest
they were like to find in this Alli|ance,
were scandaliz'd at the unrea|sonable
Obstinacy of the Pope and his
Nephew; and did frankly advise the
Duchess of Modena suddenly to make
up and perfect the Marriage: The
Peace and Excuse of the thing being
easier to be had after it was done, than
any present License to be obtain'd for
doing it.
The Bishop of Modena was then ap|plied
to (adds the Earl) for the Per|formance:
But he refusing, a poor
English Iacobine was found, Brother to
Ierome White, that after serv'd the
Duchess, who having nothing to lose,
and on whom the Terror of Excommu|nication
did not so much prevail, did
undertake it, and so he perform'd the

Ceremony. Thus far the Earl of Pe|terborough.
But to leave this Digression,The true design of the Perse|cution of Dissenters in King Charles's time. and to re|turn
to our History. It was about this
time that the Romish Cabal about King
Iames began to play their Popular Engine,
and which was likely to do most Execu|tion,
by weakning the National Establish'd
Church, and dividing Protestants among
themselves, when in the mean time the
Roman-Catholicks were to be the only
Gainers. This was disguis'd under the
specious Name of Liberty of Conscience.
And the very same Party that advis'd this
Toleration, were they that had push'd
on all the Severities against the Protestant
Dissenters in the former Reign, with de|sign
to widen the Breach between them
and the Church of England, and to ren|der
the first more willing to swallow the
Bait of Toleration, whenever it should be
offer'd to them. They gain'd in a great
part their End; for the Dissenters were
not so fond of Persecution and Ill Usage,
as to refuse a Liberty that was frankly
offer'd them, which neither their Pray|ers
nor Tears could obtain before: Nor
did they think it good manners to enquire
too narrowly how that Liberty came

about, as long as they were shelter'd
thereby from the Oppressions they lay
under.
The Church of England saw through
all this Contrivance, and fear'd the Con|sequences.
The Protestant Dissenters
were more pitied now in their seeming
Prosperity, than ever they had been in
their real Adversity. Some that had been
zealous before in putting the Penal Laws
in execution against them, did now see
their Error too late, and found they had
been us'd but as Tools to prevent the
Dissenters from uniting with the Church
of England, whenever the common Dan|ger
should come to threaten both.
This Toleration could not subsist,K. Iames grants a Tolerati|on of Re|ligion. be|ing
contrary to the Establish'd Laws of
the Realm, unless a new Monster was in|troduc'd
to give it life, under the Name
of a Dispensing Power. When King Iames
came to assume to himself this Power as
his Prerogative and Right, he unhindg'd
the Constitution all at once; for to Dis|pense
with Laws already made, is as
much a part of the Legislature, as the
making of new ones. And therefore in
aarogating to himself such a Dispensing
Power, he invaded the very Essence of the
English Constitution, by which the Le|gislature

is lodg'd in King, Lords, and Com|mons;
and every one of them has a Nega|tive
upon the other two.
Charles II. was the first King of Eng|land
that ever aim'd at any thing like a
Dispensing Power. In the Year 1662. he
was prevail'd upon for some Reasons of
State to issue out a Proclamation, dispen|sing
with some few things that related to
the Act of Vniformity, but without the
least regard to Roman-Catholicks. And
though in his Speech to the Parliament
upon that occasion, he did in a manner
acknowledge that he had no such Power,
in saying, That if the Dissenters would
demean themselves peaceably and modestly,
he could heartily wish he had such a Power
of Indulgence to use upon occasion: Yet the
Parliament was so jealous of this Inno|vation,
that they presented the King with
an Address against the Proclamation; and
plainly told him, That he had no Power to
dispense with the Laws, without an Act of
Parliament.
King Charles made another Attempt of
the like nature, in the Year 1672; and
in a Speech to Both Houses, did mention
his Declaration of Indulgence, and ac|quainted
them with the Reasons that in|duc'd
him to it; telling them withal,

how little the Roman Catholicks would
be the better for it. Upon which the
House of Commons made an Address to
him for recalling this Declaration:
Wherein they plainly told him, That in
claiming a Power to dispense with Penal
Laws, his Majesty had been very much mis|inform'd;
since no such Power was ever
claim'd or exercis'd by any of his Predeces|sors;
and if it should be admitted, might
tend to the interrupting of the free course
of the Laws, and altering the Legislative
Power, which has always been acknowledg'd
to reside in his Majesty, and his Two Houses
of Parliament. King Charles was so far
satisfied in the matter contain'd in this
Address, that he immediately thereupon
cancell'd his Declaration of Indulgence,
and order'd the Seal to be torn off; and
acquainted both Houses, That he had
done so; with this further Declaration,
which was enter'd upon Record in the
House of Lords, That it should never be
drawn into Example or Consequence.
The next that attempted such a Dis|pensing
Power, though of a far larger
Extent, was King Iames, as has been
said: And how any thing that look'd
that way, was relish'd by the House of
Commons, does appear by their Address

against the Roman Catholick Officers;
which also has been mention'd.
It was not enough for King Iames to
assume this Dispensing Power,And as|sumes a dispensing Power. and to act
by it; but such was the Misery and hard
Fate of England, that the Party about
the King would hve had us believe,
That a Power in the King to dispense wih
Laws, was Law. To maintain this Mon|strous
Position, there were not only Mer|cenary
Pens set a-work, but a Set of
Iudges found out, that to their Eternal
Reproach, did all was possible for them
to Compliment the King with the Liber|ties
of their Countrey. For these Gen|tlemen
gave it for Law,
That the Laws of England are the
King's Laws.
That therefore it's an incident, insepa|rable
Prerogative of the Kings of
England, as of all other Sovereign
Princes, to dispense with all Penal
Laws, in particular Cases, and upon
particular necssary Reasons.
That of those Reasons and Necessities
the King is the sole Iudge. And
which is a Consequent thereupon,
That this is not a Trust invested in, or
granted to the King, but the Ancient

Remains of the Sovereign Power of
the Kings of England, which never
was yet taken from them, nor can be.
Thus were we fallen under the greatest
Misfortune that can possibly happen to a
Nation; To have our Laws and Consti|tution
trampled upon under colour of Law.
And those very Men, whose Office it
was to support them, became now the
Betrayers of them to the Will of the
Prince.
This mighty Point being gain'd, or
rather forc'd upon us, the Roman-Catho|licks
were not wanting to make the best
use of it for themselves. The free and
open Exercise of their Religion was set
up every where, and Jesuit Schools and
Seminaries erected in the most considera|ble
Towns. The Church of England
had now but a Precarious Title to the Na|tional
Church, and Romish Candidates had
swallow'd up its Preferments and Digni|ties
already in their Hopes. Romish Bi|shops
were publickly Consecrated in the
Royal Chappel, and dispatch'd down to
exercise their Episcopal Function in their
respective Diocesses. Their Pastoral Let|ters,
directed to the Lay-Catholicks of
England, were openly dispers'd up and

down, and printed by the King's own
Printer, with Publick License. The Re|gular
Clergy appear'd in their Habits in
Whitehall and St. Iames's; and made no
scruple to tell the Protestants, They hop'd
in a little time to walk in Procession through
Cheapside.
A mighty Harvest of New Converts
was expected; and that Labourers might
not be wanting, Shoals of Priests and
Regulars were sent over from beyond Sea
to reap it. The only Step to Preferment,
was to be of the King's Religion: And
to preach against the Errors of Rome,
was the height of Disloyalty, because,
forsooth, it tended to alienate the Sub|jects
Affections from the King. An Or|der
was directed to the Protestant Bishops
about Preaching, which was, upon the
matter, forbidding them to defend their
Religion in the Pulpit, when it was at
the same time attack'd by the Romish
Priests with all the Vigor they were ca|pable
of, both in their Sermons and
Books. This Order was taken from a
Precdent in Queen Mary's time; for the
first Step she made to introduce Popery,
notwithstanding her Promises to the Gen|tlemen
of Suffolk and Norfolk to the con|trary,
upon their appearing first of any

for her Interest, upon the Death of her
Brother, was to issue out a Proclamation,
forbidding the Preaching upon contro|verted
Points of Religion, for fear, it was
said, of raising Animosities among the
people. But notwithstanding this insna|ring
Letter of K. Iames's, the Clergy of the
Church of England were not wanting in
their Duty: For to their Immortal Ho|nour,
they did more to vindicate the
Doctrine of their own Church, and ex|pose
the Errors of the Church of Rome,
both in their Sermons and Writings, than
ever had been done either at Home or
Abroad, since the Reformation; and in
such a Stile, and with such an Inimitable
Force of Reasoning, as will be a Stan|dard
of Writing to succeeding Ages.
To hasten on the Project against the
Establish'd Church, a new Court of In|quisition
was erected, under the Name
of a Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs:
And to blind the people, there were
some Bishops of the Church of England
nam'd Commissioners, whereof one re|fus'd
to act from the beginning, and the
other excus'd himself, after he came to
see where the Design of it was levell'd.
This Commission was another manifest
Violation of the Laws, and against an

express Act of Parliament: And as if that
had not been enough to mortify the
Church of England, there were some
Roman Catholicks appointed Commission|ers;
and consequently, the Enemies of
the Protestant Religion were become the
Judges and Directors of a Protestant
Church in its Doctrine and Discipline.
These Commissioners thought fit to
begin the Exercise of their New Power
with the Suspension of Dr. Compton,The Sus|pension of the Bishop of Londn. Bi|shop
of London. This Noble Prelate, by
a Conduct worthy of his Birth and Sta|tion
in the Church, had acquir'd the
Love and Esteem of all the Protestant
Churches at home and abroad, and was
for that reason the Mark of the Envy
and Hatred of the Romish Party at Court.
They had waited for an occasion to eno|ble
their Ecclesiastical Commission with such
an Illustrious Sacrifice; and such an oc|casion
was rather taken than given, in
the Business of Dr. Sharp, now Arch|bishop
of York.
The Priests about the King knowing
how much it was their Interest that the
Protestant Clergy should not have leave
to refute the Errors of the Church of
Rome in their Sermons,The Occa|sion of it. had advis'd him
to send to the Bishops the ensnaring Let|ter

or Order before mention'd, containing
Directions about Preahers. The Learned
Dr. Sharp taking occasion in some of his
Sermons to vindicate the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in opposition to Po|pery;
this was in the Court-Dialect un|derstood
to be the endeavouring to beget in
the minds of his Hearers an ill opinion of
the King and his Government, by insinua|ting
Fears and Iealousies, to dispose them to
Discontent, and to lead them into Disobe|dience
and Rebellion; and consequently, a
Contempt of the said Order about Preach|ers.
Whereupon King Iames sent a Let|ter
to the Bishop of London, containing
an Order to suspend Dr. Sharp from
Preaching in any Parish-Church or Chap|pel
in his Diocess, until the Doctor had
given Satisfaction, and his Majesty's fur|ther
Pleasure should be known.
The Bishop of London perceiving what
was aim'd at in this Letter, endeavour'd
all that was possible to divert the Storm
that threaten'd him, and the Church of
England through his sides. He writ a
Submissive Letter to the Secretary of
State, to be communicated to the King;
setting forth, That he thought it his Duty
to obey his Majesty in whatever Commands
he laid upon him, that he could perform with

a safe Conscience: But in this he was oblig'd
to proceed according to Law, and as a
Iudge: And by the Law no Iudge condemns
a man, before he has knowledge of the
Cause, and has cited the Party. That
however, he had acquainted Dr. Sharp
with his Majesty's Displeasure; whom he
found so ready to give all reasonable Satisfa|ction
that he had made him the Bearer of
that Letter.
Together with this Letter from the
Bishop of London, Dr. Sharp carried with
him a Petition to the King in his own
Name, shewing, That ever since his Ma|jesty
was pleas'd to give notice of his Dis|pleasure
against him, he had forborn the
Publick Exercise of his Function: And as
he had endeavour'd to do the best Service he
could to his Majesty and his late Brother in
his Station, so he had not vented now in
the Pulpit any thing tending to Faction or
Schism: And therefore prayed his Majesty
would be pleas'd to lay aside his Displeasure
conceiv'd against him, and restore him to
that Favour which the rest of the Clergy
enjoy'd.
All this Submission was to no purpose.
Nothing would satisfy the Party, but a
Revenge upon the Bishop of London,
for his Exemplary Zeal for the Protestant

Interest; and this Affair of Dr. Sharp's
was made use of as a handle to mortify
him, and in his Person the whole Body of
the Clergy. The Bishop was Cited be|fore
the Ecclesiastical Commission, for not
suspending Dr. Sharp, according to the
King's Order, and treated by their Chair|man
at his Appearance, in a manner un|worthy
of his Station and Quality. All
the Defence he could make, and his Plea
to the Jurisdiction and Legality of the
Court, which was good beyond all con|tradiction,
did signify nothing. These
New Inquisitors being resolv'd to stick at
nothing that might please the Party that
set them at work, did by their Definitive
Sentence declare, decree, and pronounce,
That the Bishop of London should for his
Disobedience and Contempt be suspended
during his Majesty's Pleasure: And accord|ingly
was suspended; with a peremptory
Admonition, To abstain from the Function
and Execution of his Episcopal Office, and
other Ecclesiastical Iurisdictions, during
the said Suspension, under the pain of De|privation,The Pro|ceedings against the Presi|dent and Fellows of Magdalene College.
and Removal from his Bishoprick.
The next that felt the weight of this
Ecclesiastical Commission, were the Presi|dent
and Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen's
College in Oxford. The two chief Seats

of Learning, the Universities of Oxford
and Cambridge stood in the way of the
Grand Design; and the Party was impa|tient
to get footing there. Magdalen
College is one of the Noblest Foundations
that perhaps was ever erected to Learn|ing
in the World, and therefore it was
no wonder it was one of the first Marks
that was shot at. This Illustrious Society,
from repeated Grants of Kings, ratified
in Parliament, and from their own Sta|tutes,
was in an uninterrupted Possession
of a Right to Elect their own President.
That Place being vacant by the Death of
Dr. Clark, a Day was appointed by the
Vice-President and Fellows, to proceed to
the Election of another to fill up the Va|cancy.
But before the day of Election
came, Charnock, one of the Fellows (who
was since executed for the late Plot to
Assassinate his present Majesty) brought
them a Mandate from King Iames, to
elect one Fermer into the Place; a Man
of an Ill Reputation, who had promis'd
to declare himself Roman Catholick, and
was altogether uncapable of the Office by
the Statutes of the College. This Mandate
the Vice-President and Fellows receiv'd
with all decent Respect; and sent their
humble Address to the King, representing

to his Majesty, That Fermer was a Person
in several respects incapable of that Office,
according to their Founders Statutes: And
therefore did earnestly beseech his Majesty,
either to leave them to the discharge of their
Duty and Consciences, according to his
Majesty's late Gracious Declaration, and
their Founders Statutes; or else to recom|mend
to them such a Person, who might be
more serviceable to his Majesty and the
College.
Notwithstanding this humble and sub|missive
Address, King Iames signified his
Pleasure to them, That he expected to be
obey'd. Upon which, the Fellows being
oblig'd by the Statutes of their Society,
to which they were sworn, not to delay
the Election longer than such a day; and
Fermer being a Person they could not
chuse, without incurring the Sin of Per|jury,
they proceeded to Election, and
chose Dr. Hough (now Bishop of Litch|field
and Coventry) their President.
Hereupon the New President and Fel|lows
were cited before the Ecclesiastical Com|mission,
for disobeying the King's Mandate.
And notwithstanding they made it ap|pear
by their Answer, plac'd at length in
the Appendix,Appendix, Numb. 19. That they could not comply
with that Mandate, without Breach of their

Oath; and that there was no room left for
the King to dispense with that Oath, be|cause
in the Oath it self they were sworn not
to make use of any such Dispensation, nor
in any sort consent thereto: Yet against all
Law, the Ecclesiastical Commissioners did
by their Sentence deprive Dr. Hough of
his Presidentship, and suspended two of the
Fellows from their Fellowships: While the
King at the same time Inhibited the Col|lege
to elect or admit any person whatso|ever
into any Fellowship, or any other
Place or Office in the said College, till his
further Pleasure.
The Court finding by this time, that
Fermer was one of so profligate a Life,
that though he had promis'd to declare
himself Roman-Catholick upon his Pro|motion
to that place, they began to be
asham'd of him: And therefore instead
of insisting on the former Mandamus in
his favour, there was another granted in
favour of Dr. Parker, then Bishop of
Oxford, one of the Creatures of the Court,
and who they knew would stick at no|thing
to serve a Turn.
The Place of President being already
in a Legal manner fill'd up by the Election
of Dr. Hough; which though it had not
been, yet the Bishop of Oxford was like|wise

incapable by the Statutes of the
College, of being elected; The Fellows
did humbly offer a very pathetick Peti|tion
to his Majesty, mention'd at length
in the Appendix;Appendix, Numb 20. in which they set forth,
how inexpressible an Affliction it was to
them, to find themselves reduc'd to such an
extremity, that either they must disobey his
Majesty's Commands, contrary to their In|clinations,
and that constant course of
Loyalty which they had ever shew'd hithert
upon all occasions; or else break their Foun|ders
Statutes, and deliberately perjure
themselves. Then they mention'd the
Statutes and the Oaths that every one of
them had taken at their Admission into
their Fellowships; and concluded with an
humble Prayer to his Majesty, To give
them leave to lay their Case and Themselves
at his Majesty's Royal Feet, earnestly be|seeching
his Sacred Majesty to extend to
them, his humble Petitioners, that Grace
and Tenderness which he had vouchsaf'd to
all his other Subjects.
All this Submission was in vain: For
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners by their
final Decree and Sentence, depriv'd and
expell'd from their Fellowships all the Fellows
of Magdalen College, but Three that had
complied with Breach of Oath, being Twenty

five in number. And to push their Inju|stice
yet further, they did by another Sen|tence
decree and declare, That Dr. Hough,
who had been depriv'd before, and the said
Twenty five Fellows, should be incapable of
receiving or being admitted into any Eccle|siastical
Dignity, Benefice, or Promotion.
And such of them who were not yet in Holy
Orders, they adjudg'd incapable of receiving
or being admitted into the same. Thus by
a Decree of an Illegal Court, were a Set of
Worthy and Learned Men turn'd out of
their Freeholds, merely for not obeying
an Arbitrary Command, which was di|rectly
against their Consciences: And
thus was King Iames prevail'd with by a
Headstrong Party, to assume a Power
not only to dispense with Laws, but to
make void Oaths.
The first Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience was not thought a sufficient
Stretch of Power;The Se|cond De|claration for Liber|ty of Con|science. and therefore King
Iames issued out another of a much higher
Strain, in which the Roman-Catholicks
were chiefly included, and indeed it was
for their sake alone it was granted. To
render the Church of England accessary
to their own Ruin,The Order of Council upon it there was an Order of
Council made upon the latter, commanding
it to be read at the usual times of Divine

Service, in all Churches and Chappels
throughout the Kingdom; and ordering the
Bishops to cause it to be sent and distributed
throughout their several and respective
Diocesses, to be read accordingly.
The Clergy of the Church of England
had reason to take it for the greatest
Hardship and Oppression that could be
put upon them, to be commanded to
read from their Pulpits a Declaration they
knew to be against Law, and which in
its Nature and Design was levell'd against
their own Interest, and that of their
Religion. Some of them through Fear
or Mistake, and others to make their Court,
complied; but the Generality refus'd to
obey so unjust a Command. The Romish
Party had their Ends in it, for their Re|fusal
laid them open to the severe Lashes
of the Ecclesiastical Commission; and ac|cordingly,
every one that had not read
the Declaration in their Churches, were
order'd to be prosecuted before that in|exorable
Tribunal, where they were in|fallibly
to expect to be depriv'd: And so
most of the Benefices in England must
have been made vacant for a new kind of
Incumbents.
But the Scene chang'd before all this
could be brought about: For King Iames,

urg'd on by his Fate, and by a restless
Party about him, came at this time to
level a Blow against the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Six of his Suffragan Bi|shops,
that awaken'd the People of Eng|land
to shake off their Chains, and im|plore
Foreign Assistance to retrieve the
dying Liberties of their Countrey.
These Seven Bishops being sensible,The Affair of the Se|ven Bi|shops. as
most of the Nation was, of what was
originally aim'd at in these two Declara|tions
for Liberty of Conscience, did con|sult
together about the humblest manner
to lay before King Iames the Reasons
why they could not comply with the
Order of Council. Having got leave to
attend him, they deliver'd to him with the
greatest Submission, a Petition in behalf
of themselves and their absent Brethren,
and in the name of the Clergy of their
respective Diocesses, humbly represent|ing,
That their unwillingness did not pro|ceed
from any want of Duty and Obedience
to his Majesty, nor from any want of due
Tenderness to Dissenters; in relation to
whom, they were willing to come to such a
Temper as should be thought fit, when that
Matter should be consider'd in Parliament
and Convocation: But, among a great many
other Considerations, from this especially,

Because That Declaration was founded upon
such a Dispensing Power as had been often
declar'd Illegal in Parliament; and was a
matter of so great moment and consequence
to the whole Nation, that they could not in
Prudence, Honour, or Conscience, so far
make themselves Parties to it, as the distri|bution
of it all over the Kingdom, and the
solemn Publication of it even in Gods
House, and in the Time of his Divine Ser|vice,
must amount to, in common and rea|sonable
Construction. Therefore did hum|bly
and earnestly beseech his Majesty,
That he would be graciously pleas'd, not
to insist upon their Distributing and Reading
the said Declaration.
This Petition, tho the humblest that
could be, and deliver'd by Six of them
to the King alone in his Closet, was so
highly resented, that the Six Bishops that
presented it, and the Archbishop of Can|terbury
that writ it, but was not present
at its delivery, were committed Prisoners
to the Tower.
They were a few days after brought
to the King-Bench Bar, and Indicted of a
High Misdemeanor, for having falsly, unlaw|fuly,
maliciously, seditiously, and scandalously
fram'd, compos'd, and writ, a false, mali|cious,
pernicious, and seditious Libel, con|cerning

the King and his Royal Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience, under the pre|tence
of a Petition: And that they had
publish'd the same in presence of the King.
There was a great Appearance at this
Trial; and it was a Leading Case; for
upon it depended in a great measure the
Fate of the rest of the Clergy of the
Church of England. It lasted long, and
in the end the Seven Bishops were Acquit|ted,
with the Acclamations of all but the
Court-Party.
There were two things very remarka|ble
in this Trial: The Dispensing Power
was learnedly and boldly argued against
by the Counsel for the Bishops, and de|monstrated
by invincible Arguments to
be an open Violation of the Laws and
Constitution of the Kingdom. So that
in one of the greatest Auditories that was
ever seen in Westminster-Hall, and upon
hearing one of the most Solemn Causes
that was ever Tried at the Kings-Bench-Bar,
King Iames had the Mortification
to see his new-assum'd Prerogative baffled,
and its Illegality expos'd to the World.
The other thing observable upon this
Trial, was, That the Tables were so far
turn'd, that some that had largely contri|buted
to the Enslaving their Countrey

with false Notions of Law, were now
of another Opinion: While at the same
time, others that had stood up for the
Liberty of their Countrey in two succes|sive
Parliaments, and had suffer'd upon
that account, did now as much endea|vour
to stretch the Prerogative beyond
its just Limits, as they had oppos'd it be|fore.
So hard it is for Mankind to be in
all times, and upon all turns, constant to
themselves.
The News of the Bishops being ac|quitted,
was receiv'd with the highest Ex|pressions
of Joy throughout the whole
Kingdom: Nor could the King's own
Presence prevent his Army, that was
then encamp'd at Hounslow-Heath, from
mixing their loud Acclamations with
the rest. This last Mortification might
have prevented his Fate, if his Ears had
been open to any but a Hot Party, that
were positively resolv'd to push for all,
cost what it would: And it was easily
seen by the Soldiers Behaviour upon this
occasion, How impossible it is to debauch an
English Army from their Love to their
Countrey and their Religion.
While the Bishops were in the Tower,
the Roman-Catholicks had their Hopes
rown'd with the Birth of a pretended

Prince of Wales.The Birth of a pre|tended Prince of Wales. The fears of a Prote|stant
Successor had been the only Allay
that render'd their Prosperity less perfect:
Now the happiness of having an Heir to
the Crown to be bred up in their own
Religion, quash'd all those Fears, and
atond for the Uncertainty of the King's
Life. It was so much their Interest to
have one, and there were so many Cir|cumstances
that seem'd to render his
Birth suspicious, that the Nation in ge|neral
were inclinable to believe that this
was the last Effort of the Party, to ac|complish
our Ruin.
All things seem'd now to conspire to|wards
it.A new Parlia|ment de|sign'd, and to what End. There was only a Parliament
wanting, to ratify and approve all the
Illegal Steps that had been made; which
was to be done effectually, by taking off
the Penal Laws and Test, the two chief
Barriers of our Religion. To obtain
such a Parliament, no Stone was left
unturn'd, nor no Threas nor Promises
neglected. Regulators were sent-down
to every Corporation, to model them to
this end; though a great part of their
Work had been done to their hand; for
in most of the New Charters there had
been such Regulations made, and such
sort of Men put in, as was thought
would make all sure.

But to be yet surer,Closetting in fashion. and to try the In|clinations
of People, Closetting came in|to
fashion; and King Iames was at pains
to sound every man's mind, how far he
might depend upon him for his concur|rence
with those Designs: If they did
not readily promise to serve the King in
his own way, which was the distinguishing
word at that time, there was some Brand
put upon them, and they were turn'd
out of Place, if they had any. Nor did
King Iames think it below his Dignity,
after the Priests had fail'd to bring in
New Converts, to try himself how far
his own Arguments might prevail; and
he Closetted men for that purpose too.
Some few of no Principles, and a great
many others of desperate Fortunes, com|plimented
him with their Religion, and
were generally thereupon put into Em|ployments:
And so fond was the King
of making Proselites at any rate, that
there were of the Scum of the People,
that pretended to turn Papists, merely
for the sake of a Weekly small Allowance,
which was regularly paid them.
It's a question after all, whether the Par|liament
which K. Iames was thus labour|ing
to model, would have answer'd his
Expectation, had they come to sit; for

mens eyes were open'd more and more
every day; and the Noble Principles of
English Liberty began to kindle afresh in
the Nation, notwithstanding all the en|deavours
had been usd of a long time to
extinguish them. Though the Dissen|ters
who might be chosen into Parlia|ment
upon this new Model, would pro|bably
have made Terms for themselves
to prevent their falling under any future
Persecution; yet being as a verse to Popery
as any others whatsoever, it is not to be
imagin'd that they would upon that Con|sideration
have unhindg'd the Constitution
of England, to enable the Roman Catholicks
to break in upon the Establish'd National
Church, which in the end must have in|evitably
ruin'd both it and themselves.
But there fell out a little before this
time, an Accident that help'd mightily to
buoy up the sinking Spirits of the Na|tion,
and which was occasion'd by the
forward Zeal of some about the King,
contrary to their Intentions. While the
Project was going on to take off the Pe|nal
Laws and Test, and the Protestants
were in a maze what to expect, the good
Genius of England, and King Iams's
ill Fate, set him on to make a Trial of the
Inclinations of the Prince and Princess of

Orange in that matter. The Prince and
Princess had look'd on with a silent Re|gret
upon all the unlucky Steps that were
making in England, and were unwilling
to publish their Opinion of them, since
they knew it could not but be displeasing
to King Iames. To know their Highnesses
mind in the business of the Penal Laws
and Test, was a thing the most desir'd by
the Protestants; but there was no possible
way to come to this knowledge, if King
Iames himself had not help'd them to it.
Mr. Stuart,The Prince and Princess of Orange's Opinion about the Penal Laws and Test, de|clar'd in Pensiona|ry Fagell's Letter. since Sir Iames Stuart,
had been pardon'd by King Iames, and
receiv'd into Favour, after a long Ba|nishment:
He had been acquainted in
Holland with the late Pensionary Fagel,
and persuaded himself of a more than
ordinary Friendship with that Wise Mi|nister.
The King foresaw it was his In|terest
to find out, some one way or other,
the Prince and Princess's Thoughts of
these matters; which if they agreed with
his own, were to be made publick; if
otherwise, were to be conceal'd: And
Mr. Stuart took that Task upon him|self:
Pensionary Fagel was in a great
Post in Holland, and in a near Intimacy
with the Prince; one that was entirely
trusted by him, and ever firm to his In|terest.

To know the Pensionary's Opinion
was thought to be the same with knowing
the Prince's, since it was to be suppos'd
that he would not venture to write of any
thing that concern'd England, especially
such a nice Point as was then in question,
without the Prince's Approbation at least,
if not his positive Direction.
Upon these Considerations, and upon
a Mistake that Mr. Stuart was in, about
the Constitution of Holland, as if the
Roman-Catholicks were not there excluded
from Employments and Places of Trust,
he writ a Letter to Pensionary Fagel. It's
needless to give any account of the Let|ter
it self, since Fagel's Answer, together
with what has been already said, do give
a sufficient Hint of the Design and Scope
of it.
So averse were the Prince and Princess
of Orange to meddle, and so unwilling to
allow Pensionary Fagel to return to this
Letter an Answer which they knew
would not be pleasing, that Mr. Stuart
writ by the King's direction five or six
more, before it was thought fit to answer
them. But at length their Highnesse
were in a manner forc'd to it, by the Re|ports
that were industriously spread
abroad in England by the Emissaries of

the Court, as if the Pensionary in an An|swer
to Mr. Stuart, had acquainted him,
That the Prince and Princess agreed with
the King in the Design of taking off the
Penal Laws and Test. This was not all;
for the Marquess de Albeville, the English
Envoy at the Hague, was put upon wri|ting
over to several persons, That the
Prince of Orange had told him the very
same thing; which Letter of Albeville's
was likewise made publick. Such Re|ports
were enough to shake the Constancy
of all those that design'd to stand firm to
the Interest of the Establish'd Church in
the ensuing Parliament, and to make them
give all up for lost.
To do themselves Justice, and to dis|abuse
a Nation they had so near an Inte|rest
in, Pensionary Fagel was directed by
the Prince and Princess, to write one
Answer to all Mr. Stuart's Letters, to this
purpose; That being desir'd by Mr. Stuart
to let him know the Prince and Princess of
Orange's Thoughts concerning the Repeal
of the Penal Laws, and more particularly
concerning the Test; he told him, That he
would write without Reserve, since Mr. Stu|art
had said in his Letters, that they were
writ by the King's Knowledge and Allowance.
That it was the Prince and Princess's Opi|nion,

That no Christian ought to be persecu|ted
for his Conscience, or be ill us'd because
he differs from the Publick and Establish'd
Religion: And therefore, that they can
consent, That the Papists in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, be suffer'd to con|tinue
in their Religion, with as much Liberty
as is allow'd them by the States of Holland;
in which it cannot be denied but they enjoy a
full Liberty of Conscience. And as to the
Dissenters, their Highnesses did not only
consent, but did heartily approve of their
having an entire Liberty for the full Exer|cise
of their Religion: And that their
Highnesses were ready to concur to the setling
and confirming this Liberty, and protect
and defend it, and likewise confirm it with
their Guarantee, which Mr. Stuart had
mention'd.
And if his Majesty (continues the
Pensionary) desires their Concurrence in
Repealing the Penal Laws, their Highnesses
were ready to give it, provided these Laws
remain still in their full force, by which the
Roman-Catholicks are shut out of both
Houses of Parliament, and out of all Pub|lick
Employments Ecclesiastical, Civil, and
Military; as likewise those other Laws
which confirm the Protestant Religion, and
which secure it against all the Attempts of

the Roman-Catholicks. But their High|nesses
cannot agree to the Repeal of the Test,
and those other Penal Laws last mention'd,
that tend to the Security of the Protestant
Religion; since the Roman-Catholicks
receive no other Prejudices from these, than
the being excluded from Parliament, and
Publick Employments.
More than this (adds Pensionary Fagel)
their Highnesses do think ought not be ask'd
or expected; and they wondred how any that
profess'd themselves Christians, and that
may enjoy their Religion freely and without
disturbance, can judge it lawful for them to
disturb the Quiet of any Kingdom or State,
or overturn Constitutions, that so they
themselves may be admitted to Employ|ments,
and that these Laws, in which the
Security and Quiet of the Establish'd Reli|gion
consists, should be shaken. And as to
what Mr. Stuart had writ, That the Roman-Catholicks
in Holland were not shut out
from Employments and Places of Trust, he
tells him, He was grosly mistaken. The
Pensionary concludes, That their High|nesses
could not concur with his Majesty in
these matters; for they believ'd they should
have much to answer to God for, if the
consideration of any present Advantage
should carry them to consent to things which

they believe would not only be dangerous,
but mischievous to the Protestant Religion.
Thus far Pensionary Fagel. And I
would not have dwelt so long upon this
Letter of his, if it were not for the Noble
Scheme of a just Liberty in matters of
Conscience, that's therein contain'd.
Notwithstanding, it was still given out at
Court, and that even after it came to
Mr. Stuart's hands, That he had writ
the quite contrary; though it's but Cha|rity
to suppose that Mr. Stuart was a Man
of more Honour than to contribute to
the Report. At last there was a necessi|ty
of making publick the Pensionary's
Letter in several Languages, which had
wonderful Influence upon the Minds of
the Protestants of England, and was high|ly
resented by King Iames.
However, King Iames had more than
one Method in his View, how to accom|plish
his Design; for what a Parliament
it may be would not do, he was resolv'd
that an Army should; and therefore
Care was taken to model his Troops as
much to that end, as the shortness of
time would allow.The Mo|delling of the Army.
Ireland was the inexhaustible Source
whence England was to be furnish'd with

a Romish Army; and an Irish Roman-Catholick
was the most welcome Guest
at Whitehall. They came over in Shoals
to take possession of the promis'd Land;
and had already swallow'd up in their
Hopes the best Estates of the Hereticks
in England. Over and above compleat
Regiments of them, there was scarce a
Troop or Company wherein some of them
were not plac'd by express Order from
Court. Several Protestants that had
serv'd well and long, were turn'd out to
make room for them; and Seven consi|derable
Officers were cashier'd in one day,
merely for refusing to admit them. The
chief Forts, and particularly Portsmouth
and Hull, the two Keys of England,
were put into Popish Hands, and the
Garisons so modell'd, that the Majority
were Papists.
To over-awe the Nation, and to make
Slavery familiar, this Army was encamp'd
Yearly near London; where the only
Publick Chappel in the Camp was ap|pointed
for the Service of the Romish
Church, and strict Orders given out,
That the Soldiers of that Religion should
not fail every Sunday and Holiday to re|pair
thither to Mass.

As Ireland was remarkable for having
furnish'd King Iames with Romish Troops
sent into England,The Me|thods us'd in Ireland. so was it much more
for the bare-fac'd and open Invasions that
were made there, upon the Liberties
and Rights of the Protestants. That
Kingdom was the most proper Field to
ripen their Projects in, considering that
the Protestants were much out-number'd
by the Papists, and had been for some
Ages the constant Object of their Ran|cour
and Envy, which had been more
than once express'd in Letters of Blood.
King Iames did recall the Earl of Cla|rendon
from the Government of Ireland,Tyrconnel made Lord Lieute|nant of Ireland.
soon after he was sent thither, and ap|pointed
the Earl of Tyrconnel to succeed
him, who was a Gentleman had signa|liz'd
himself for his Bigotry to the
Church of Rome, and his Hatred to the
Protestants. The Roman-Catholick Cler|gy
had recommended him to King Iames
for that Post, in a Letter mention'd at
length in the Appendix,Appendix, Numb. 21. As one that did
first espouse, and chiefly maintain the Cause
of the Catholick Clergy against their many
and powerful Enemies, for the last Five and
twenty Years; and was then the only Person
under whose Fortitude and Popularity in
that Kingdom, they durst with chearfulness

and assurance own their Loyalty, and assert
his Majesty's Interest. Making it there|fore
their humble Request, That his Ma|jesty
would be pleas'd to lodge his Authority
in his hands, to the Terror of the Factious,
and Encouragement of his Majesty's faithful
Subjects in Ireland; promising to receive
him with such Acclamations as the long-captiv'd
Jews did their Redeemer Morde|cai.
Which Letter show'd they were no
less mistaken in their History of the Bi|ble,
than their Advice to the King; for
it does not appear by the Story of Morde|cai
in the Scripture, that he was ever sent
to the Iews, or remov'd from the City of
Susa, after he came into Favour with
Ahasuerus.
However, Tyrconnel fully answer'd the
hopes and expectations of the Papists, and
the fears of the Protestants of Ireland; for
by the Ministry of this Rigid Man was the
Ruin of the Protestant English Interest
in that Kingdom in a great measure com|pleated.
At King Iames's Accession to the
Crown, the Army of Ireland consisted of
about Seven Thousand Men, all Prote|stants,
and zealous to the Service: These
were in a little time all turn'd out, and the
whole Army made up of Papists, most of

them the Sons and Descendants, or near
Relations of those that were Attainted
for the Rebellion in 1641; or others that
had distinguish'd themselves since that
time, by their notorious Villanies, and
implacable Hatred to the English and Pro|testant
Interest.
Though in King Charles's time,The Man|ner of fil|ling up the Bench|es in Ire|land. by
the Influence of the Duke of York, there
had been grounds of Complaint against
some of the Judges in Ireland, upon the
account of their Partiality to the Papists,
yet when King Iames came to the Crown
these very Judges were not thought fit
enough for the Work that was design'd.
It was judg'd necessary to employ the
most zealous of the Party, those that
from Interest and Inclination were the
most deeply engag'd to destroy the Pro|testant
Interest; and accordingly such
were pick'd out to sit in every Court of
Justice.
The Custody of the King's Consci|ence
and Great Seal, was given to Sir A|lexander
Fitton, a Person convicted of
Forgery, not only at Westminster-Hall,
and at Chester, but Fin'd for it by the
Lords in Parliament. This Man was
taken out of Gaol, to discharge the
Trust of Lord High Chancellor, and had

no other Qualities to recommend him,
besides his being a Convert to the Romish
Church, and a Renegado to his Religion
and Countrey. To him were added as
Masters of Chancery, one Stafford a Po|pish
Priest, and O Neal, the Son of one
of the most notorious Murderers in the
Massacre, 1641.
In the Kings Bench care was taken to
place one Nugent, whose Father had lost
his Honour and Estate, for being a prin|cipal
Actor in the same Rebellion. This
Man, who had never made any figure at
the Bar, was pitch'd upon to judge whe|ther
the Outlawries against his Father and
Fellow-Rebels, ought to be Revers'd;
and whether the Settlements that were
made in Ireland upon these Outlawries,
ought to stand good.
The next Court is that of Exchequer,
from which only of all the Courts in
Ireland, there lies no Appeal, or Writ of
Error in England. It was thought fit,
that one Rice, a profligate Fellow, and
noted for nothing but Gaming, and a
mortal Inveteracy against the Protestants,
should fill the place of Lord Chief Baron.
This man was often heard to say, before
he came to be a Judge, That he would
drive a Coach and Six Horses through the

Act of Settlement: And before that Law
was actually Repeal'd in King Iames's
Parliament, he declar'd upon the Bench,
That it was against Natural Equity, and
did not oblige. It was before him, that
all the Charters in the Kingdom were
damn'd in the space of a Term or two;
so much was he for dispach. A Learned
Prelate,Dr. King, Bishop of Londonder|ry, his State of Ireland under K. Iames. from whose Book all the things
that here relate to that Countrey are ta|ken,
does observe, That if this Judge
had been left alone, it was believ'd in a
few Years he would by some Contrivance
or another have given away most of the
Protestants Estates in Ireland, without
troubling a Parliament to Attaint them.
In the Court of Common-Pleas it was
though advisable, that a Protestant Chief
Iustice should continue; yet so, as to
pinion him with Two of their own sort,
that might out-vote him upon occasion.
The Administration of Justice and
the Laws being in such hands, it was no
wonder that the poor Protestants in Ire|land
wish'd rather to have had no Laws
at all, and be left to their Natural De|fence,
than be cheated into the necessity
of submitting to Laws, that were execu|ted
only to punish, and not to protect
them. Under such Judges the Roman-Catholicks

had a glorious time; and be
their Cause never so unjust they were
sure to carry it: When the Lord Chan|cellor
did not stick on all occasions, and
sometimes upon the Bench, to declare,
That the Protestants were all Rogues; and
that among Forty thousand of them, there
was not one that was not a Traytor, a Rebel,
and a Villain.
The Supreme Courts being thus fill'd
up, it was but reasonable all other Courts
should keep pace with them. In the
Year 1687. there was not a Protestant
Sheriff in the whole Kingdom, except
one, and he put in by mistake for another
of the same Name, that was a Roman-Catholick.
Some few Protestants were
continued in the Commission of the Peace;
but they were render'd useless and insig|nificant,
being over-power'd in every
thing by the greater Number of Papists
join'd in Commission with them, and
those, for the most part, of the very
Scum of the People; and a great many,
whose Fathers had been executed for
Theft, Robbery, or Murther.
The Privy-Council of Ireland is a great
part of the Constitution, and has consi|derable
Privileges and Power annex'd to
it: This was likewise so modell'd, that

the Papists made the Majority; and those
few that were Protestants, chose for the
most part to decline appearing at the
Board, since they could do those of their
Religion no service.
The great Barrier of the Peoples Li|berties
both in England and Ireland being
their Right to chuse their own Repre|sentatives
in Parliament,The Re|gulating the Cor|porations in Ireland which being
once taken away, they become Slaves to
the Will of their Prince; The Protestants
in Ireland finding a necessity of securing
this Right in their own hands, had pro|cur'd
many Corporations to be founded,
and had built many Corporate Towns
upon their own Charges; from all which
the Roman Catholicks were by their
Charters excluded. This Barrier was
broken through at one stroke, by dissol|ving
all the Corporations in the Kingdom,
upon Quo Warranto's brought into the
Exchequer Court, and that without so
much as the least shadow of Law. Here|upon
New Charters were granted, and
filld up chiefly with Papists, and men of
desperate or no Fortunes: And a Clause
was inserted in every one of them, which
subjected them to the Absolute Will of
the King; by which it was put in the
Power of the chief Governor to turn out

and put in whom he pleas'd, without
showing a Reason, or any formal Trial
at Law.
The Protestant Clergy felt upon all oc|casions
the weight of Tyrconnel's Wrath.The Seve|rities a|gainst the Protestant Clergy.
The Priests began to declare openly,
That the Tythes belong'd to them; and
forbad their people under the pain of
Damnation, to pay them to the Protestant
Incumbents. This past afterwards into
an Act of Parliament, by which not only
all Tythes payable by Papists, were given
to their own Priests, but likewise a way
was found out to make the Popish Clergy
capable of enjoying the Protestants
Tythes: Which was thus: If a Prote|stant
happen'd to be possess'd of a Bi|shoprick,
a Dignity, or other Living, he
might not by this new Act demand any
Tythes or Ecclesiastical Dues from any
Roman-Catholick; and as soon as his Pre|ferment
became void by Death, Cession,
or Absence, a Popish Bishop or Clergy|man
was put into his Place. And the
Act was so express, that there needed no
more to oblige all men to repute and
deem a man to be a Roman-Catholick Bi|shop
or Dean of any place, but the King's
signifying him to be so, under his Privy
Signet, or Sign Manual. As soon as any

one came to be thus entitled to a Bi|shoprick,
Deanry, or Living, immedi|ately
all the Tythes, as well of Prote|stants
as Papists, became due to him,
with all the Glebes and Ecclesiastical
Dues.
The only great Nursery of Learning
in Ireland, is the Vniversity of Dublin,
consisting of a Provost, Seven Senior, and
Nine Junior Fellows, and Seventy Scho|lars,
who are partly maintain'd by a
Yearly Salary out of the Exchequer.
This Salary the Earl of Tyrconnel stopt,
merely for their not admitting into a
vacant Fellowship, contrary to their Sta|tutes
and Oaths, a Vicious, Ignorant
Person, who was a New Convert. Nor
could he be prevail'd with by any Inter|cession
or Intreaty, to remove the Stop;
by which in effect he dissolv'd the Foun|dation,
and shut up the Fountain of
Learning and Religion. This appear'd
more plainly afterwards to have been his
Design; for it was not thought enough
upon King Iames's Arrival, to take away
their Maintenance, but they were further
prceeded against, and the Vicepresident,
, and Scholars all turn'd out,
their Furniture, Library, and Commu|on-Plate
seiz'd, and every thing that

belong'd to the College, and to the pri|vate
Fellows and Scholars, taken away.
All this was done, notwithstanding that
when they waited upon King Iames at
his first Arrival at Dublin, he was pleas'd
to promise them, That he would preserve
them in their Liberties and Properties, and
rather augment than diminish the Privile|ges
and Immunities that had been granted
them by his Predecessors. In the House
they plac'd a Garison, and turn'd the
Chappel into a Magazine, and the Cham|bers
into Prisons for the Protestants. One
More, a Popish Priest, was made Provost,
and one Mackarty, also a Priest, was
made Library-keeper, and the whole de|sign'd
for them and their Fraternity.
One Archbishoprick, and several Bi|shopricks,
and a great many-other Digni|ties
and Livings of the Church, were
designedly kept vacant, and the Reve|nues
first paid into the Exchequer, and
afterwards dispos'd of to Titular Bishops
and Priests, while in the mean time the
Cures lay neglected; so that it appear'd
plainly that the Design was to destroy
the Succession of Protestant Clergymen.
At length things came to that height after
King Iames was in Ireland, that most of
the Churches in and about Dublin, were

seiz'd upon by the Government; and at
last Lutterell, Governor of Dublin, issued
out his Order,Appendix, Numb. 22. mention'd in the Appendix,
Forbidding more than Five Protestants to
meet together, under pain of Death. Being
ask'd whether this was design'd to hinder
meeting in Churches? He answer'd, It
was design'd to hinder their meeting
there, as well as in other places. And
accordingly all the Churches were shut
up, and all Religious Assemblies through
the whole Kingdom forbidden, under the
pain of Death.
It were endless to enumerate all the
Miseries that Reverend Author mentions,The Act of Attain|der in Ire|land.
which the Protestants of Ireland suffer'd
in the Reign of King Iames: But to
give a decisive Blow, there was an Act of
Attainder past in Parliament; in order to
which evey Member of the House of
Commons return'd the Names of all
such Protestant Gentlemen as liv'd near
them, or in the County or Borough for
which he serv'd; and if he was Stran|ger
to any of them, he sent to the Coun|trey
for Information about them. When
this Bill was presented to the King for his
Assent, the Speaker of the House of Com|mons
told him, That many were attainted

in that Act upon such Evidence as satisfied
the House, and the rest upon common Fame.
In this Act there were no fewer At|tainted,
than Two Archbishops, One Duke,
Seventeen Earls, Seven Countesses, Twenty
eight Viscounts, Two Viscountesses, Seven
Bishops, Eighteen Barons, Thirty three
Baronets, Fifty one Knights, Eighty three
Clergymen, Two thousand one hundred
eighty two Esquires and Gentlemen: And
all of them unheard, declar'd and adjudg'd
Traytors, convicted and attainted of High
Treason, and adjudg'd to suffer the pains of
Death and Forfeiture. The famous Pro|scription
of Rome during the last Trium|virate,
came not up in some respects
to the Horror of this; for there were
condemn'd in this little Kingdom more
than double the Number that were pro|scrib'd
through the vast Bounds of the
Roman Empire. And to make this of
Ireland yet the more terrible, and to put
the Persons Attainted out of a possibility
of escaping, the Act it self was conceal'd,
and no Protestant allow'd a Copy of it,
till Four Months after it was past.
Whereas in that of Rome, the Names of
the Persons proscrib'd were affix'd upon
all the Publick Places of the City, the
very day the Proscription was concerted;

and thereby opportunity was given to
many of the Noblest Families in Rome,
to preserve themselves by a speedy flight,
for better Times.
There remain'd but one Kingdom
more for the Romish Party to act their
Designs in; and that was Scotland;
where they reap'd a full Harvest of their
Hopes, and there were scarce left the least
Remains of Ancient Liberty in that Na|tion.
Their Miseries were summ'd up
in one new-coin'd Word, which was
us'd in all the King's Declarations, and
serv'd to express to the full their Absolute
Slavery; which was this, That his Sub|jects
were oblig'd to obey him without Re|serve.
A Word that the Princes of the
East, how Absolute soever they be, did
never yet pretend to in their Stile, what|ever
they might in their Actions. But
I leave the Detail of the Encroachments
that were made upon the Laws and Li|berties
of that Kingdom, to others that
may be thought more impartial, as having
suffer'd less in their Ruins.
While King Iames was thus push'd on
by a headstrong Party,The Inte|rest that Foreign Princes and States had in England. to enslave his
Subjects, the other Princes and States of
Europe look'd on with quite different Sen|timents,
according as their own Interests

and Safety mov'd them. The greater
part did commiserate the Fate of these
Three Kingdoms, and wish'd for their
Deliverance. The Protestants saw with
Regret, that they themselves were with|in
an immediate Prospect of losing the
most considerable Support of their Reli|gion;
and both they and the Roman-Catholicks
were equally convinc'd, that
it was their common Interest to have
England continue in a condition to be the
Arbiter of Christendom, especially at a
time when they saw they most needed it.
On the other hand, it was the Interest of
another Prince, that not only the King of
England should be his Friend, but the
Kingdom of England should become in|considerable
abroad, which it could not
fail to be when enslav'd at home.
King Iames had been again and again
sollicited, not only by Protestant Princes
but those of his own Religion, to enter
into other Measures for the common Safe|ty
of Europe; at least, not to contribute
to its Ruin, by espousing an Interest
which they judg'd was opposite to it.
The Emperor, among others, had by his
Ambassador made repeated Instances to
him to this purpose, but with no better
Success than the rest; as appears by a

Letter he writ to him after his Abdication,The Em|peror's Letter to K. Iames in Latin, printed at London, 1689.
which has been Printed in several Lan|guages,
and was conceiv'd in Elegant
Latin, as all the Publick Dispatches of
that Court are. But all these Remon|strances
had no weight with King Iames;
though they had this good effect in the
end, as to put those Princes and States
upon such Measures as secur'd to them
the Friendship of England in another
way.
The Power of France was by this time
become the Terror and Envy of the rest
of Europe; and that Crown had upon all
sides extended its Conquests. The Em|pire,
Spain, and Holland seem'd to enjoy
a precarious Peace, while the common
Enemy of the Christian Name was making
War with the Emperor, and the State of
Venice, and was once very near being
Master of the Imperial Seat, whereby he
might have carried the War into the
Bowels of Germany. The main Strength
of the Empire being turn'd against the
Turks, and that with various Success,
there was another War declar'd against
the Emperor by France; so that it came
to be absolutely necessary for Spain and
Holland to interpose, not as Mediators,
for that they were not to hope for, but

as Allies and Partners in the War. These
last, as well as the other Princes and
States that lay nearest the Rhine, were
expos'd to the Mercy of a Prince whom
they were not able to resist, if England
should look on as Neuters, or take part
against them; the last of which they
had reason to fear.
Thus it happen'd that the Fortune of
England, and that of the greatest part of
Christendom came to be link'd together,
and their common Liberties must of ne|cessity
have undergone one and the same
Fate. The latter, from a Natural Prin|ciple
of Self-Preservation were resolv'd
to make their last Effort to break the
Fetters which they saw were ready to be
impos'd upon them: And the other,
animated by the Example of their An|cestors,
and the Constitution of their
Countrey, which is diametrically oppo|site
to Tyranny, were resolv'd to venture
All, to retrieve themselves and their Po|sterity
from the Chains that were already
put upon them.
Both the one and the others might
have struggled in vain to this day with
the Ruin that threaten'd them,The Inte|rest the Prince of Orange had in England. if Hea|ven
in pity to their Condition had not
provided in the Person of the Prince of

Orange, the only Sanctuary that was
left them to shelter their sinking State.
This Prince by his Mother was a Nephew
of England, and in Right of the Princess
his Wife, the Presumptive Heir of the
Crown. By his Father's side he was
Heir of an Illustrious Family, that had
eterniz'd their Name, by delivering their
Countrey from Slavery, and laying the
Foundation of a mighty Commonwealth,
which has since prov'd the greatest Bul|wark
of the Protestant Religion, and the
chief Support of the Liberty of Christen|dom.
A Family born for the good of
Mankind, to be the Scourge of Tyrants,
and Deliverers of the Oppress'd.
The Father of this Prince died young,The ill Circum|stances of the House of Orange at his Birth.
possess'd of Hereditary Dignities he de|riv'd
from his Ancestors in the States of
the Vnited Provinces, which had plac'd
them upon a Level with most Princes of
Europe, and had given them a Figure in
the World equal to some Crown'd Heads.
He had married a Princess of England,
the Eldest Daughter of King Charles I.
and left her with Child of this only Son,
at a Time when the Royal Family of
England was not only bereft of their Re|gal
Power at Home, but forc'd to seek
Refuge Abroad. The Father was scarce

dead, and the Son yet unborn, when a
Party in Holland that always oppos'd the
House of Orange, took hold of that un|happy
Juncture, to divest the Family by
a Publick Decree, of all the Dignities and
Offices they had enjoy'd since the first
Foundation of that Commonwealth, and
which they had so justly acquir'd as the
Rewards of so many glorious Services
they had done their Countrey.
Under these dismal Circumstances
was the Prince of Orange, now King of
England, born: And in Apartments hung
with Mourning, for the Untimely Death
of a Father, and the Murther of a Royal
Grandfather, he first saw Light.
He was about Ten Years of Age, when
his Uncle King Charles the Second was
restor'd; and whether it proceeded from
want of Power or of Will in the one,
the Condition of the other was little bet|ter'd
by that Change. It's true, King
Charles in his Wars with Holland did al|ways
mention the Injury done to his Ne|phew,
as one of the Motives of his break|ing
with the States: Yet neither in the
Treaty of Breda in 1667. nor in the Al|liance
made at the Hague in 1668. nor
that of the Peace concluded at London in
167 1/4. was there any notice taken of the

Prince of Orange's Interest. In this last
it's confess'd it was needless, seeing some
little time before, he was Restor'd to all
his Hereditary Offices and Dignities upon
the following Occasion.
King Charles,The man|ner he was restor'd to the Digni|ties of his Family. the French King, and
the Bishop of Munster, had enter'd into
a mutual League against the Hollanders in
the Year 1672. While in pursuance of
that League, King Charles, without any
previous Declaration of War, did send
out a strong Squadron of Ships to
intercept their Smyrna Fleet, and ruin
their Trade at Sea; and while the Bishop
of Munster did invade the Provinces that
lay next to him, the French King, at the
Head of a Royal Army of at least 118000
Foot, and 26000 Horse, broke in upon
them on the other side. Like an Impe|tuous
Torrent he carried all before him,
without any remarkable opposition, ma|king
himself Master in a few Weeks, of
above Forty Towns and places of Strength,
some without firing a Gun, and the rest
with little or no Resistance. This Army
was compos'd of the best Troops that had
been seen together for some Ages before,
and was made up of several Nations.
Over above the French themselves, there
were 3000 English, 3000 Catalans, 3000

Genoese, and other Italians, 6000 Savoy|ards,
1200 German Horse, 10000 Swis|sers,
without reckoning into the Num|ber
the Ancient Regiments of that Nati|on
in the French Service; and which was
altogether new and extraordinary, there
was a Regiment of Swiss Horse. Under
the King in Person, this Army was com|manded
by Two of the greatest Generals
of the Age, the late Prince of Conde,
and the Mareschal Turenne.
Never was any State nearer its Ruin,The des|perate Condition of Holland, An. 1672.
than that of Holland was upon this Ir|ruption;
and in the opinion of all the
World, the end of that flourishing Re|publick
was then at hand. The French
pierc'd into the Bowels of Holland as far
as Vtrecht, where the King kept a splen|did
Court, and receiv'd Embassies from all
Parts. He was already Master of Three
of the Seven Provinces, and a Fourth was
in the hands of the Bishop of Munster his
Ally. The Consternation was so great
in the rest, that it's said it was debated at
Amsterdam, whether they should send the
Keys of that Town to the French King at
Vtrecht, or hold out a Siege.
Scarce any thing can paint out in live|lier
Colours the low Ebb the Common|wealth
of Holland was brought to at that

time, than the Declaration which the
French King publish'd at Arnheim, plac'd
at length in the Appendix.Appendix, Numb. 23. In this the
French King declar'd that all the Inhabi|tants
of the Towns in Holland that should
render themselves willingly his Subjects,
and receive his Troops, should not only
be treated favourably, but likewise be
maintain'd in their Liberties and Privi|leges,
and enjoy the free Exercise of their
Religion: But upon the contrary, who|ever
of them did not submit themselves,
of whatever degree or condition they
be, or should endeavour to resist his
Arms, by opening their Sluces, or any
other way, they should be punish'd with
the utmost Rigor; his Majesty being re|solv'd
to give no Quarter to the Inhabi|tants
of those Towns that shall resist his
Arms, but an Order to pillage their Goods,
and burn their Houses.
Among the more immediate Causes of
this surprizing Desolation of Holland,The Cau|ses of that Desolati|on.
upon the Irruption of the French Army,
there were chiefly these two: 1. The su|pine
Security, or rather profound Le|thargy
they were of late fallen into.
And 2. Their Intestine Divisions.
As to the first, A vast Opulent Trade
through most parts of the World, had

wonderfully enrich'd them, and brought
them to neglect and forget the Art of
War. A Peace that had continued with|out
any remarkable Interruption for
about Twenty Years at Land, lull'd them
so fast asleep with false Notions of their
own Strength, that they had neglected
their Fortifications and Martial Disci|pline,
and were brought to believe, that
their Neighbour's Garisons and Strong
Places were sufficient to cover them from
all Insults.
As to the second, Their Ancestors at
the first founding their State, taking into
their Consideration, that they were to
raise a Commonwealth out of a great many
distinct Governments independent origi|nally
of one another, and govern'd by
Customs and Laws peculiar to every
Town and Province, and how difficult
it was to prevent Intestine Divisions in a
Body thus aggregated, did wisely pro|vide
against such a destructive Inconve|nience,
by constituting an Hereditary
Stadtholder and Captain General, whose
Office and Power was to be the Center in
which all the various Lines of their Con|stitution
should meet, and the Cement
that should keep the whole Frame toge|ther.
This High and Important Dignity

was lodg'd in the Family of Orange; and
it was to the Auspicious Conduct of the
Princes of that House, that the States of
Holland ow'd their first Settlement, and
the Figure they have made ever since in
the World.
What their Ancestors foresaw, and had
thus wisely provided against, came to
pass: For no sooner was this Office and
Dignity abolish'd, upon the Death of the
last Prince of Orange, through the Inte|rest
of a prevailing Faction, but they fell
into Intestine Divisions and Animosities
at Home, and sunk in their Reputation
Abroad: Insomuch that it was justly said,
That instead of being the Vnited, they were
become the Disunited Provinces.
There may be a Third Reason given
for this Chain of Misfortunes that over|whelm'd
the Hollanders the first Year of
this War. From a false, though plausi|ble
Notion of saving Money, they
thought fit to reduce their Army to
25000 men, and rejected the repeated
Propositions of Spain to enter into a Trea|ty
with them for a mutual Supply of
Money Yearly to England and Sueden, by
which these Two Crowns might be ena|bled
and encourag'd to maintain and con|tinue
the Triple League. And which was

yet worse, the few Troops they had,
were in a bad Condition, and sunk to a
very low degree both in Discipline and
Courage. Their Fortifications were eve|ry
where fallen into decay, and their
Magazines ill provided. To compleat all
their Misfortunes, they wanted a Head
to command them, at least one of Weight
and Authority enough to support so great
a Trust.
It were in vain to attempt to express
the deplorable Condition of the Hollan|ders
at that time. It's enough to say,
The approach of a Triumphant King
flesh'd with Victories, put them into so
deep a Consternation, that a great many
of their Richest Families abandon'd their
Countrey, and retir'd to Hamburgh, Ant|werp,
and other places of Security; while
the States-General gave Orders for remo|ving
the Courts and Archives from the
Hague, for fear they should fall into the
Enemies hands. This horrid Fright,
which spread it self every where, and
grew every day greater, was sufficient of
it self to occasion the entire Ruin of their
State, though it had not been accompa|nied
as it was, with Seditions, Divisions,
and Tumults in every Town and Province,
and no Enemy within their Bowels.

Those alone did naturally tend to the
Dissolution of the Belgick Vnion, without
any other concurring Circumstances to
hurry it on.
Matters standing thus with the Vnited
Provinces, they came to see, when it was
almost too late, their former Errors, and
more particularly that of abolishing the
Office of Stadtholder. And now, as the
last Cast for their Liberty, they applied to
the Prince of Orange, young though he
was, as the only Person capable to sup|port
their Tottering State, and to put a
stop to the Miseries that overwhelm'd
their Countrey. With the Universal
Consent and Approbation of the People,
and the Publick Sanction of the States, he
was declar'd Stadtholder, Captain and Ad|miral-General,
and restor'd to all the Dig|nities
of his Family.
It's hard to determine whether the
Misfortunes of his Countrey, or the
Universal Love the People bore him,
contributed most to his Restoration. How|ever,
he was restor'd in spite of the Bar|nevelt
Faction; and had the pleasure to
see De-Wit, the greatest Opposer of his
House, among the other Deputies that
waited upon him with the Resolutions of
the States-General, and deliver'd him his
Commission.

The Difficulties this Young Prince had
to struggle with, in supporting his sink|ing
Countrey, would have pall'd any
Courage but his own;The Hi|story of the Ma|schal Tu|reme, by Monsieur de Busson, render'd out of French by Ferrand Spence, 1686. and may in the
main be gather'd from what has been al|ready
said. What these were, upon his
first heading the Army, are in part so
well express'd by a French Author, who
was a considerable Actor in that War on
the French side, and has writ the Account
of it with an Impartiality not over-fre|quent
among the Historians of his Coun|trey,
that it may not be amiss to Tran|scribe
some few Passages relating to this
matter, as they lye together in the Eng|lish
Translation.
Nothing but the Season of the Year,The diffi|culties the P. of O|range had to grapple with for retrieving his Coun|trey from Ruin.
says he, hinder'd the French from at|tempting
new Conquests, or rather
the Waters which cover'd the Surface of
the Earth. The Duke of Luxenburgh
being still at Vtrecht, hop'd however,
that if it once came to freeze, he might
by means of the Ice surprize several
Posts that were otherwise inaccessible.
As the Enemy (meaning the Holland|ers)
were not unacquainted with his
Design, they had ever the Shovel and
Pickaxe in their hands, to precaution

themselves against this Misfortune,
upon the first Frost that should come.
They broke the least piece of Ice,
hoping by taking such strict care, they
should render all his Measures abor|tive.
But it happening to freeze all of
a sudden, it was impossible for them to
repair in several days what fell out in
one Night. This cast so great an
Alarm into the Places that were the
most expos'd, that Peoples minds were
wholly set upon removing thence what
they had most precious
The Consternation spread it self to
the very Hague, which being destitute
of Walls and Defence, could not other|wise
expect but a strange Desolation, if
the Posts that cover'd it came to be
forc'd. However, the Prince of Orange,
who laid the Publick Miseries as much to
heart, as if they had only regarded him|self,
had not for all this been under any
Apprehensions, if his Troops, by be|ing
so often beaten, had not utterly
lost their Courage: For though the
Ice seem'd to give a great Advantage
to the French, they would however
run a great Risque, in coming to at|tack
him in places well intrench'd, and
where his Highness might oppose

against them as many Men as they
could have. He was busied Day and
Night either in adding new Fortifica|tions
to those that were already made,
or in encouraging his Captains and
Soldiers. But whatever care he took,
Colonel Penvin, abandon'd his Post
upon the Request of the Inhabitants
of Dergau, who sent for him to main|tain
their Walls.The D. of Luxem|burgh's Cruelties at Swam|merdam. The Duke of Luxem|burgh
trusting rather to the Terror than
the Strength of his Troops, marching
in the mean while towards Bodegrave
and Swammerdam, won both, Sword in
hand. And as if this Action had not
been sufficiently glorious by reason of
the little Opposition he met with, he
would render it the more remarkable,
not only by the Slaughter that he made
of those that were found in Arms, but
of all sorts of Persons, even Women
and Children. He was often heard,
amidst the piteous Cries that every one
made to move him to Compassion, to
bid his Soldiers give no Quarter, but
Plunder, Ravish, and Kill. He him|self
did what he said; and his Men,
after his Example, having delug'd the
Streets with Rivers of Blood, entred
the Houses, where they committed in|conceivable

Cruelties. Several Wo|men
were violated in their Husbands
Arms, several Maidens in their Fa|thers;
and whoever went about to op|pose
such Criminal Excesses, was piti|lesly
massacred by these Furies, who
suffer'd themselves to be no longer go|vern'd,
but by their disorderly Passion,
and by their Cruelty. Thus far my
Author.
Notwithstanding these Difficulties and
Discouragements that seem'd insupera|ble,
wonderful and surprizing were the
Consequences of the Prince of Orange's
Restoration. As if that Family alone
were design'd of Heaven to be the Foun|der
and Restorer of Holland: It fell out,
that immediately upon his being call'd to
the Helm, the whole Scene of their Af|fairs
chang'd to the better. At the Head
of a small ill-disciplin'd Army, discou|rag'd
by continual Losses, he not only
put a Stop to the French Conquests, but by
taking first Naerden in spite of an Army
near four times greater than his own, and
carrying afterwards the War out of his
own Countrey, he oblig'd the Enemy to
abandon their Conquests in Holland as
fast as they had gain'd them, and be

contented to retire to the Defence of
their own Frontiers.
This War was attended with various
Successes on all sides; and most of the
Princes of Europe came to be some way
or other engag'd in it; till at last it ended
in the Treaty of Nimeguen. The part
King Charles acted in all these Transacti|ons,
contributed but little to his Glory,
for he had been unsuccessful while he was
engag'd in the War; and when he came
to be a Mediator for the Peace, all Parties
grew jealous of him, and neglected him.
It was during the Course of this War,
as has been said before, that King Charles
aton'd for all the Errors of his Reign, by
marrying his Niece, the Lady Mary, to
the Prince of Orange: And whatever
were the Motives that induc'd him to
comply in this with the Universal Wishes
of his People, it has been found since,
that not only England, but the greatest
part of Europe do share at this day in the
Blessings that have attended it.
By this Match the Prince of Orange had
a double Interest in England, both as a
Prince of the Blood himself, and in Right
of his Princess the next Presumptive Heir.
He liv'd with King Charles in as much
Friendship as was possible, for one that

would not enter into an Interest separate
from that of his Country, or of England.
Insomuch that in all the Endeavours that
were made to exclude the Duke of York
from the Crown, he look'd on, without
espousing any of the Parties that strug|gled
for or against the Bill of Exclusion;
though he knew it was design'd that He
and the Princess should succeed upon the
Death of King Charles.
When King Iames came to the Throne,
the Prince of Orange tried all possible
means to cultivate a sincere Friendship
with him, and to persuade him to enter
into such Measures as might tend to the
Common Safety of Europe, and the Hap|piness
of England; which if King Iames
had given Ear to, would have preserv'd
the Crown upon his Head. And so cau|tious
was he of giving him no reasonable
ground of Complaint, that though in
King Charles's time he had given a Gene|rous
Welcome to the Duke of Monmouth,
at the Request of that King, upon his
retiring to Holland; Yet as soon as he knew
that that unhappy Gentleman designd to
invade England upon King Iames's Acces|sion
to the Throne, he offer'd to come
over in Person to his Assistance, and sent
him with all Expedition the English and

Scotch Troops that were in the Service of
the States.
It had been happy for King Iames if
he had complied with the Advice of the
Prince of Orange, or had not by his Suc|cess
against Monmouth been push'd on to
make the Steps that have bee mention'd,
together with a great many more, for
Brevity's sake here omitted, towards his
own Ruin, and that of the Constitution
of England. But being flatter'd with
the gaudy Charms of Absolute Power,
and the empty Merit of Restoring the
Romish Religion, he drove on without
Controul, till at last he forc'd the People
of England upon an inevitable necessity of
calling in the Prince of Orange to retrieve
the expiring Liberties of their Countrey.
At the same time an indissoluble
Friendship and Alliance, which King
Iames had enter'd into when Duke of
York, and had cultivated afterwards when
he came to the Crown, was a matter of
that vast Consequence to the Neighbour|ing
Princes and States, as would not per|mit
them to stand by as unconcern'd Spe|ctators
of the Scene that was acting in
England; but oblig'd them likewise to
save recourse to the Prince of Orange for

breaking off their own Fetters, by break|ing
first those of England.
But by what Steps and concurring Ac|cidents,
and with what surprizing Cir|cumstances
this Mighty Design came
about, may some time or other, though
perhaps not so properly in this Age, be
the Subject of a Second Part, when it
meets with one of more Leisure and Ca|pacity
to write it.
FINIS.



Addenda ad Page 36.
Concerning the Reign of King James I.
It may not be impertinent in this place,
to say something of that Convocation that
was held in the beginning of this King's
Reign; Which had never been taken
notice of in History, if it were not for the
use that was made of it in our late Debates
about the Lawfulness of the Oaths to his
present Majesty. This Convocation goes
under the name of Overall's Convocation,
and has been of late years often menti|oned
in Print upon that account. And since
a very Learned Divine has told us upon a
solemn Occasion,Dr. Sher|lock. That it was the Canons
of this Convocation that first Enlightned
his Eyes, and persuaded him of the Law|fulness
of the Oaths to his Majesty, I
shall only take notice of a few things
about them.
It's very probable, that this Convocati|on
was call'd, to clear some Doubts that
King Iames might have had, about the
Lawfulness of the Hollanders the 
off the Monarchy of Spain, 

withdrawing, for good and all, their
Allegiance to that Crown: Which was
the Great Matter then in Agitation
in most Courts of Christendom.
It appears plainly by some of those
Canons, that the Highflown Notions of
Prerogative and Absolute Obedience,
which came afterwards into fashion, were
not much known at that time: at least,
the Clergy were not of that Opinion. It's
true, This was the first time that the
Distinction of a King de jure and de facto,
was ever mention'd as a Point of Divinity,
or a Doctrine of the Church; though it
had been taken notice of before, and that
but once, as a Matter of Law, in an Act
of Parliament of Henry 7. But these
Canons did never receive the Royal Ap|probation,
and therefore are in the same
case, as if they had never been.
King Iames thought these Points too
nice to be much touch'd upon, and was
highly displeas'd with the Members of
that Convocation for medling in Matters
which he thought were without their
Sphere. Thereupon he writ that angry
Letter to Dr. Abbot (afterwards Bishop of
Sarum), the Original of which it was my
fortune to fall upon, and to publish upon
another Occasion. It's hop'd the Reader

will not be displeas'd to read it again:
And it runs thus.

Good Doctor Abbot,
I Cannot abstain to give you my Iudg|ment
of your Proceedings in your Convo|cation,
as you call it: and both as Rex in
solio, and unus Gregis in Ecclesia, I am
doubly concerned. My Title to the Crown
no body calls in question, but they that nei|ther
love you nor me, and you guess whom I
mean. All that you and your Brethren have
said of a King in Possession (for that Word
I tell you, is no worse than that you make
use of in your Canon) concerns not me at all.
I am the next Heir, and the Crown is mine
by all Rights you can name, but that of Con|quest;
and Mr Solicitor has sufficiently ex|press'd
my own Thoughts concerning the Na|ture
of Kingship in general, and concerning
the nature of it, ut in mea persona: And I
believe you were all of his Opinion: at least,
none of you said ought contrary to it, at the
time he spake to you from me. But you
know all of you, as I think, that my Reason
of calling you together, was to give your
Iudgments how far a Christian and a Prote|stant
King may concur to assist his Neigh|bours
to shake of their Obedience to their once
Sovereign, upon the Account of Oppression,
Tyranny, or what else you like to name it.

In the late Queen's time this Kingdom was
very free in assisting the Hollanders, both
with Arms and Advice. And none of your
Coat ever told me, that any scrupled about
it in her Reign. Vpon my coming to Eng|land,
you may know that it came from some
of your selves to raise Scruples about this
Matter. And albeit I have often told my
Mind concerning Jus Regium in Subditos,
as in May last in the Star-Chamber, upon
the occasion of Hales his Pamphlet; yet I
never took any notice of these Scruples, till
the Affairs of Spain and Holland forc'd me
to it. All my Neighbours call on me to concur
in the Treaty between Holland and Spain;
and the Honour of the Nation will will not
suffer the Hollanders to be abandoned, espe|cially
after so much Money and Men spent
in their Quarrel: Therefore I was of the
Mind to call my Clergy together, to satisfy
not so much me, as the World about us, of
the Iustness of my owning the Hollanders at
this time: This I needed not have done;
and you have forced me to say, I wish I had
not. You have dipp'd too deep in what all
Kings reserve among the Arcana Imperii.
And what ever Aversion you may profess
against God's being the Author of Sin, you
have stumbled upon the Threshold of that
Opinion, in saying upon the Matter, that

even Tyranny is God's Authority, and
should be reverenc'd as such. If the King
of Spain should return to claim his old Pon|tifical
Right to my Kingdom, you leave me
to seek for others to fight for it: For you
tell us upon the matter beforehand, his Au|thority
is God's Authority, if he prevail.
Thus far the Secretary's Hand, as I take
it, follows the rest in the King's own
Hand thus: Mr. Doctor, I have no time
to express my Mind farther in this thorny
business. I shall give you my Orders about it
by Mr. Solicitor; and until then, meddle
no more in it, for they are Edge-Tools, or
rather like that Weapon, that's said to cut
with the one edge, and cure with the other.
I commit you to God's Protection, good Do|ctor
Abbot, and rest,
Your good Friend,
Iames R.





APPENDIX;
Containing a Collection of Instru|ments
and Original Papers, re|ferr'd
to in the former Memoirs.

NUMB. I.
The Character of the Members of the House
of Commons in Queen Elizabeth's Time;Naunton's Fragmenta Regalia, p. 13, 14.
and how differing from those in the Reign
of King James.
WE must ascribe some part of the
Commendation to the Wisdom
of the Times, and the Choice of Parlia|ment-men:
For I find not that they were
at any time given to any violent or perti|nacious
dispute; Elections being made of
grave and discreet Persons, not factious
and ambitious of Fame; such as came
not to the House with a malevolent Spi|rit
of Contention, but with a preparati|on
to consult on the publick good; rather

to comply than contest with her Majesty.
Neither do I find that the House was at
any time weaken'd and pester'd with the
admission of too many Young Heads, as
it hath been of later times: Which re|members
me of Recorder Martin's Speech,
about the Tenth of our late Sovereign
Lord King Iames, when there were ac|counts
taken of Forty Gentlemen not
above Twenty, and some not exceeding
Sixteen; which moved him to say, That
it was the ancient Custom for Old Men
to make Laws for Young ones; but that
then he saw the Case alter'd, and that
there were Children elected unto the great
Council of the Kingdom, which came to
invade and invert Nature, and to enact
Laws to govern their Fathers. Sure we
are, the House always took the Common
Cause into their Consideration, and they
saw the Queen had just occasion, and
need enough to use their assistance: Nei|ther
do I remember that the House did
ever capitulate, or prefer their private to
the publick, the Queen's Necessities, c.
but waited their times, and in the first
place gave their Supply, and according
to the Exigency of her Affairs; yet fail|ed
not at last to obtain what they desired;
so that the Queen and her Parliaments had

ever the good fortune to depart in Love,
and on reciprocal Terms; which are Con|siderations
which have not been so exact|ly
observed in our last Assemblies as they
might, and I would to God they had
been: For considering the great Debt left
on the King, and in what Incumbrances
the House it self had then drawn him,
his Majesty was not well used; though I
lay not the blame on the whole Suffrage
of the House, where he had many good
Friends; for I dare avouch, had the
House been freed of half a dozen of po|pular
and discontented Persons, such as
(with the Fellow that burnt the Tem|ple
at Ephesus) would be talked of, tho
but for doing of mischief, I am confident
the King had obtained that which in rea|son,
and at his first Accession he ought
to have received freely, and without any
condition.



NUMB. II.
The Character of Cecil,Naunton, Ibid. p. 80, 81, 82, 83. Earl of Salisbury;
with his Letter to the Lord Mountjoy,
about the Spaniards Invading Ireland.
AND so again to this great Master of
State, and the Staff of the Queen's
declining Age; who though his little
crooked Person could not promise any
great supportation, yet it carried thereon
a Head and a Head-piece of a vast con|tent;
and therein it seems Nature was so
diligent to compleat one and the best part
about him, as that to the perfection of
his Memory and Intellectuals, she took
care also of his Senses; and to put him
in Linceos Oculos, or to pleasure him the
more, borrowed of Argos, so to give un|to
him a Prospective Sight. And for the
rest of his Sensitive Virtues, his Predeces|sor
Walsingham had left him a Receit to
smell out what was done in the Con|clave;
and his good old Father was so
well seen in the Mathematicks, as that
he could tell you through all Spain, every
part, every Ship, with the Burthens,
whither bound, what preparation, what

Impediments for diversion, of Enterpri|zes,
Counsels, and Resolutions. And
that we may see (as in a little Map)
how docible this little Man was, I will
present a Taste of his Abilities.
My Lord of Devonshire,Mountjoy. (upon the
certainty the Spaniard would invade Ire|land
with a strong Army) had written
very earnestly to the Queen and the
Council, for such Supplies to be sent over,
that might enable him to march up to
the Spaniard, if he did land, and follow
on his Prosecution against the Rebels.
Sir Robert Cecil (besides the general
Dispatch of the Council,Earl of Sa|lisbury. as he often did)
wrote this in private; for these two be|gan
then to love dearly.
My Lord, Out of the abundance of my
Affection, and the care I have of your well-doing,
I must in private put you out of
doubt, (for of Fear I know you cannot be
otherwise sensible, than in the way of Ho|nour)
that the Spaniard will not come unto
you this Year; for I have it from my own,
what Preparations are in all his Parts, and
what he can do; for be confident, he beareth
up a Reputation by seeming to embrace more
than he can gripe; but the next Year be as|sured
he will cast over unto you some Forlorn

Hopes, which how they may be reinforced
beyond his present Ability, and his first Inten|tion,
I cannot as yet make any certain Iudg|ment;
but I believe out of my Intelligence,
that you may expect their landing in Mun|ster;
and the more to distract you, in seve|ral
places, as at Kingsale, Beerhaven,
Baltimore, where you may be sure (coming
from Sea) they will first fortify, and learn
the Strength of the Rebels, before they dare
take the Field; howsoever (as I know you
will not) lessen not your Care, neither
your Defences; and whatsoever lies within
my power to do you and the Publick service,
rest thereof assured.
Note, All came exactly to pass, as this
Letter insinuates.



NUMB. III.
Queen Elizabeth's Speech to the House of
Commons,Cambden's Hist. of Q. Eliz. p 26, 27. in Answer to their Address
about her Marriage.
IN a matter most unpleasing, most
pleasing to me, is the apparent Good-Will
of you and my People, as proceed|ing
from a very good mind towards me
and the Commonwealth. Concerning
Marriage, which ye so earnestly move
me to, I have been long since persuaded,
that I was sent into this World by God
to think and do those things chiefly, which
may tend to his Glory. Hereupon have
I chosen that kind of life which is most
free from the troublesome Cares of this
World, that I might atttend the Service
of God alone. From which, if either
the tendred Marrriages of most Potent
Princes, or the danger of Death intended
against me, could have removed me, I
had long agone enjoyed the Honour of an
Husband. And these things have I
thought upon when I was a private Per|son.
But now that the publick Care of
governing the Kingdom is laid upon me,

to draw upon me also the Cares of Mar|riage,
may seem a point of inconsiderate
Folly. Yea, to satisfy you, I have al|ready
joined my self in Marriage to an
Husband, namely, the Kingdom of Eng|land.
And behold (said she, which I
marvel ye have forgotten) the Pledge of
this my Wedlock and Marriage with my
Kingdom. (And therewith she drew
the Ring from her Finger, and shewed
it, wherewith at her Coronation she had
in a set form of words solemnly given
her self in Marriage to her Kingdom.)
Here having made a pause: And do not
(saith she) upbraid me with miserable
lack of Children; for every one of you,
and as many as are Englishmen, are Chil|dren
and Kinsmen to me; of whom, if
God deprive me not, (which God for|bid)
I cannot without injury be account|ed
Barren. But I commend you that ye
have not appointed me an Husband, for
that were most unworthy the Majesty of
an Absolute Princess, and unbeseeming
your Wisdom, which are Subjects born.
Nevertheless, if it please God that I en|ter
into another course of life, I promise
you I will do nothing which may be pre|judicial
to the Commonwealth, but will
take such a Husband, as near as may be,

as will have as great a care of the Com|monwealth
as my self. But if I conti|nue
in this kind of life I have begun, I
doubt not but God will so direct mine
own and your Counsels, that ye shall not
need to doubt of a Successor which may
be more beneficial to the Commonwealth
than he which may be born of me, con|sidering
that the Issue of the best Prin|ces
many times degenerateth. And to
me it shall be a full satisfaction, both for
the Memorial of my Name, and for my
Glory also, if when I shall let my last
Breath, it be engraven upon my Marble
Tomb, Here lieth ELIZABETH,
which Reigned a Virgin, and died a
Virgin.



NUMB. IV.
Queen Elizabeth's Letter to King Henry
the Fourth of France,Ibid. p. 475. upon his changing
his Religion.
ALas! what deep Sorrow, what ve|hement
Grief, what Sighs have I
felt at my Heart, for the things which
Morlante hath told me of? Alas! is the
World come to this pass? Was it possi|ble
that any Worldly matter should make
you quit the fear of God? Can we ex|pect
any happy Issue of such a Fact? Or
could you think that he who hath hi|therto
with his own Right Hand up|holden
and preserved you, would now
forsake you? It is a very dangerous thing
to do Evil that Good may come of it.
Yet I hope a sober Spirit will put you
into a better Mind. In the mean time
I will not omit to make it a principal
part of my Prayers, the recommending
you to God, beseeching him that the
Hands of Esau may not lose you the
Blessing of Iacob. Whreas you do re|ligiously
and solemnly offer me your
Friendship, I know to my great Cost I

have well deserved it; neither should I
repent that, had you not changed your
Father. Verily, from henceforth I can|not
be your Sister by the Father; for the
truth is, I shall ever more dearly love and
honour mine own Father, than a false
and counterfeit one: which God know|eth
very well, who (I beseech him)
bring you back again to a better Mind.
Subscribed,
Your Sister, if it be after the
old manner; as for the new
I have nothing to do with it.
Elizabeth R.



NUMB. V.
An Account of what was Remarkable upon
opening the Body of Prince Henry.
FIrst,Truth brought to Light, or the first 14 Years of K. Iames, p. 33. we found his Liver paler than
ordinary, in certain places somewhat
wan, his Gall without any Choler in it,
and distended with Wind.
Secondly, his Spleen was in divers pla|ces
more than ordinarily black.
Thirdly, his Stomach was in no part
offended.
Fourthly, his Midriff was in divers
places black.
Fifthly, his Lungs were very black,
and in divers places spotted, and full of a
thin watery Blood.
Lastly, the Veins in the hinder part of
his Head were fuller than ordinary, but
the Ventricles and hollowness of the
Brain were full of clear Water.

In witness whereof, with our own Hands we
have Subscribed this present Relation,
the 7th day of November, 1612.
Mayerne,
Atkins,
Hammond,
Palmer,
Gifford,
Buttler.




NUMB. VI.
Mr. Secretary Vane's Notes about the Earl
of Strafford's Advice to King Charles
to bring over an Army from Ireland,Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 41. to
subdue England.
Note, This was the most dubious, and yet the
most material Article against him, which
contributed most to his Ruin.
The Title of them was,
No danger of a War with Scotland.
If Offensive, not Defensive.

K. Charles.
HOW can we undertake
Offensive War, if we
have no more Money?


Lord Strafford.
Borrow of the City
100000 l. Go on vigorously to levy Ship|money:
Your Majesty having tried the
Affection of your People, you are ab|solv'd
and loose from all Rule of Govern|ment,
and to do what Power will admit.
Your Majesty having tried all ways, and
being refus'd, shall be acquitted before
God and Man. And you have an Army
in Ireland that you may employ to reduce

this Kingdom to Obedience; for I am
confident the Scots cannot hold out Five
Months.


A Bp. Laud.
You have tried all ways,
and have always been denied; it is now
lawful to take it by Force.


Lord Cottington.
Levies abroad there
may be made for Defence of the King|dom.
The Lower House are weary of
the King and Church. All ways shall be
just to raise Money by, in this inevitable
Necessity, and are to be us'd, being
lawful.


A Bp. Laud.
For an Offensive, not a
Defensive War.


Lord Strafford.
The Town is full of
Lords; put the Commission of Array on
foot; and if any of them stir, we will
make them smart.




NUMB. VII.
The Theatrical Manner of Archbishop
Laud's Consecrating Katherine Creed-Church,Rushworth, Part 2. Vol. 1, p. 77.
in London.
ST. Katherine Creed Church being late|ly
repaired, was suspended from all
Divine Service, Sermons, and Sacraments,
till it were Consecrated. Wherefore
Dr. Laud, Lord Bishop of London, on the
16th of Ianuary, being the Lord's Day,
came thither in the Morning to Conse|crate
the same. Now because great Ex|ceptions
were taken at the Formality
thereof, we will briefly relate the manner
of the Consecration.
At the Bishop's approach to the West|door
of the Church, some that were
prepared for it, cried with a loud voice,
Open, open, ye everlasting Doors, that the
King of Glory may enter in! and present|ly
the Doors were opened: And the Bi|shop,
with some Doctors, and many
other principal Men, went in, and im|mediately
falling down upon his Knees,
with his Eyes lifted up, and his Arms

spread abroad, uttered these words, This
Place is holy, this Ground is holy; In the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
I pronounce it holy.
Then he took up some of the dust,
and threw it up into the Air, several
times in his going up towards the Chan|cel;
when they approached near to the
Rail and Communion-Table, the Bishop
bowed towards it several times, and re|turning,
they went round the Church
in Procession, saying the Hundredth
Psalm; after that, the 19th Psalm, and
then said a Form of Prayer, Lord Iesus
Christ, c. and concluding, We Conse|crate
this Church, and separate it unto thee,
as holy Ground, not to be prophaned any
more to common use.
After this, the Bishop being near the
Communion-Table, and taking a written
Book in his hand, pronounced Curses
upon those that should afterwards pro|phane
that Holy Place, by Musters of
Soldiers, or keeping prophane Law-Courts,
or carrying Burdens through it;
and at the end of every Curse, he bowed
towards the East, and said, Let all the
People say, Amen.
When the Curses were ended, he pro|nounced
a number of Blessings upon all

those that had any hand in Framing and
Building of that Sacred and Beautiful
Church, and those that had given, and
should hereafter give any Chalices, Plate,
Ornaments, or Utensils: And at the end
of every Blessing, he bowed towards the
East, saying, Let all the People say,
Amen.
After this followed the Sermon; which
being ended, the Bishop consecrated and
administred the Sacrament, in manner
following:
As he approached the Communion-Table
he made many several lowly Bowings;
and coming up to the side of the Table
where the Bread and Wine were covered,
he bowed seven times, and then after the
reading of many Prayers, he came near
the Bread, and gently lifted up the cor|ner
of the Napkin wherein the Bread
was laid; and when he beheld the Bread,
he laid it down again, flew back a step
or two, bowed three several times to|wards
it, then he drew near again, and
opened the Napkin, and bowed as be|fore.
Then he laid his hand on the Cup,
which was full of Wine, with a Cover
upon it, which he let go again, went
back, and bowed thrice towards it, then

he came near again; and lifting up the
Cover of the Cup, looked into it, and
seeing the Wine, he let fall the Cover
again, retired back, and bowed as before;
then he received the Sacrament, and gave
it to some principal Men; after which,
many Prayers being said, the Solemnity
of the Consecration ended.


NUMB. VIII.
The Order of Council against Archibald
the King's Fool, for affronting Arch|bishop
Laud.
IT is this day ordered by his Majesty,Rushworth, Part 2. Vol. 1. p. 471.
with the Advice of the Board, That
Archibald Armstrong, the King's Fool, for
certain scandalous Words of a high na|ture,
spoken by him against the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, and
proved to be uttered by him by two Wit|nesses,
shall have his Coat pull'd over his
Head, and be discharged of the King's
Service, and banished the Court; for
which the Lord Chamberlain of the
King's Houshold is prayed and required
to give Order to be executed. And imme|diately
the same was put in Execution.



NUMB. IX.
The Petition of the House of Commons,Husband's Collect. in 4 to, from p. 1. to p. 29.
and their Remonstrance of the State of
the Nation, presented to K. Charles I.
at his Return from Scotland in 1641.
Together with the King's Answer, and the
Declaration he afterwards publish'd to the
same purpose.
Note, That the Matters contain'd in these Four Pa|pers,
were the Grounds of the Civil War, and
came afterwards to be decided by the Sword.

The Petition of the House of Commons,
which accompanied the Declaration of the
State of the Kingdom, when it was pre|sented
to his Majesty at Hampton-Court.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
YOur Majesties most humble and
faithful Subjects the Commoners in
this present Parliament assembled, do
with much thankfulness and joy, acknow|ledge
the great mercy and favour of God,
in giving your Majesty a safe and peacea|ble
return out of Scotland into your King|dom
of England, where the pressing dan|gers

and distempers of the State have cau|sed
us with much earnestness to desire the
comfort of your gracious presence, and
likewise the Unity and Justice of your
Royal Authority to give more life and
power to the dutiful and loyal Counsels
and Endeavours of your Parliament, for
the prevention of that eminent ruin and
destruction wherein your Kingdoms of
England and Scotland are threatned. The
duty which we owe to your Majesty and
our Countrey, cannot but make us very
sensible and apprehensive, that the mul|tiplicity,
sharpness and malignity of those
evils under which we have now many
years suffered, are fomented and cherish|ed
by a corrupt and ill-affected party,
who amongst other their mischievous de|vices
for the alteration of Religion and
Government, have thought by many
false scandals and imputations cunningly
insinuated, and dispersed amongst the
people, to blemish and disgrace our pro|ceedings
in this Parliament, and to get
themselves a party and faction amongst
your Subjects, for the better strengthning
of themselves in their wicked courses,
and hindring those Provisions and Re|medies
which might by the wisdom
of your Majesty, and Counsel of

your Parliament be opposed against
them.
For preventing whereof, and the better
information of your Majesty, your Peers,
and all other your loyal Subjects, we
have been necessitated to make a Decla|ration
of the state of the Kingdom, both
before and since the Assembly of this Par|liament
unto this time, which we do
humbly present to your Majesty without
the least intention to lay any blemish up|on
your Royal Person, but only to repre|sent
how your Royal Authority and Trust
have been abused, to the great prejudice
and danger of your Majesty, and of all
your good Subjects.
And because we have reason to believe
that those malignant parties whose pro|ceedings
evidently appear to be mainly
for the advantage and encrease of Popery,
is composed, set up, and acted by the sub|til
practice of the Jesuits, and other En|gineers
and Factors for Rome, and to the
great danger of this Kingdom, and
most grievous affliction of your loyal
Subjects, have so far prevailed, as to
corrupt divers of your Bishops, and others
in prime places of the Church, and al|so
to bring divers of these Instruments to
be of your Privy Council, and other em|ployments

of trust and nearness about
your Majesty, the Prince, and the rest of
your Royal Children.
And by this means hath had such an ope|ration
in your Council, and the most im|portant
affairs and proceedings of your
Government, that a most dangerous divi|sion
and chargeable preparation for War
betwixt your Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, the increase of Jealousies betwixt
your Majesty and your most obedient Sub|jects,
the violent distraction and inter|ruption
of this Parliament, the insurre|ction
of the Papists in your Kingdom of
Ireland, and bloody Massacre of your
people, have been not only endeavoured
and attempted, but in a great measure
compassed and effected.
For preventing the final accomplish|ment
whereof, your poor Subjects are en|forced
to engage their persons and estates
to the maintaining of a very expenceful
and dangerous War, notwithstanding
they have already since the beginning of
this Parliament undergone the charge of
150000 pounds sterling, or thereabouts,
for the necessary support and supply of
your Majesty in these present and peril|lous
Designs. And because all our most
faithful endeavours and engagements

will be ineffectual for the peace, safety,
and preservation of your Majesty and
your people, if some present, real and
effectual course be not taken for suppres|sing
this wicked and malignant party,
We your most humble and obedient
Subjects do with all faithfulness and hu|mility
beseech your Majesty,
1. That you will be graciously pleased
to concur with the humble desires of your
people in a Parliamentary way, for the
preserving the peace and safety of the
Kingdom from the malicious Designs of
the Popish party.
For depriving the Bishops of their
Votes in Parliament, and abridging their
immoderate power usurped over the Cler|gy,
and other your good Subjects,
which they have most perniciously abu|sed,
to the hazard of Religion, and great
prejudice and oppression of the Laws of
the Kingdom, and just liberty of your
people.
For the taking away such oppressions
in Religion, Church government, and
Discipline, as have been brought in and
fomented by them.
For uniting all such your loyal Sub|jects
together, as joyn in the same funda|mental

truths against the Papist, by re|moving
some oppressions and unnecessary
Ceremonies, by which divers weak con|sciences
have been scrupled, and seem to
be divided from the rest: For the due ex|ecution
of those good Laws which have
been made for securing the liberty of your
Subjects.
2. That your Majesty will likewise be
pleased to remove from your Council all
such as persist to favour, and promote any
of those pressures and corruptions where|with
your people have been grieved; and
that for the future your Majesty will
vouchsafe to imploy such persons in your
great and publick Affairs, and to take such
to be near you in places of trust, as your
Parliament may have cause to confide in;
that in your Princely goodness to your
people, you will reject and refuse all me|diation
and solicitation to the contrary,
how powerful and near soever.
3. That you would be pleased to for|bear
to alienate any of the forfeited and
escheated Lands in Ireland, which shall
accrue to your Crown by reason of this
Rebellion, that out of them the Crown
may be the better supported, and some
satisfaction made to your Subjects of this
Kingdom, for the great expences they
are like to undergo this War.

Which humble desires of ours being
graciously fulfilled by your Majesty, we
will by the blessing and favour of God
most chearfully undergo the hazard and
expences of this War, and apply our selves
to such other courses and counsels as may
support your Royal Estate with honour
and plenty at home, with power and re|putation
abroad; and by our loyal affecti|ons,
obedience, and service, lay a sure
and lasting foundation of the greatness
and prosperity of your Majesty, and your
Royal Posterity in future times.


A Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom.
Die Mercurii, 15 Decemb. 1642.
THE Commons in this present Par|liament
assembled, having with
much earnestness, and faithfulness of affe|ction,
and zeal to the publick good of
this Kingdom, and his Majesties honour
and service, for the space of twelve
months, wrestled with the great dangers
and fears, the pressing miseries and cala|mities,
the various distempers and disor|ders,
which had not only assaulted, but

even overwhelmed and extinguisht the
liberty, peace, and prosperity of this
Kingdom, the comfort and hopes of all
his Majesties good Subjects, and exceed|ingly
weakned and undermined the foun|dation
and strength of his own Royal
Throne; Do yet find an abounding Ma|lignity
and Opposition in those parties
and factions, who have been the cause of
those evils, and do still labour to cast as|persions
upon that which hath been done,
and to raise many difficulties for the hin|derance
of that which remains yet undone,
and to foment Jealousies betwixt the
King and the Parliament; that so they
may deprive him his people, of the fruit
of his own gracious Intentions, and their
humble desires of procuring the publick
peace, safety, and happiness of this
Realm. For the preventing of those mi|serable
effects, which such malicious en|deavours
may produce, We have thought
good to declare,
1. The root and the growth of these mis|chievous
Designs.
2. The Maturity and Ripeness, to which
they have attained before the beginning of
the Parliament.
3. The effectual means which hath been

used for the extirpations of those dangerous
evils, and the Progress which hath therein
been made by his Majesties goodness, and the
Wisdom of the Parliament.
4. The ways of obstruction and opposition,
by which that Progress hath been interrupt|ed.
5. The courses to be taken for the remov|ing
those Obstacles, and for the accomplishing
of our most dutiful and faithful intentions
and endeavours, of restoring and establishing
the Ancient Honour, Greatness, and Secu|rity
of this Crown and Nation. The Root
of all this mischeif, We find to be a malig|nant,
and pernicious design, of subverting
the Fundamental Laws and Principles of
Government; upon which the Religion and
Iustice of this Kingdom are firmly esta|blisht.
The Actors and Promoters hereof
have been,
1. The Iesuited Papists who hate the
Laws, as the Obstacles of that Change and
Subversion of Religion, which they so much
long for.
2. The Bishops, and the corrupt part of
the Clergy, who cherish formality and su|perstition,
as the natural effects, and more
probable supports of their own Ecclesiastical
Tyranny and Vsurpation.
3. Such Counsellors and Courtiers as for

private ends have engaged themselves to
further the interests of some foreign Princes
or States, to the prejudice of his Majesty,
and the State at home.
The common Principles, by which
they moulded and governed all their par|ticular
Counsels and Actions were these:
First, To maintain continual differences
and discontents betwixt the King and the
People, upon Questions of Prerogative and
Liberty, that so they might have the advan|tage
of siding with him, and under the noti|ons
of men addicted to his service, gain
to themselves and their parties the places
of greatest trust and power in the Kingdom.
A second, To suppress the purity and pow|er
of Religion, and such as were best affected
to it; as being contrary to their own ends,
and the greatest impediment to that Change
which they thought to introduce.
A third, To conjoyn those parties of the
Kingdom, which were most propitious to
their own ends, and to divide those who were
most opposite, which consisted in many parti|cular
Observations; to chrish the Armini|an
part in those points wherein they agree
with the Papists; to multiply and enlarge the
difference between the common Protestants

and those whom they call Puritans, to intro|duce
and countenance such Opinions and Ce|remonies,
as are fittest for accomodation with
Popery, to increase and maintain ignorance,
looseness and prophaneness in the people:
That of those three parties, Papists, Armi|nians,
and Libertines, they might compose
a body fit to act such counsels and resolutions,
as were most conducible to their own ends.
A fourth, To disaffect the King to Parlia|ments,
by slanders and false imputations,
and by putting him upon other ways of supply,
which in shew and appearance were fuller of
advantage than the ordinary course of Sub|sidies,
though in truth they brought more loss
than gain both to the King and People, and
have caused the distractions under which we
both suffer.
As in all compounded bodies, the Ope|rations
are qualified according to the pre|dominant
Element; So in this mixt par|ty,
the Jesuited Counsels being most
active and prevailing, may easily be dis|covered
to have had the greatest sway in
all their determinations; and if they be
not prevented, are like to devour the rest,
or to turn them into their own nature.
In the beginning of his Majesties
Reign, the party begun to revive and flou|rish
again, having been somewhat dampt

by the breach with Spain in the last year
of King Iames, and by his Majesties
Marriage with France; the interests and
Councils of that State being not so con|trary
to the good of Religion, and the
prosperity of his Kingdom, as those of
Spain; and the Papists of England hav|ving
been ever more addicted to Spain
than France; yet they still retained a pur|pose
and resolution to weaken the Prote|stant
parties in all parts, and even in France,
whereby to make way for the change of
Religion, which they intended at home.
The first effect and evidence of their
recovery and strength, was the dissolution
of the Parliament at Oxford, after there
had been given two Subsidies to his Ma|jesty;
and before they received relief in
any one Grievance, many other more
miserable effects followed,
The loss of the Rochel Fleet, by the
help of our Shipping set forth and deli|vered
over to the French, in opposition to
the advice of Parliament, which left that
Town without defence by Sea, and made
way not only to the loss of that impor|tant
place, but likewise to the loss of all
the strength and security of the Protestant
Religion in France.
The diverting of his Majesties course of

Wars from the West-Indies, which was
the most facile and hopeful way for this
Kingdom to prevail against the Spaniard;
to an expenceful and successless attempt
upon Cales, which was so ordered, as if
it had rather been intended to make us
weary of War than to prosper in it.
The precipitate breach with France,
by taking their Ships to a great value,
without making recompence to the
English, whose Goods were thereupon im|barr'd
and confiscate in that Kingdom.
The Peace with Spain without con|sent
of Parliament, contrary to the pro|mise
of K. Iames to both Houses; where|by
the Palatine Cause was deserted, and
left to chargeable and hopeless Treaties,
which for the most part, were managed
by those who might justly be suspected
to be no Friends to that Cause.
The charging of the Kingdom with
Billeted Soldiers in all parts of it, and
that concomitant design of German Horse,
that the Land might either submit with
fear, or be enforced with rigour to such
Arbitrary Contributions as should be re|quired
of them.
The dissolving of the Parliament in
the second year of his Majesties Reign,
after a Declaration of their intent to grant
five Subsidies.

The exacting of the like proportion of
five Subsidies after the Parliament dissol|ved,
by Commission of Loan; and di|vers
Gentlemen and others imprisoned
for not yielding to pay that Loan, where|by
many of them contracted such sick|nesses
as cost them their Lives. Great
sums of Money required and raised by
Privy Seals. An unjust and pernicious
attempt to extort great payments from
the Subject, by way of Excise; and a
Commission issued under Seal to that pur|pose.
The Petition of Right, which was
granted in full Parliament, blasted with
an illegal Declaration, to make it destru|ctive
to it self, to the power of Parlia|ment,
to the Liberty of the Subject, and
to that purpose printed with it; and the
Petition made of no use, but to shew the
bold and presumptuous injustice of such
Ministers as durst break the Laws, and
suppress the Liberties of the Kingdom,
after they had been so solemny and evi|dently
declared.
Another Parliament dissolved, 4 Car.
The privilege of Parliament broken by
imprisoning divers Members of the House,
detaining them close prisoners for many
months together, without the liberty of
using Books, Pen, Ink, or Paper, deny|ing

them all the comforts of life, all means
of preservation of health, not permitting
their Wives to come unto them, even in
time of their sickness. And for the com|pleating
of that cruelty, after years spent
in such miserable durance, depriving
them of the necessary means of Spiritual
consolation, not suffering them to go
abroad to enjoy God's Ordinances in
God's House, or God's Ministers to come
to them, to administer comfort unto them
in their private Chambers; and to keep
them still in this oppressed condition, not
admitting them to be bailed according to
Law, yet vexing them with Informations
in inferior Courts, sentencing and fining
some of them for matters done in Parlia|ment,
and extorting the payments of those
Fines from them, enforcing others to put
in security of good behaviour, before they
could be released.
The imprisonment of the rest which
refused to be bound, still continued;
which might have been perpetual, if ne|cessity
had not the last year brought an|other
Parliament to relieve them; of
whom one died, by the cruelty and harsh|ness
of his imprisonment, which would
admit of no relaxation, notwithstanding
the imminent danger of his life did suffi|ciently

appear by the declaration of his
Physician: And his Release, or at least,
his Refreshment, was sought by many
humble Petitions. And his Blood still
cries either for Vengeance, or Repen|tance
of those Ministers of State, who
have at once obstructed the course both of
his Majesty's Justice and Mercy.
Upon the Dissolution of both these
Parliaments, untrue and scandalous De|clarations
published, to asperse their Pro|ceedings
and some of their Members,
unjustly to make them odious, and co|lour
the Violence which was used against
them. Proclamations set out to the same
purpose; and to the great dejecting of
the hearts of the People, forbidding them
even to speak of Parliaments.
After the Breach of Parliament, in the
Fourth Year of his Majesty, Injustice,
Oppression, and Violence broke in upon
us, without any Restraint or Modera|tion;
and yet the first Project was the
great Sums exacted through the whole
Kingdom, for default of Knighthood,
which seemed to have some colour and
shadow of a Law, yet if it be rightly
examined by that obsolete Law which
was pretended for it, it would be found
to be against all the Rules of Justice,

both in respect of the Persons charged,
the Proportion of the Fines demanded,
and the absurd and unreasonable Manner
of their Proceedings. Tunnage and
Poundage hath been received without
colour or pretence of Law; many other
heavy Impositions continued against
Law; and some so unreasonable, that
the Sum of the Charge exceeds the Value
of the Goods. The Book of Rates
lately inhansed to a high proportion;
and such Merchants as would not submit
to their illegal and unreasonable Pay|ments,
were vexed and oppressed above
measure; and the ordinary course of
Justice, the common Birth-right of the
Subject of England, wholly obstructed
unto them. And although all this was
taken upon pretence of guarding the Sea,
yet a new and unheard-of Tax of Ship|money
was devised, upon the same pre|tence.
By both which, there was char|ged
upon the Subject near 700000 Pounds
some Years; and yet the Merchants have
been left so naked to the violence of the
Turkish Pyrates, that many great Ships of
Value, and Thousands of his Majesty's
Subjects have been taken by them, and
do still remain in miserable Slavery.

The enlargement of Forests, contrary
to Charta de Foresta, and the Compositi|on
thereupon. The exactions of Coat
and Conduct money, and divers other
Military Charges. The taking away
the Arms of the Trained-Bands of divers
Counties. The desperate design of en|grossing
all the Gunpowder into one
hand, keeping it in the Tower of Lon|don,
and setting so high a Rate upon it,
that the poorer sort were not able to buy
it, nor could any have it without License,
thereby to leave the several parts of the
Kingdom destitute of their necessary de|fence;
and by selling so dear that which
was sold, to make an unlawful advan|tage
of it, to the great charge and detri|ment
of the Subject. The general de|struction
of the King's Timber, espe|cially
that in the Forest of Dean, sold to
Papists, which was the best Store-house
of this Kingdom, for the maintenance of
our Shipping. The taking away of mens
Right, under colour of the King's Title
to Land between high and low Water
Marks. The Monopolies of Soap, Salt,
Wine, Leather, Sea-Coal, and in a man|ner,
of all things of most common and
necessary use. The restraint of the Li|berties
of the Subjects in their Habitati|on,

Trades, and other Interest. Their
vexation and oppression by Purveyors,
Clerks of the Market, and Salt-Petre|men.
The sale of pretended Nusances,
as Buildings in and about London, Con|version
of Arable into Pasture, continu|ance
of Pasture, under the Name of
Depopulation, have drawn many Milli|ons
out of the Subjects Purses, without
any considerable Profit to his Majesty.
Large quantities of Common, and seve|ral
Grounds, have been taken from the
Subject, by colour of the Statute of Im|provement,
and by abuse of the Com|mission
of Sewers, without their con|sent,
and against it. And not only pri|vate
Interest, but also publick Faith have
been broken, in seizing of the Money
and Bullion in the Mint; and the whole
Kingdom like to be robb'd at once, in
that abominable Project of Brass Money.
Great numbers of his Majesty's Subjects,
for refusing those unlawful Charges,
have been vex'd with long and expensive
Suits; some fined and censured, others
committed to long and hard Imprison|ments
and Confinements, to the loss of
Health of many, of Life in some; and
others have had their Houses broken up,
their Goods seized; some have been re|strained

from their lawful Callings:
Ships have been interrupted in their
Voyages, surprized at Sea in an Hostile
manner by Projectors, as by a common
Enemy: Merchants prohibited to unlade
their Goods in such Ports as were for
their own advantage, and forced to bring
them to those places which were most for
the advantages of the Monopolizers and
Projectors. The Court of Star-chamber
hath abounded in extravagant Censures,
not only for the maintenance and im|provement
of Monopolies, and other un|lawful
Taxes, but for divers other Cau|ses,
where there hath been no offence, or
very small; whereby his Majesty's Sub|jects
have been oppressed by grievous
Fines, Imprisonments, Stigmatizings,
Mutilations, Whippings, Pillories, Gags,
Confinements, Banishments; after so
rigid a manner, as hath not only depri|ved
men of the society of their Friends,
exercise of their Professions, comfort of
Books, use of Paper or Ink, but even
violated that near Union which God hath
establish'd betwixt Men and their Wives,
by forced and constrained Separation;
whereby they have been bereaved of the
comfort and conversation one of another
for many years together, without hope of

relief; if God had not by his over-ruling
Providence, given some interruption to
the prevailing Power and Counsel of
those who were the Authors and Promo|ters
of such peremptory and heady
Courses.
Judges have been put out of their Pla|ces,
for refusing to do against their Oaths
and Consciences: Others have been so
awed, that they durst not do their duties;
and the better to hold a Rod over them,
the Clause quam diu se bene gesserint was
left out of their Patents, and a new
Clause, durante bene placito, inserted.
Lawyers have been check'd for being
faithful to their Clients; Sollicitors and
Attornies have been threatned, and some
punished for following lawful Suits. And
by this means all the approaches to Justice
were interrupted and forecluded. New
Oaths have been forced upon the Sub|ject
against Law; new Judicatories
erected without Law: The Council-Table
have, by their Orders, offered to
bind the Subjects in their Freeholds,
Estates, Suits, and Actions. The pre|tended
Court of the Earl Marshal was
Arbitrary and Illegal in its Being and
Proceedings. The Chancery, Exchequer-Chamber,
Court of Wards, and other

English Courts have been grievous in ex|ceeding
their Jurisdiction. The Estate
of many Families weaken'd, and some
ruin'd by excessive Fines, exacted from
them for Compositions of Wardships.
All Leases of above a hundred Years,
made to draw on Wardship contrary to
Law. Undue proceedings used in the
finding of Offices, to make the Jury find
for the King. The Common-Law Courts
seeing all men more inclined to seek Ju|stice
there, where it may be fitted to their
own desire, are known frequently to for|sake
the Rules of the Common-Law,
and straining beyond their bounds, under
pretence of Equity to do Injustice. Ti|tles
of Honour, Judicial Places, Serjeant-ships
at Law, and other Offices, have
been sold for great Sums of Money;
whereby the common Justice of the
Kingdom hath been much endanger'd,
not only by opening a way of Employ|ment
in places of great Trust and Ad|vantage
to men of weak Parts, but also
by giving occasion to Bribery, Extortion,
Partiality: It seldom happening that
Places ill-gotten are well used. Com|missions
have been granted for examining
the excess of Fees; and when great Ex|actions
have been discovered, Composi|tions

have been made with Delinquents,
not only for the time past, but likewise
for immunity and security in offending
for the time to come; which under co|lour
of remedy, hath but confirmed and
increased the Grievance to the Subject.
The usual course of pricking Sheriffs
not observed, but many times Sheriffs
made in an extraordinary way; some|times
as a Punishment and Charge unto
them; sometimes such were prick'd out,
as would be Instruments to execute
whatsoever they would have to be done.
The Bishops and the rest of the Clergy
did triumph in the Suspensions, Excom|munications,
Deprivations, and Degrada|tions
of divers painful, learned and pious
Ministers, in the vexation and grievous
oppression of great numbers of his Ma|jesty's
good Subjects. The High Com|mission
grew to such excess of sharpness
and severity, as was not much less than
the Romish Inquisition; and yet in many
cases by the Archbishop's Power was
made much more heavy, being assisted
and strengthen'd by Authority of the
Council-Table.
The Bishops and their Courts were as
eager in the Countrey; and although
their Jurisdiction could not reach so high

in rigor and extremity of Punishment,
yet were they no less grievous in respect
of the generality and multiplicity of
Vexations, which lighting upon the
meaner sort of Tradesmen and Artificers,
did impoverish many Thousands, and
so afflict and trouble others, that great
numbers, to avoid their miseries, depart|ed
out of the Kingdom, some into New-England,
and other parts of America,
others into Holland, where they have
transported their Manufactures of Cloath,
which is not only a loss by diminishing
the present Stock of the Kingdom, but a
great Mischief, by impairing and endan|gering
the loss of that peculiar Trade of
Cloathing, which hath been a plentiful
Fountain of Wealth and Honour to this
Nation. Those were fittest for Eccle|siastical
Preferment, and soonest obtained
it, who were most officious in promoting
Superstition, most virulent in railing
against Godliness and Honesty.
The most publick and solemn Sermons
before his Majesty, were either to advance
Prerogative above Law, and decry the
Property of the Subject; or full of such
kind of Invectives, whereby they might
make those odious who sought to main|tain
the Religion, Laws, and Liberties

of the Kingdom; and such men were
sure to be weeded out of the Commission
of the Peace, and out of all other Em|ployments
of Power in the Government
of the Countrey. Many Noble Perso|nages
were Counsellors in Name, but
the Power and Authority remained in a
few of such as were most addicted to
this Party; whose Resolutions and De|terminations
were brought to the Table
for countenance and execution, and not
for debate and deliberation; and no man
could offer to oppose them, without
disgrace and hazard to himself: Nay, all
those that did not wholly concur, and
actively contribute to the furtherance of
their Designs, though otherwise Persons
of never so great Honour and Abilities,
were so far from being employed in any
place of Trust and Power, that they
were neglected, discountenanced, and
upon all occasions injured and oppressed.
This Faction was grown to that height
and entireness of Power, that now they
began to think of finishing their Work,
which consisted of these Three parts.
1. The Government must be set free
from all Restraint of Laws concerning our
Persons and States.

2. There must be a Conjunction betwixt
Papists and Protestants in Doctrine, Disci|pline,
and Ceremonies; only it must not
yet be called Popery.
3. The Puritans, under which Name
they include all those that desire to preserve
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom,
and to maintain Religion in the Power of
it, must be either rooted out of the King|dom
with force, or driven out with fear.
For the effecting of this, it was thought
necessary to reduce Scotland to such Popish
Superstitions and Innovations as might
make them apt to join with England in the
great Change which was intended. Where|upon
new Canons, and a new Liturgy were
prest upon them; and when they refused to
admit of them, an Army was raised to force
them to it; towards which the Clergy and
the Papists were very forward in their Con|tribution.
The Scots likewise raised an
Army for their defence: And when both
Armies were come together, and ready for
a bloody Encounter, his Majesty's own gra|cious
Disposition, and the Counsel of the
English Nobility, and dutiful Submission
of the Scots, did so far prevail against the
evil Counsel of others, that a Pacification
was made, and his Majesty returned with
Peace, and much Honour to London.

The unexpected Reconciliation was
most acceptable to all the Kingdom, ex|cept
to the Malignant Party, whereof
the Archbishop and the Earl of Strafford
being Heads, they and their Faction be|gun
to inveigh against the Peace, and to
aggravate the Proceedings of the States;
which so incensed his Majesty, that he
forthwith prepared again for War. And
such was their Confidence, that having
corrupted and distempered the whole
Frame and Government of the King|dom,
they did now hope to corrupt that
which was the only means to restore all
to a right frame and temper again; to
which end they persuaded his Majesty to
call a Parliament; not to seek Counsel
and Advice of them, but to draw Coun|tenance
and Supply from them, and en|gage
the whole Kingdom in their Quar|rel;
and in the mean time continued all
their unjust Levies of Money; resolving
either to make the Parliament pliant to
their Will, and to establish mischief by a
Law, or else to break it. And with more
colour to go on by Violence to take what
they could not obtain by Consent, the
Ground alledged for the Justification of
this War, was this;

That the undutiful Demands of the
Parliament of Scotland, was a sufficient
Reason for his Majesty to take Arms
against them, without hearing the Reason
of those Demands: And thereupon a
new Army was prepared against them;
their Ships were seized in all Ports both
of England and Ireland, and at Sea; their
Petitions rejected, their Commissioners
refused Audience: This whole Kingdom
most miserably distemper'd with Levies
of Men and Money, and Imprisonments
of those who denied to submit to those
Levies. The Earl of Strafford pass'd
into Ireland, caused the Parliament there
to declare against the Scots, to give four
Subsidies towards that War; and to en|gage
themselves, their Lives and For|tunes,
for the prosecution of it; and gave
directions for an Army of Eight thou|sand
Foot, and One thousand Horse, to
be levied there, which were for the most
part Papists. The Parliament met upon
the 13th of April, 1640. The Earl of
Strafford, and Archbishop of Canterbury,
with their Party, so prevailed with his
Majesty, that the House of Commons
was prest to yield to a Supply for main|tenance
of the War with Scotland, be|fore
they had provided any Relief for

the great and pressing Grievances of the
People; which being against the Funda|mental
Privilege and proceeding of Par|liament,
was yet in humble Respect to
his Majesty so far admitted, as that they
agreed to take the matter of Supply into
Consideration; and two several days it
was debated. Twelve Subsidies were
demanded for the Release of Ship-money
alone; a third day was appointed for
conclusion; when the Heads of that
Party begun to fear the People might
close with the King in satisfying his de|sire
of Money; but that withal they
were like to blast their malicious designs
against Scotland, finding them very much
indisposed to give any countenance to
that War;
Thereupon they wickedly advised the
King to break off the Parliament, and to
return to the ways of Confusion, in
which their own evil Intentions were
most like to prosper and succeed.
After the Parliament ended the fifth of
May, 1640, this Party grew so bold, as
to counsel the King to supply himself out
of his Subjects Estates by his own Power,
at his own Will, without their Consent.
The very next day some Members of both
Houses had their Studies and Cabinets,

yea their Pockets searched: Another of
them, not long after, was committed
close Prisoner, for not delivering some
Petitions which he received by Autho|rity
of that House: And if harsher cour|ses
were intended (as was reported) it
is very probable that the sickness of the
Earl of Strafford, and the Tumultuous
Rising in Southwark, and about Lambeth,
were the Causes that such violent Inten|tions
were not brought to execution. A
false and scandalous Declaration against
the House of Commons, was published
in his Majesty's Name, which yet
wrought little effect with the People, but
only to manifest the Impudence of those
who were Authors of it.
A forced Loan of Money was attempt|ed
in the City of London.
The Lord Mayor and Aldermen in
their several Wards enjoined to bring in
a List of the Names of such Persons as
they judged fit to lend, and of the Sum
they should lend. And such Aldermen
as refused so to do, were committed to
Prison.
The Archbishop and the other Bishops
and Clergy continued the Convocation,
and by a new Commission turned it to a
Provincial Synod; in which, by an un|heard-of

presumption, they made Ca|nons
that contain in them many matters
contrary to the King's Prerogative, to
the Fundamental Laws and Statutes of
the Realm, to the Right of Parliaments,
to the Property and Liberty of the Sub|ject,
and matters tending to Sedition,
and of dangerous consequence, thereby
establishing their own Usurpations, ju|stifying
their Altar-Worship, and those
other Superstitious Innovations, which
they formerly introduced without war|rant
of Law.
They imposed a new Oath upon divers
of his Majesty's Subjects, both Ecclesia|stical
and Lay, for maintenance of their
own Tyranny; and laid a great Tax
upon the Clergy for Supply of his Ma|jesty;
and generally they shewed them|selves
very affectionate to the War with
Scotland, which was by some of them
stiled Bellum Episcopale; and a Prayer
composed, and enjoined to be read in all
Churches, calling the Scots Rebels, to
put the two Nations into Blood, and make
them irreconcileable. All those pretend|ed
Canons and Constitutions were armed
with the several Censures of Suspension,
Excommunication, Deprivation, by which
they would have thrust out all the good

Ministers, and most of the well-affected
People of the Kingdom, and left an easy
Passage to their own Design of Reconci|liation
with Rome. The Popish Party
enjoined such Exemptions from the Penal
Laws, as amounted to a Toleration, be|sides
many other Encouragements and
Court-Favours: They had a Secretary of
State, Sir Francis Windebank, a powerful
Agent for the speeding of all their de|sires;
a Pope's Nuncio residing here to
act and govern them according to such
influences as he received from Rome, and
to intercede for them with the most pow|erful
concurrence of the Foreign Prin|ces
of that Religion: By his Authority
the Papists of all sorts, Nobility, Gen|try,
and Clergy, were convocated after
the manner of a Parliament; new Ju|risdictions
were erected of Romish Arch|bishops,
Taxes levied, another State
moulded within this State, independent
in Government, contrary in Interest and
Affection, secretly corrupting the igno|rant
or negligent Professors of our Reli|gion,
and closely uniting and combining
themselves against such as were sound, in
this posture waiting for an opportunity by
force to destroy those whom they could
not hope to seduce. For the effecting

whereof, they were strengthen'd with
Arms and Munition, encouraged by su|perstitious
Prayers, enjoined by the Nun|cio
to be Weekly made, for the prosperity
of some great design. And such power
had they at Court, that secretly a Com|mission
was issued out, intended to be
issued to some Great Men of that Profes|sion,
for the levying of Soldiers, and to
command and employ them according to
private Instructions, which we doubt
were framed for the advantage of those
who were the Contrivers of them: His
Majesty's Treasure was consumed, his
Revenue anticipated; his Servants and
Officers compelled to lend great Sums of
Money: Multitudes were called to the
Council-Table, who were tired with long
attendances there, for refusing illegal
Payments. The Prisons were filled with
their Commitments; many of the She|riffs
summoned into the Star Chamber,
and some imprisoned, for not being
quick enough in levying the Ship-money;
the People languished under grief and
fear, no visible hope being left, but in
desperation. The Nobility began to be
weary of their silence, and patience, and
sensible of the Duty and Trust which
belongs to them; and thereupon some of

the most eminent of them did petition
his Majesty at such a time when Evil
Counsels were so strong, that they had
reason to expect more hazard to them|selves,
than redress of those publick Evils
for which they interceded. Whilst the
Kingdom was in this agitation and di|stemper,
the Scots, restrained in their
Trades, impoverished by the loss of many
of their Ships, bereaved of all possibility
of satisfying his Majesty by any naked
Supplication, entred with a powerful
Army into the Kingdom; and without
any hostile Act or Spoil in the Countrey
as they passed, more than forcing a Pas|sage
over the Tyne at Newborne, near
Newcastle, possessed themselves of New|castle;
and had a fair opportunity to press
on further upon the King's Army, but
Duty and Reverence to his Majesty, and
Brotherly Love to the English Nation,
made them stay there; whereby the
King had leisure to entertain better
Counsels; wherein God so blessed and
directed him, that he summoned the
Great Council of Peers to meet at York
upon the 24th of September, and there
declared a Parliament to begin the Third
of November then following. The Scots
the first day of the Great Council, pre|sented

an humble Petition to his Majesty,
whereupon the Treaty was appointed at
Rippon; a present Cessation of Arms
agreed upon; and the full Conclusion of
all Differences referred to the Wisdom
and Care of the Parliament. At our first
meeting, all Oppositions seemed to va|nish;
the mischiefs were so evident which
those Evil Counsellors produced, that no
man durst stand up to defend them. Yet
the Work it self afforded Difficulty
enough. The multiplied Evils and Cor|ruption
of Sixteen Years, strengthen'd
by Custom and Authority, and the con|current
Interest of many powerful De|linquents,
were now to be brought to
Judgment and Reformation. The King's
Houshold was to be provided for; they
had brought him to that Want, that he
could not supply his ordinary and necessa|ry
Expences, without the assistance of
his People. Two Armies were to be
paid, which amounted very near to
Eighty thousand Pounds a Month; the
People were to be tenderly charged,
having been formerly exhausted with
many burthensome Projects.
The difficulties seemed to be insupera|ble,
which by the Divine Providence we
have overcome. The Contrarieties in|compatible,

which yet in a great mea|sure
we have reconciled. Six Subsidies
have been granted, and a Bill of Poll-money;
which if it be duly levied, may
equal Six Subsidies more, in all Six hun|dred
thousand Pounds. Besides, we
have contracted a Debt to the Scots, of
Two hundred and twenty thousand
Pounds; and yet God hath so blessed the
Endeavours of this Parliament, that the
Kingdom is a great Gainer by all these
Charges. The Ship-money is abolished,
which cost the Kingdom above Two hun|dred
thousand Pounds a Year. The
Coat and Conduct-money, and other
Military Charges, are taken away,
which in many Counties amounted to
little less than the Ship-money. The
Monopolies are all supprest, whereof
some few did prejudice the Subject above
a Million Yearly. The Soap an Hun|dred
thousand Pounds; the Wine Three
hundred thousand Pounds; the Leather
must needs exceed both; and Salt could
be no less than that; besides the inferior
Monopolies, which if they could be
exactly computed, would make up a
great Sum. That which is more bene|ficial
than all this, is, That the Root of
these Evils is taken away, which was,

The Arbitrary Power pretended to be
in his Majesty, of taxing the Subject, or
charging their Estates without Consent
in Parliament, which is now declared to
be against Law, by the Judgment of both
Houses, and likewise by an Act of Par|liament.
Another Step of great advan|tage
is this; The living Grievances, the
Evil Counsellors and Actors of these
Mischiefs have been so quell'd by the
Justice done upon the Earl of Strafford,
the Flight of the Lord Finch and Secre|tary
Windebank; the Accusation and Im|prisonment
of the Archbishop of Can|terbury,
of Judge Bartlet, and the Im|peachment
of divers other Bishops and
Judges; that it is like not only to be an
ease to the present Times, but a preserva|tion
to the future. The discontinuance
of Parliaments is prevented by the Bill
for a Triennial Parliament, and the ab|rupt
Dissolution of this Parliament by
another Bill, by which it is provided it
shall not be dissolved or adjourned, with|out
the Consent of both Houses.
Which two Laws well considered, may
be thought more advantageous than all
the former, because they secure a full ope|ration
of the present Remedy, and afford
a perpetual Spring of Remedies for the

future. The Star-chamber, the High-Commission,
the Courts of the President,
and Council in the North, were so many
forges of misery, oppression, and violence,
and are all taken away, whereby men are
more secured in their persons, liberties
and estates, than they could be by any
Law or Example for the regulation of
those Courts, or terror of the Judges;
The immoderate power of the Council-table,
and the excessive abuse of that
power, is so ordered and restrained, that
we may well hope that no such things as
were frequently done by them, to the
prejudice of the publick liberty, will ap|pear
in future times but only in stories,
to give us and our posterity more occasion
to praise God for his Majesties goodness,
and the faithful endeavous of this Parlia|ment.
The Canons and the power of Ca|non-making,
are blasted by the Vote of
both Houses. The exorbitant power of
Bishops and their Courts are much abated,
by some provisions in the Bill against the
High-Commission Court. The Authors of
the many Innovations in Doctrine and
Ceremonies; The Ministers that have
been scandalous in their lives, have been
so terrified in just complaints and accusa|tions,
that we may well hope they will

be more modest for the time to come;
either inwardly convicted by the sight of
their own folly, or outwardly restrained
by the fear of punishment. The Forests
are by a good Law reduced to their right
bounds; the encroachments and oppres|sions
of the Stannery Courts; The Extor|tions
of the Clerk of the Market, and the
compulsion of the Subject to receive the
Order of Knighthood against his will,
paying of Fines for not receiving it, and
the vexatious proceedings thereupon for
levying of those Fines, are by other bene|ficial
Laws reformed and prevented.
Many excellent Laws and provisions are
in preparation for removing the inordi|nate
power, vexation, and usurpation of
Bishops, for reforming the pride and idle|ness
of many of the Clergy, for easing
the people of unnecessary Ceremonies in
Religion, for censuring and removing un|worthy
and unprofitable Ministers;
and for maintaining godly and diligent
Preachers through the Kingdom: Other
things of main importance for the good of
this Kingdom are in proposition, though
little could hitherto be done, in regard
of the many other more pressing bu|sinesses,
which yet before the end of this
Session, we hope may receive some pro|gress

and perfection. The establishing
and ordering the King's Revenue, that
so the abuse of Officers, and superfluity
of expences may be cut off, and the ne|cessary
disbursments for his Majesties
Honour, the defence and government of
the Kingdom, may be more certainly pro|vided
for. The regulating of Courts of
Justice, and abridging both the delays
and charges of Law-Suits; The setling of
some good courses for preventing the ex|portation
of Gold and Silver, and the in|equality
of exchanges betwixt Us and
other Nations, for the advancing of native
Commodities, increase of our Manufactu|res,
and well ballacing of Trade, where|by
the Stock of the Kingdom may be in|creased
or at least kept from impairing;
as through neglect hereof it hath done for
many years last past; For improving the
Herring-fishing upon our own Coasts,
which will be of mighty use in the im|ployment
of the Poor, and a plentiful
Nursery of Mariners for inabling the
Kingdom in any great Action. The op|positions,
obstructions, and other Difficul|ties
where-with we have been encountred
and which still lye in our way with some
strength and much obstinacy are these:
The malignant Party whom we have for|merly

described to be the Actors and
Promoters of all our Misery, they have
taken heart again: They have been able
to prefer some of their own Factors and
Agents to Degrees of Honour, to Places
of Trust and Employment, even during
the Parliament. They have endeavour|ed
to work in his Majesty ill impressi|ons
and opinions of our Proceedings, as
if we had altogether done our own work,
and not his; and had obtained from him
many things very prejudicial to the
Crown, both in respect of Prerogative
and Profit. To wipe out this Slander,
we think good only to say thus much;
That all that we have done, is for his
Majesty, his Greatness, Honour, and
Support. When we yielded to give
Twenty five thousand Pounds a Month
for the Relief of the Northern Coun|tries,
this was given to the King, for he
was bound to protect his Subjects: They
were his Majesty's Evil Counsellors, and
their ill Instruments that were Actors in
those Grievances which brought in the
Scots. And if his Majesty please to
force those who were the Authors of this
War, to make satisfaction, as he might
justly and easily do, it seems very reasona|ble
that the People might well be excused

from taking upon them this burthen, be|ing
altogether innocent and free from
being any Causes of it.
When we undertook the Charge of the
Army, which cost above 50000 l. a
Month, was not this given to the King?
Was it not his Majesty's Army? Were
not all the Commanders under Contract
with his Majesty at higher Rates and
greater Wages than ordinary? And have
not we taken upon us to discharge all the
Brotherly Assistance of Three hundred
thousand Pounds which we gave the
Scots? Was it not toward repair of those
Damages and Losses which they received
from the King's Ships, and from his Mi|nisters?
These three Particulars amount
to above Eleven hundred thousand
Pounds: Besides, his Majesty hath re|ceived
by Impositions upon Merchan|dise,
at least Four hundred thousand
Pounds; so that his Majesty hath had
out of the Subjects Purse since the Par|liament
began, one Million and an half;
and yet these men can be so impudent, as
to tell his Majesty that we have done
nothing for him. As to the second Branch
of this Slander, we acknowledge with
much Thankfulness, that his Majesty
hath passed more good Bills to the advan|tage

of the Subjects, than have been in
many Ages; but withal we cannot for|get
that these venomous Counsels did
manifest themselves in some endeavours
to hinder these good Acts: and for both
Houses of Parliament we may with truth
and modesty say thus much, That we
have ever been careful not to desire any
thing that should weaken the Crown
either in just profit or useful power.
The triennial Parliament, for the matter
of it, doth not extend to so much as by
Law we ought to have required; there
being two Statutes still in force for a Par|liament
to be once a year; and for the
manner of it, it is in the King's power,
that it shall never take effect, if he by a
timely summons shall prevent any other
way of assembling. In the Bill for con|tinuance
of this present Parliament, there
seems to be some restraint of the Royal
Power in dissolving of Parliaments, not
to take it out of the Crown, but to sus|pend
the execution of it for this time and
occasion only, which was so necessary
for the King's own security, and the pub|lick
Peace, that without it we could not
have undertaken any of these great char|ges,
but must have left both the Armies to
disorder and confusion, and the whole

Kingdom to blood and rapine. The Star|chamber
was much more fruitful in op|pression
than in profit, the great fines being
for the most part given away, and the rest
stalled at long times. The ines of the
High-Commission were in themselves
unjust, and seldom or never came into
the King's Purse. These four Bills are
particularly and more specially instanced;
in the rest there will not be found so
much as a shadow of prejudice to the
Crown. They have sought to diminish
our reputation with the people, and to
bring them out of love with Parliaments:
the aspersions which they have attempt|ed
this way, have been such as these,
That we have spent much time and done
little, especially in those grievances which
concern Religion. That the Parliament
is a burthen to the Kingdom by the abun|dance
of Protections, which hinder Justice
and Trade; and by many Subsidies granted,
much more heavy than any they former|ly
endured. To which there is a ready
Answer, if the time spent in this Parlia|ment
be considered in relation backward
to the long growth and deep root of those
grievances, which we have removed,
to the powerful Supports of those De|linquents
which we have pursued, to

the great necessities and other charges of
the Commonwealth for which we have
provided: or if it be considered in relati|on
forward, to many advantages which
not only the present, but future ages
are like to reap by the good Laws and
other proceedings in this Parliament; we
doubt not but it will be thought by all
indifferent Judgments, that our time hath
been much better imployed than in a far
greater proportion of time in many for|mer
Parliaments put together; and the
charges which have been laid upon the
Subject, and the other inconveniences
which they have born, will seem very
light in respect of the benefit they have
and may receive. And for the matter of
Protections, the Parliament is so sensible
of it, that therein they intend to give
them whatsoever ease may stand with
Honour and Justice; and are in a way of
passing a Bill to give them satisfaction.
They have sought by many subtile practi|ces,
to cause jealousies and divisions be|twixt
us and our brethren of Scotland,
by slandering their proceedings and in|tentions
towards us, and by secret endea|vours
to instigate and incense them and
us one against another. They have had
such a party of Bishops and Popish Lords

in the House of Peres as hath caused much
opposition and delay in the prosecution
of Delinquents, hindred the proceeding of
divers good Bills passed in the Commons
house, concerning the reformation of sun|dry
great abuses and corruptions both in
Church and State. They have labour|ed
to seduce and corrupt some of the
Commons House, to draw them into
conspiracies and combinations against the
liberty of the Parliament: And by their
instruments and agents they have at|tempted
to disaffect and discontent his
Majesties Army, and to engage it for the
maintainance of their wicked and traite|rous
designs, the keeping up of Bishops
in votes and functions, and by force to
compel the Parliament to order, limit and
dispose their proceedings in such manner
as might best concur with the intentions
of this dangerous and potent faction:
And when one mischeivous design and
attempt of theirs to bring on the Army
against the Parliament, and the City of
London, had been discovered and prevent|ed;
they presently undertook another of
the same damnable nature, with this ad|dition
to it; to endeavour to make the
Scotish Army neutral, whilst the English
Army which they had laboured to cor|rupt

and invenome against us by their
false and slanderous suggestions, should
execute their malice to the subversion of
our Religion, and the dissolution of our
government. Thus they have been con|tinually
practising to disturb the peace,
and plotting the destruction even of all
the Kings Dominions, and have employ|ed
their Emissaries and Agents in them,
all for the promoting of their divellish
Designs, which the vigilancy of those
who were well affected hath still disco|vered
and defeated before they were ripe
for execution in England and Scotland;
only in Ireland which was farther off,
they have had time and opportunity to
mould and prepare their work, and had
brought it to that perfection that they had
possessed themselves of that whole King|dom,
totally subverted the government
of it, rooted out Religion, and destroyed
all the Protestants whom the conscience
of their duty to God, their King and
Country would not have permitted to
oin with them, if by Gods wonderful
providence their main enterprise upon the
City and Castle of Dublin, had not been
detected and prevented upon the very
Eve before it should have been executed.
Notwithstanding, they have in other parts

of that Kingdom broken out into open
Rebellion, surprized Towns and Castles,
committed Murders, Rapes, and other
Villanies; and shaken off all bonds of
obedience to his Majesty, and the Laws
of the Realm; and in general have kind|led
such a fire, as nothing but God's in|finite
blessing upon the wisdom and en|deavours
of this State will be able to
quench it: And certainly had not God
in his great mercy unto this Land disco|vered
and confounded their former de|signs,
we had been the Prologue to this
Tragedy in Ireland, and had by this time
been made the lamentable spectacle of
misery and confusion. And now what
hope have we but in God, when as the
only means of our subsistence, and power
of Reformation is under him, in the Par|liament?
but what can we the Commons
without the conjuction of the House of
Lords, and what conjunction can we
expect there, when the Bishops and Recu|sant
Lords are so numerous and prevalent,
that they are able to cross and interrupt
our best endeavours for Reformation,
and by that means give advantage to this
malignant party to traduce our proceed|ings?
They infuse into the People, that
we mean to abolish all Church-govern|ment,

and leave every man to his own
fancy for the service and worship of God,
absolving him of that obedience which
he owes under God unto his Majesty,
whom we know to be intrusted with the
Ecclesiastical Law as well as with the
Temporal, to regulate all the Members
of the Church of England, by such rules
of Order and Discipline as are established
by Parliament, which is his great Councel
in all Affairs both in Church and State.
We confess our intention is, and our en|deavours
have been to reduce within
bounds that exorbitant power which the
Prelates have assumed unto themselves so
contrary both to the Word of God and to
the Laws of the Land; to which end we
past the Bill for the removing them from
their temporal power and employments,
that so the better they might with Meek|ness
apply themselves to the discharge of
their Functions; which Bill themselves
opposed, and were the principal instru|ments
of crossing it.
And we do here declare, That it is far
from our purpose or desire to let loose the
Golden Reins of Discipline, and Govern|ment
in the Church, to leave private per|sons
or particular Congregations to take
up what form of divine Service they

please; for we hold it requisite that there
should be throughout the whole Realm a
conformity to that Order which the Laws
enjoyn, according to the Word of God;
and we desire to unburthen the conscien|ces
of men, of needless and superstitious
Ceremonies, suppress innovations, and
take away the monuments of Idolatry.
And the better to effect the intended Re|formation,
we desire there may be a
general Synod of the most grave, pious,
learned, and judicious Divines of this
Island, assisted with some from foreign
parts professing the same Religion with us,
who may consider of all things necessary
for the peace and good government of the
Church, and represent the results of their
consultations unto the Parliament, to be
there allowed of and confirmed, and re|ceive
the stamp of authority, thereby to
find passage and obedience throughout the
Kingdom. They have maliciously char|ged
us that we intend to destroy and dis|courage
Lening; whereas it is our
chiefest cae and desire to advance it, and
to provide a competent maintenance for
conscionable and preaching Ministers
throughout the Kingdom, which will be
a great encouregement to Scholars, and
a certain means whereby the want,

meanness, and ignorance to which a great
part of the Clergy is now subject, will
be prevented. And we intend likewise
to reform, and purge the Fountains of
Learning, the two Universities, that the
streams flowing from thence may be
clear and pure, and an honour and com|fort
to the whole Land. They have
strained to blast our proceedings in Par|liament,
by wresting the Interpretations
of our Orders from their genuine inten|tion.
They tell the people that our med|ling
with the power of Episcopacy, hath
caused Sectaries and Conventicles; when
Idolatry and Popish Ceremonies introdu|ced
into the Church by the command of
the Bishops, have not only debarred the
people from thence, but expelled them
from the Kingdom. Thus with Elijah
we are called by this Malignant party the
troublers of the State; and still while we
endeavour to reform their abuses, they
make us the Authors of those mischiefs
we study to prevent. For the perfecting
of the work begun, and removing all fu|ture
impediments, we concieve these
courses will be very effectual, seeing the
Religion of the Papists hath such princi|ples
as do certainly tend to the destruction
and extirpation of all Protestants when

they shall have opportunity to effect
it.
It is necessary in the first place to keep
them in such condition, as that they
may not be able to do us any hurt, and
for avoiding of such connivance and
favour as hath heretofore been shewed
unto them. That his Majesty be pleased
to grant a standing Commission to some
choice men named in Parliament, who
may take notice of their increase, their
counsels and proceedings; and use all
due means by execution of the Laws,
to prevent any mischievous designs
against the peace and safety of this King|dom.
That some good course be taken to
discover the counterfeit and false confor|mity
of Papists to the Church; by colour
whereof Persons very much disaffected to
the true Religion have been admitted in|to
place of greatest authority and trust in
the Kingdom.
For the better preservation of the Laws
and Liberties of the Kingdom, that all
illegal grievances and exactions be pre|sented
and punished at the Sessions, and
Assizes: and that Judges and Justices be
careful to give this in charge to the Grand
Jury, and both the Sheriff and Justices
to be sworn to the due execution of the

Petition of Right, and other Laws: That
his Majesty be humbly Petitioned by
both Houses to employ such Counsellors,
Ambassadors, and other Ministers, in
managing his business at home and
abroad, as the Parliament may have
cause to confide in; without which we
cannot give his Majesty such supplies for
support of his own estate, nor such assi|stance
to the Protestant party beyond the
Sea, as is desired. It may often fall out
that the Commons may have just cause
to take exceptions at some men for being
Counsellors, and yet not charge those
men with Crimes, for there be grounds of
diffidence which lye not in proof; there
are others which tho they may be pro|ved,
yet are not legally criminal. To be
a known favourer of Papists, or to have
been very forward in defending or coun|enancing
some great offenders questioned
in Parliament; or to speak contemptuou|sly
of either Houses of Parliament, or
Parliamentary proceedings; or such as
are Factors or Agents for any Foreign
Prince of another Religion; such as are
justly suspected to get Councellors places
r any other of trust concerning publick
imployments, for Money: For all these
and divers others we may have great rea|son

to be earnest with his Majesty not to
put his great Affairs into such hands,
though we may be unwilling to proceed
against them in any legal way of charge
or impeachment. That all Councellors
of State may be sworn to observe those
Laws which concern the Subject in his li|berty;
that they may likewise take an
Oath not to receive or give Reward or
Pension from any Foreign Prince, but
such as they within some reasonable time
discover to the Lords of his Majesties
Council: and although they should
wickedly forswear themselves, yet it may
herein do good to make them known to
be false and perjured to those who imploy
them, and thereby bring them into as
little credit with them as with us. That
his Majesty may have cause to be in love
with good Counsel and good men, by
shewing him in an humble and dutiful
manner, how full of advantage it would
be to himself, to see his own Estate setled
in a plentiful condition to support his ho|nour,
to see his People united in ways of
duty to him, and endeavours of the pub|lick
good; to see Happiness, Wealth,
Peace and Safety derived to his own
Kingdom, and procured to his Allies by
the influence of his own power and go|vernment.

That all good courses may
be taken to unite the two Kingdoms
of England and Scotland, to be mutually
aiding and assisting one another for the
common good of the Island, and honour
of both. To take away all differen|ces
amongst our selves for matters in|different
in their own nature concerning
Religion, and to unite our selves against
the common enemies, which are the
better enabled by our divisions to destroy
us all, as they hope and have often en|deavoured.
To labour by all offices of
friendship to unite the Foreign Churches
with us in the same cause, and to seek
their liberty, safety, and prosperity, as
bound thereunto both by charity to them,
and by wisdom for our own good. For
by this means our own strength shall be
encreased, and by a mutual concurrence
to the same common end, we shall be
enabled to procure the good of the whole
body of the Protestant Profession. If
these things may be observed, we doubt
not but God will crown this Parliament
with such success as shall be the begin|ning
and foundation of more honour and
happiness to his Majesty, than ever yet
was enjoyed by any of his Royal Predeces|sors.



His Majesties Answer to the Petition which
accompanied the Declaration presented to
him at Hampton Court, Dec. 1. 1641.
WE having received from you,
soon after our Return out of
Scotland, a long Petition, consisting of
many desires of great moment; together
with a Declaration of a very unusual na|ture
annexed thereunto; We had taken
some time to consider of it, as befitted Us
in a matter of that consequence, being
confident, that your own reason and re|gard
to Us, as well as Our express intima|tion
by our Comptroller to that purpose,
would have restrained you from the pub|lishing
of it, till such time as you should
have reeceived our Answer to it: But,
much against our expectation, find|ing
the contrary, that the said Declarati|on
is already abroad in Print, by directi|ons
from your House, as appears by the
printed Copy: we must let you know,
that we are very sensible of the disrespect.
Notwithstanding, it is our intention,
that no failing on your part, shall make
us fail in ours, of giving all due satisfacti|on
to the desires of our People in a Parlia|mentary
way; And therefore we send

you this Answer to your Petition, reser|ving
our self in point of the Decla|ration,
which we think unparliamentary,
and shall take a course to do that which
we shall think fit in prudence and ho|nour.
To the Petition we say, that altho there
are divers things in the Preamble of it,
which we are so far from admiting, that we
profess we cannot at all understand them,
as, Of a wicked and malignant party preva|lent
in the Government; Of some of that
party admitted to our Privy Council, and to
other Employments of trust, and nearest to
Vs and our Children; Of Endeavours to
sow among the People false scandals and im|putations,
to blemish and disgrace the pro|ceedings
of the Parliament: All, or any
of which, did we know of, we should
be as ready to remedy and punish, as
you to complain of. That the prayers
of your Petition are grounded upon
such premisses as We must in no
wise admit; yet notwithstanding we
are pleased to give this Answer to you.
To the first, concerning Religion, con|sisting
of several branches, we say, That
for the preserving the peace and safety
of this Kingdom from the designs of the
Popish party, we have, and will still con|cur

with all the just desires of our people
in a Parliamentary way. That for the
depriving of the Bishops of their Votes
in Parliament, We would have you
consider, that their right is grounded up|on
the fundamental Law of the Kingdom,
and constitution of Parliament; This we
would have you consider; but since you
desire our concurrence herein in a Par|liamentary
way, we will give no further
answer at this time.
As for the abridging of the inordinate
power of the Clergy, we conceive that
the taking away of the High-Commission
Court hath well moderated that; but if
there continue any Usurpations, or Ex|cesses
in their Jurisdictions, we therein
neither have nor will protect them.
Unto that Clause which concerneth
Corruptions (as you stile them) in Reli|gion,
in Church-government, and in Dis|cipline,
and the removing of such unne|cessary
Ceremonies as weak Consciences
might cheque at: That for any illegal
Innovations, which may have crept in,
we shall willingly concur in the removal
of them. That if our Parliament shall
advise us to call a National Synod,
which may duly examine such Ceremo|nies
as give just cause of offence to any,

we shall take it into consideration, and
apply our self to give due satisfaction
therein; But we are very sorry to hear
in such general terms, Corruption in Re|ligion
objected, since we are perswaded
in our conscience that no Church can be
found upon the earth that professeth the
true Religion with more purity of Do|ctrine
than the Church of England doth,
nor where the Government and Discipline
are joyntly more beautified, and free
from Superstition, than as they are here
established by Law; which (by the grace
of God) we will with constancy maintain
(while we live) in their Purity and Glo|ry,
not only against all invasions of Po|pery,
but also from the irreverence of
those many Schismaticks and Separatiss,
wherewith of late this Kingdom and this
City abounds, to the great dishonour and
hazard both of Church and State; for
the suppression of whom we require your
timely aid and active assistance.
To the second prayer of the Petition,
concerning the removal and choice of
Councellors, we know not any of our
Council to whom the Character set forth
in the Petition can belong. That by those
whom we had exposed to trial, we have
already given you sufficient testimony,

that there is no man so near unto us in
place or affection, whom we will not
leave to the Justice of the Law, if you
shall bring a particular charge, and suffi|cient
proofs against him; and of this we
do again assure you: but in the mean
time we wish you to forbear such general
aspersions as may reflect upon all our
Council, since you name none in parti|cular.
That for the choice of our Councellors
and Ministers of State, it were to debar
us that natural liberty all Freemen have;
and it is the undoubted right of the Crown
of England, to call such persons to our
Secret Councils, to publick employment,
and our particular service, as we shall
think fit, so we are, and ever shall be ve|ry
careful to make election of such per|sons
in those places of trust, as shall have
given good testimonies of their abilities
and integrity, and against whom there
can be no just cause of exception, where|on
reasonably to ground a diffidence;
and to choices of this nature, we assure
you that the mediation of the nearest unto
us hath always concurred.
To the third Prayer of your Petition,
concerning Ireland, we understand your
desire of not alienating the forfeited Lands

thereof, to proceed from your much care
and love; And likewise that it may be a
Resolution very fit for us to take; but
whether it be seasonable to declare Reso|lutions
of that nature before the events of
a War be seen, that we much doubt of.
Howsoever, we cannot but thank you
for this care, and your chearful ingage|ment
for the suppression of that Rebel|lion;
upon the speedy effecting thereof,
the glory of God in the Protestant Pro|fession,
the safety of the British there,
our honour, and that of the Nation so
much depends; all the Interests of this
Kingdom being so involved in that busi|ness,
we cannot but quicken your affecti|ons
therein, and shall desire you to frame
your Councils, and to give such expedi|tion
to the work, as the nature thereof,
and the pressures in point of time requires,
and whereof you are put in mind by the
daily insolence and encrease of those Re|bels.
For Conclusion, your promise to ap|ply
your selves to such courses as may
support our Royal Estate with Honour
and Plenty at home, and with Power
and Reputation abroad, is that which we
have ever promised our self, bot from
your Loyalties and Affections, and also

for what we have already done, and
shall daily go adding unto for the com|fort
and happiness of our People.


His Majesties Declaration to all His loving
Subjects. Published with the advice of
His Privy Council.
ALthough we do not believe that our
House of Commons intended, by
their Remonstrance of the State of
the Kingdom, to put us to any Apolo|gy,
either for our past or present Actions;
Notwithstanding, since they have
thought it so very necessary (upon their
Observation of the present Distemper) to
publish the same, for the satisfaction of
all our loving Subjects, We have thought
it very suitable to the duty of our place
(with which God hath trusted us) to do
our part to so good a work; in which we
shall not think it below our Kingly dig|nity
to descend to any particular, which
may compose and settle the affections of
our meanest Subjects; since we are so
conscious to our self of such upright In|tentions
and endeavours, and only of
such (for which we give God thanks) for
the peace and happiness of our Kingdom.

in which the prosperity of our Subjects
must be included, that we wish from our
heart, that even our most secret thoughts
were published to their view and exam|nation.
Though we must confess we
cannot but be very sorry in this conjun|cture
of time (when the unhappiness of
this Kingdom is so generally understood
abroad) there should be such a necessity
of publishing so many particulars, from
which, we pray, no inconveniences may
ensue that were not intended.
We shall in few words pass over that
part of the Narrative, wherein the Mis|fortunes
of this Kingdom from our first
entring to the Crown, to the beginning
of this Parliament, are remembred in so
sensible expressions; And that other
which acknowledgeth the many good
Laws passed by our Grace and Favour
this Parliament for the Security of our
people; Of which we shall only say
thus much, That as we have not refused
to pass any Bill presented to us by our
Parliament, for redress of those Grievan|ces
mentioned in the Remonstrance, so
we have not had a greater Motive for
the passing those Laws than our own Re|solution
(grounded upon our Observation,
and understanding the State of our King|dom)

to have freed our Subjects for the
future, from those Pressures which were
grievous to them, if those Laws had not
been propounded; which therefore we
shall as inviolably maintain, as we look
to have our own Rights preserved; not
doubting but all our loving Subjects will
look on those Remedies, with that full
gratitude and affection, that even the
memory of what they have formerly un|dergone
by the Accidents and Necessities
of those times, will not be unpleasant to
them: And possibly in a pious sence of
God's blessing upon this Nation (how
little share soever we shall have of the ac|knowledgment)
they will confess they
have enjoyed a great measure of happi|ness
(even the last sixteen Years) both in
peace and plenty, not only comparatively
in respect of their Neighbours, but even
of those times which were justly account|ed
Fortunate.
The Fears and Jealousies which may
make some impression in the minds of
our People, we will suppose may be of
two sorts; either for Religion, or Liber|ty,
and their Civil Interests. The fears
for Religion may haply be, not only as
ours here established may be invaded by
the Romish party, but as it is accompani|ed

with some Ceremonies, at which some
tender Consciences really are, or pretend
to be scandalized; for of any other which
have been used without any legal War|rant
or Injunction, and already are, or
speedily may be abolished, we shall not
speak.
Concerning Religion, as there may be
any suspicion of favour or inclination to
the Papists, we are willing to declare to
all the World, That as we have been
from our Childhood brought up in, and
practised the Religion now established in
this Kingdom, so it is well known, we
have (not contented simply with the
Principles of our Education) gien a
good proportion of our time and pains,
to the examination of the grounds of this
Religion, as it is different from that of
Rome, and are from our Soul so fully sa|tisfied
and assured, that it is the most pure,
and agreeable to the Sacred Word of God,
of any Religion now practised in the
Christian World; That as we believe
we can maintain the same by unanswera|ble
Reasons, so we hope we should rea|dily
seal to it by the effusion of our Blood,
if it pleased God to call us to that sacrifice.
And therefore nothing can be so accepta|ble
unto us, as any proposition which may

contribute to the advancement of it here,
or the propagation of it abroad; being the
only means to draw down a blessing from
God upon our selves, and this Nation.
And we have been extreamly unfortunate,
if this profession of ours be wanting to
our Peopl our constant practice in our
own , having always been (with|out
otentati) as much to the evidence
of our care and duty herein, as we could
possibly tell how to express.
For differences amongst our selves, for
matters indifferent in their own nature,
concerning Religion, we shall, in tender|ness
to any number of our loving Sub|jects,
very willingly comply with the ad|vice
of our Parliament, that some Law
may be made for the exemption of ten|der
Consciences from punishment, or
prosecution for such Ceremonies, and in
such cases which by the judgment of
most men, are held to be matters indiffe|rent,
and of some to be absolutely unlaw|ful.
Provided that this ease be attempted,
and pursued with that modesty, temper
and submission, that in the mean time
the peace and quiet of the Kingdom be
not disturbed, the decency, and comeli|ness
of God's service discountenanced,
nor the pious, sober, and devout actions

of those Reverend Persons, who were
the first labourers in the blessed Reforma|tion,
or of that time, be scandal'd and
defamed. For we cannot without grief
of heart, and without some tax upon our
Self, and our Ministers for the not execu|tion
of our Laws, look upon the bold
License of some men, in Printing of
Pamphlets, in Preaching and Printing of
Sermons, so full of bitterness and malice
against the present Government, against
the Laws established; so full of Sedition
against our Self, and the peace of the
Kingdom, that we are many times ama|zed
to consider by what Eyes these things
are seen, and by what Ears they are
heard; And therefore we have good
cause to command, as we have done,
and hereby do, all our Judges and Mini|sters
of Justice, Our Attorney and Soli|citor
General, and the rest of our learned
Council, to proceed with all speed
against such, and their Abettors, who
either by writing or words, have so bold|ly
and maliciously violated the Laws, di|sturbed
the peace of the Common|wealth;
and as much as in them lies,
shaken the very foundation upon which
the Peace and Happiness is founded and
constituted. And we doubt not but all

our loving Subjects, will be very sensible
that this busy, virulent demeanour is a
fit Prologue to nothing but confusion;
and if not very seasonably punished and
prevented, will not only be a blemish to
that wholsome accommodation we in|tend,
but an unspeakable scandal and im|putation,
even upon the profession and
Religion of this our Kingdom of Eng|land.
Concerning the Civil Liberties and In|terests
of our Subjects, we shall need to
say the less, having erected so many
lasting Monuments of our Princely and
Fatherly care of our People, in those
many excellent Laws passed by us this
Parliament, which in truth (with very
much content to our Self) we conceive
to be so large and ample, that very many
sober Men have very little left to wish for.
We understood well the Right, and
pretences of Right, we debarred from in
the consenting to the Bills of the Trienni|al
Parliament, for the continuance of
this present Parliament, and in the pre|amble
to the Bill of Tunnage and Pound|age;
the matter of which having begot
so many disturbances in late Parliaments,
we are willing to remove, that no inte|rest
of ours might hereafter break that

correspondence; abundantly contenting
our Self with an Assurance (which we
still have) that we should be repaired and
supplied by a just proportion of confi|dence,
bounty and obedience of our peo|ple.
In the Bills for the taking away the
High-commission and Star-chamber
Courts, we believed we had given that
real satisfaction, that all jealousies and ap|prehensions
of Arbitrary pressures under
the Civil or Ecclesiastical state, would
easily have been abandoned, especially
when they saw all possible doubts secured
by the Visitation of a Triennial Parliament.
These, and others of no mean conside|ration,
we had rather should be valued
in the hearts and affections of our people,
than in any mention of our own; not
doubting, but as we have taken all these
occasions to render their condition most
comfortable and happy, so they will al|ways
in a grateful and dutiful relation,
be ready with equal tenderness and ala|crity,
to advance our Rights, and pre|serve
our Honour, upon which their
own security and subsistance so much de|pends.
And we will be so careful, that
no particular shall be presented unto us
for the compleating and establishing that
security, to which we will not with the

same readiness contribute our best assi|stance.
If these resolutions be the effects of our
present Councils, (and we take God
to-witness that they are such, and that
all our loving Subjects may confidently
expect the benefit of them from us) cer|tainly
no ill design upon the Publick can
accompany such Resolutions; neither
will there be greater cause of suspicion
of any Persons preferred by us to degrees
of Honour, and Places of trust and em|ployment
since this Parliament. And we
must confess, that among our misfor|tunes,
we reckon it not the least, that
having not retained in our Service, nor
protected any one person, against whom
our Parliament hath excepted during the
whole sitting of it, and having in all that
time scarce vouchsafed to any man an in|stance
of our Grace and Favour, but to such
who were under such eminent characters
of Estimation amongst our People, there
should so soon be any mis-understanding
or jealousy of their fidelity and upright|ness;
especially in a time when we take
all occasions to delare, That we conceive
our Self only capable of being served by
honest Men, and in honest ways How|ever,
if in truth we have been mistaken in

such our election, the particular shall be
no sooner discovered to us, either by our
own observation, or other certain infor|mation,
than we will leave them to pub|lick
Justice under the marks of our dis|pleasure.
If notwithstanding this, any malig|nant
party shall take heart, and be wil|ling
to sacrifice the Peace and Happiness
of their Countrey to their own sinister
ends and ambitions, under what pretence
of Religion and Conscience soever. If
they shall endeavour to lessen our Repu|tation
and Interest, and to weaken our
lawfull Power and Authority with our
good Subjects; if they shall go about by
discountenancing the present Laws to
loosen the Bonds of Government, that
all disorder and confusion may break in
upon us, we doubt not but God in his
good time will discover them unto us,
and the Wisdom and Courage of our
High-Court of Parliament join with us in
their suppression and punishment.
Having now said all that we can to ex|press
the clearness and uprightness of our
Intentions to our People, and done all we
can to manifest those Intentions, we can|not
but confidently believe all our good
Subjects will acknowledge our part to be

fully performed, both in deeds past, and
present Resolutions, to do whatsoever
with Justice may be required of us; and
that their quiet and prosperity depends
now wholly upon themselves and is in
their own power, by yielding all obedi|ence
and due-reverence to the Law,
which is the inheritance of every Subject,
and the only security he can have for his
Life, Liberty or Estate; and the which be|ing
neglected or dis-esteemed (under
what specious shews soever) a very great
measure of infelicity, if not an irreparable
confusion must without doubt fall upon
them. And we doubt not it will be the
most acceptable Declaration a King can
make to his Subjects, That for our part
we are resolved not only duly to observe
the Laws our Self, but to maintain
them against what opposition soever,
though with the hazard of our Being.
And our hope is, that not only the
Loyalty and good Affections of all our
loving Subjects, will concur with us in
the constant preserving a good under|standing
between us and our people, but
at this time their own and our interest,
and compassion of the lamentable condi|tion
of our poor Protestant Subjects in
Ireland, will invite them to a fair intelli|gence

and unity amongst themselves,
that so we may with one heart intend the
relieving and recovering that unhappy
Kingdom, where those barbarous Re|bels
practice such inhumane and unheard-of
Outrages upon our miserable people,
that no Christan Ear can hear without
horrour, nor story parallel. And as we
look upon this as the greatest affliction
it hath pleased God to lay upon us, so
our unhappiness is encreased, in that by
the distempers at home, so early reme|dies
have not been applied to those grow|ing
evils, as the expectation and necessity
there requires; though for our part, as
we did upon the first notice acquaint our
Parliament of Scotland, (where we then
were) with that Rebellion, requiring
their aid and assistance, and gave like
speedy intimation and recommendation to
our Parliament here; so since our return
hither, we have been forward to all
things which have been proposed to us to|wards
that work, and have lately our
Self offered (by a Message to our House
of Peers, and communicated to our House
of Commons) to take upon us the care to
raise speedily 10000 English Voluntiers
for that service, if the House of Commons
shall declare that they will pay them;

which particulars we are (in a manner)
necessitated to publish, since we are in|formed
that the malice of some persons
hath whispered it abroad, That the no
speedier advancing of this business hath
proceeded from some want of alacrity in
us to this great work; whereas we ac|knowledge
it a high crime against Al|mighty
God, and inexcusable to our
good Subjects of our three Kingdoms, if
we did not to the utmost employ all
our powers and faculties to the speediest
and most effectual assistance and protecti|on
of that distressed people.
And we shall now conjure all our
good Subjects (of what degree soever) by
all the Bonds of Love, Duty, or Obedi|ence,
that are precious to good men, to
join with us for the Recovery of the
peace of that Kingdom, and the preserva|tion
of the peace of this; to remove all
their Doubts and Fears, which may inter|rupt
their affection to us, and all their
jealousies and apprehensions which may
lessen their charity to each other; and
then (if the sins of this Nation have not
prepared an inevitable Judgment for us
all) God will yet make us a great and
glorious King, over a free and happy peo|ple.




NUMB. X.
A Fatal Letter of the Marquis of Mon|tross
to King Charles I.; deliver'd du|ring
the Treaty of Vxbridge.
An ORIGINAL.
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
THE last Dispatch I sent your Ma|jesty,
was by my worthy Friend,
and your Majesty's brave Servant, Sir Wil|liam
Rollock, from Kintore near Aber|deen,
dated the 14th of September last;
wherein I acquainted your Majesty with the
good Success of your Arms in this Kingdom,
and of the Battels the Iustice of your
Cause has won over your obdur'd Rebel
Subjects. Since Sir William Rollock went,
I have travers'd all the North of Scotland,
up to Argyle's Countrey; who durst not
stay my coming, or I should have given your
Majesty a good account of him e'r now.
But at last I have met with him yesterday to
his Cost: Of which your gracious Majesty
be pleas'd to receive the following Particu|lars:

After I had laid waste the whole Coun|trey
of Argyle, and brought off Provisi|ons
for my Army of what could be found, I
receiv'd information, That Argyle was got
together with a considerable Army, made up
chiefly of his own Clan [Family], and
Vassals, and Tenants, with others of the
Rebels that join'd him; and that he was at
Innerlochy, where he expected the Earl of
Seaforth, and the Sept [the Family] of
the Fraziers, to come up to him with all the
Forces they could get together. Vpon this
Intelligence I departed out of Argyleshire,
and march'd through Lorn, Glencow, and
Aber, till I came to Lochness; my design
being to fall upon Argyle, before Seaforth
and the Fraziers could join him. My
March was through inaccessible Mountains,
where I could have no Guides but Cowherds,
and they scarce acquainted with a place but
Six Miles from their own habitations. If
I had been attack'd but with a hundred men
in some of these Passes, I must have cer|tainly
return'd back, for it would have been
impossible to force my way, most of the Passes
being so streight, that Three Men could not
march a-breast. I was willing to let the
World see that Argyle was not the Man his
Highland Men believ'd him to be; and that
it was possible to beat him in his own High|lands.

The difficultest March of all was
over the Lochaber Mountains; which we
at last surmounted, and came upon the back
of the Enemy when they least expected us,
having cut off some Scouts we met about
four Miles from Innerlochy. Our Van
came within view of them about five a Clock
in the Afternoon, and we made a Halt till
our Rear was got up, which could not be
done till Eight at Night. The Rebels took
the Alarm, and stood to their Arms as well
as we, all Night, which was Moon-light,
and very clear. There were some few Skir|mishes
between the Rebels and Vs all the
Night, and with no loss on our side, but
one Man. By break of day I order'd my
Men to be ready to fall on upon the first
Signal; and I understand since by the Pri|soners,
the Rebels did the same. A little
after the Sun was up, both Armies met, and
the Rebels fought for some time with great
Bravery; the Prime of the Campbells
giving the first Onset, as Men that deserv'd
to fight in a better Cause. Our Men having
a Nobler Cause, did wonders, and came im|mediately
to push of Pike, and dint of
Sword, after their first firing. The Rebels
could not stand it, but after some Resistance
at first, began to run; whom we pursued for
Nine Miles together, making a great

slaughter; which I would have hindred, if
possible, that I might save your Majesty's
mis-led Subjects; for well I know your Ma|jesty
does not delight in their Blood, but in
their returning to their Duty. There were
at least Fifteen hundred kill'd in the Battel,
and the Pursuit; among whom there are a
great many of the most considerable Gentle|men
of the Name of Campbell, and some
of them nearly related to the Earl. I have
sav'd and taken Prisoners several of them,
that have acknowledg'd to me their fault,
and lay all the blame on their Chief. Some
Gentlemen of the Low-lands, that had be|hav'd
themselves bravely in the Battel,
when they saw all lost, fled into the Old Ca|stle,
and upon their Surrender I have treated
them honourably, and taken their Parole
never to bear Arms against your Majesty.
[Here are Six or Seven Lines, that for the
Honour of some Families, are better
left out than mention'd.] We have of
your Majesty's Army about Two hundred
wounded, but I hope few of them dange|rously.
I can hear but of four kill'd, and
one whom I cannot name to your Majesty,
but with grief of Mind, Sir Thomas
Ogilvy, a Son of the Earl of Arly's, of
whom I writ to your Majesty in my last. He
is not yet dead, but they say he cannot possibly

live; and we give him over for dead. Your
Majesty had never a truer Servant, nor
there never was a braver, honester Gentle|man.
For the rest of the Particulars of
this Action, I refer my self to the Bearer,
Mr. Hay, whom your Majesty knows alrea|dy,
and therefore I need not recommend
him.
Now, Sacred Sir, let me humbly intreat
your Majesty's Pardon, if I presume to
write you my poor Thoughts and Opinion
about what I heard by a Letter I receivd
from my Friends in the South last Week,
as if your Majesty was entring into a Treaty
with your Rebel Parliament in England.
The Success of your Arms in Scotland does
not more rejoice my heart, as that News
from England is like to break it. And
whatever come of me, I will speak my mind
freely to your Majesty; for it's not mine,
but your Majesty's Interest I seek. When I
had the Honour of waiting upon your Ma|jesty
last, I told you at full length what I
fully understood of the Designs of your Re|bel
Subjects in both Kingdoms, which I had
occasion to know, as much as any one what|soever,
being at that time, as they thought,
entirely in their Interest. Your Majesty
may remember how much you said you were
convinc'd I was in the right in my opinion

of them. I am sure there is nothing fallen
out since, to make your Majesty change your
Iudgment in all those things I laid before
your Majesty at that time. The more your
Majesty grants, the more will be ask'd; and
I have too much reason to know that they
will not rest satisfied with less than making
your Majesty a King of Straw. I hope the
News I have receiv'd about a Treaty, may
be a Mistake; and the rather, that the
Letter wherewith the Queen was pleas'd to
honour me, dated the 30th of December,
mentions no such thing. Yet I know not
what to make of the Intelligence I receiv'd,
since it comes from Sir Robert Spotswood,
who writes it with a great Regret; and it's
no wonder, considering no man living is a
more true Subject to your Majesty, than he.
Forgive me, Sacred Sovereign, to tell your
Majesty, That in my poor Opinion it is un|worthy
of a King, to treat with Rebel Sub|jects
while they have the Sword in their
hands. And though God forbid I should
stint your Majesty's Mercy, yet I must de|clare
the Horror I am in, when I think of a
Treaty, while your Majesty and they are in
the Field with Two Armies; unless they
disband, and submit themselves entirely to
your Majesty's Goodness and Pardon. As
to the State of Affairs in this Kingdom,

the Bearer will fully inform your Majesty in
every particular. And give me leave with
all humility to assure your Majesty, That
through God's Blessing I am in the fairest
hopes of reducing this Kingdom to your
Majesty's Obedience. And if the Measures
I have concerted with your other Loyal Sub|jects,
fail me not, which they hardly can, I
doubt not but before the End of this Sum|mer
I shall be able to come to your Majesty's
Assistance with a brave Army; which back'd
with the Iustice of your Majesty's Cause,
will make the Rebels in England as well as
in Scotland, feel the just Rewards of Re|bellion.
Only give me leave, after I have
reduc'd this Countrey to your Majesty's Obe|dience,
and conquer'd from Dan to Beer|sheba,
to say to your Majesty then, as Da|vid's
General did to his Master, Come
thou thy self, lest this Countrey be calld
by my Name: For in all my Actions I aim
only at your Majesty's Honour and Interest,
as becomes one that is to his last Breath,
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
Innerlochy in Lo|chaber,
Feb. 3.
1645.
Your Majesty's most Humble,
most Faithful, and most Obe|dient
Subject and Servant,
MONTROSS.



NUMB. XI.

The Address of General Monk and his Of|ficers
from Scotland, to the Parliament
of England, against Monarchy, upon
Richard Cromwell's Abdication.
Right Honourable,
THAT a Nation may be born in a
day,Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 679, 680. is a truth which this days expe|rience
witnesseth unto us against all the
dictates of humane Reason; and that a
glorious Cause whose Interest was laid
low (even in the dust) should be in one
day restored to its life and lustre, when
almost all the Asserters of it had so mani|festly
declined it by a defection of many
years, cannot be imputed to less than the
greatest and most powerful manifestation
of the Arm of God, that ever this, or
former Generations saw, or heard of.
In the sense of this (the greatest of
our Temporal Mercies) we now come
to address to your Honours, as those
whose presence we have so long wanted,
that had you staid but a little longer, it
might have been left to be enquired what

England was; we mean, what was be|come
of that People, by whom God for
so many years filled the World with so
much admiration and terror. But
though this great Work be (as most just|ly
it ought to be) wonderful in our eyes,
yet when we consider its Author, who
calls things that are not, as if they were,
bringeth down to the Pit, and raiseth up
again; we see that nothing is difficult
to Faith, and the Promises of God are sure
and stable, even then, when in the eye
of man no less than impossible.
We cannot but acknowledge to our
exceeding great sorrow and shame, that
our selves (though we hope most of us,
through weakness and frailty, not out of
design) have very much contributed
to those Provocations, which have cau|sed
God to depart from our Israel; and
we could heartily wish that even amongst
those that help to make up your own
number, there had not been an helping
hand to this sad and deplorable work:
But we see when God's hour is come, and
the time of his people's deliverance (even
the set time is at hand) he cometh skip|ping
over all the Mountains of Sin and
Unworthiness that we daily cast in the
way.

We are not willing to detain your Ho|nours
too long upon this Subject; and
therefore beseeching the God of all our
Mercies, to heal the backslidings of his
people, and not to charge unto their ac|count,
in this his day of their deliverance,
their miscarriages, whilst they were
wandering in dark and slippery places,
after the imaginations of their own
hearts: we with all humility and affecti|on
in the first place congratulate you in
this your happy Restoration to the Go|vernment
of these Nations, which God
was pleased once so to own in your hands,
as to make you both the praise and won|der
of the Earth, the glory and rejoicing
of his People, and the terror of your
Adversaries; and we acknowledge it a
singular condescension in you, in this day
of so great difficulties, to take upon you
so heavy a burthen. And seeing his late
Highness hath been pleased to manifest so
much self-denial and love to his Country,Richard Cromwell.
in appearing for the Interest thereof
against his own; we humbly intreat that
some speedy care may be taken for him
and his family, (together with her High|ness
Dowager) that there may be such an
honourable Provision settled upon them,
and such other Dignities as are suitable to

the former great Services of that Family
to these Nations.
And in the next place we cannot but
humbly beseech you, now you have an
opportunity, than which a fitter your
hearts did never pray for, to finish the
work of Reformation that hath been so
long upon the wheel, and met with so
great Obstructions; that you would not
heal the wound of the daughter of God's
people slightly, but make so sure and last|ing
provision for both their Christian and
Civil Rights, as that both this and future
Generations may have cause to rise up,
and call you Blessed, and the blackest of
Designs may never be able to cast dirt in
your faces any more. And as helpful to
these two great Concernments, Religion
and Liberty, we humbly propose unto
your mature consideration these two De|sires:
First, that you would be pleased to
countenance Godliness, and all the sincere
professors thereof, encourage an able and
laborious Ministry, and suffer no other
Yoak to be imposed upon the Consciences
of God's people, than what may be agree|able
to the Word of God; and that you
would be a terror to all impious, pro|phane,
and licentious People whatsoe|ver.

Secondly that you would so vindicate
and assert the Native Rights and Liberties
of these Nations, in and by the Govern|ment
of a Free-State, that there may not
be the voice of an oppressed one in our
Land, but that all may enjoy the blessed
fruits of your righteous and peaceable Go|vernment.
And for the prevention of all
possibility for ambitious Spirits ever to
work their ends against you; we humbly
desire you to be very careful, as well what
persons you entrust with the manage|ment
of the Armies and Navies of this
Commonwealth, as of the measure of
that Power and Authority you depart
with to them, or substitute in them.
Touching the qualifications of the Per|sons,
we desire they may be truly godly
and conscientious. Touching the mea|sure
of their Authority, that it may be
adequate to the nature and being of a
Commonwealth. And whilst you are thus
pleading, and asserting the Interest of
God and his People, you may rest assured
with greatest confidence, that we shall
appear in your defence, and the vindica|tion
of your Authority, against the op|position
of all Arbitrary Powers whatso|ever.
And to that blessed and All-powerful

God, who is able to spirit you for this
great work; you are, and shall daily be
recommended in the prayers of,
Your most loyal and most
Obedient Servants,

George Monk.
Thomas Read.
Ralph Cobbet.
Tim. Wilks.
Robert Read.
Iohn Cloberry.
Abra. Holmes.
Henr. Dorney.
Dan. Davison.
Rich. Heath.
Mi. Richardson.
I. Hubbelthorn.
Tho. Iohnson.
P. Crisp.
He. Brightman.
Phil. Watson.
Tho. Dean.
Ierem. Smith.
Will. Davis.
Iames Wright.
Ios. Wallinton.
Will. Helling.
Ethelb. Morgan.
Rob. Winter.
Iohn Paddon.
Anthony Nowers.




The Form of the Declaration and En|gagement
taken by General Monk and
his Officers, against Monarchy, and
the Family of the Stuarts, at his
coming up from Scotland.
I A. B.Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 684. do hereby declare, That I
do renounce the pretended Title
of Charles Stuart, and the whole Line
of the late King James, and of every
other person as a single person, pre|tending
to the Government of these
Nations of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging:
And that I will by the grace and
assistance of Almighty God, be true,
faithful and constant to this Com|monwealth,
against any King.
single person, and House of Peers,
and every of them; and hereunto I
subscribe my Name.




NUMB. XII.
King James the IId's promising Speech to
the Parliament, May 30. 1685.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Thank you very heartily for the Bill
you have presented me this Day; and
I assure you, the Readiness and Chear|fulness
that hath attended the Dispatch
of it, is as acceptable to me as the Bill it
self.
After so happy a beginning, you may
believe I would not call upon you unne|cessarily
for an extraordinary Supply:
But when I tell you the Stores of the
Navy are extreamly exhausted; That
the Anticipations upon several Branches
of the Revenue are great and burthen|some;
and the Debts of the King my
Brother, to his Servants and Family,
are such as deserve Compassion; That
the Rebellion in Scotland, without put|ting
more Weight upon it than it really
deserves, must oblige me to a considera|ble
Expence extraordinary. I am sure
such Considerations will move you to
give me an Aid to provide for those

things, wherein the Security, the Ease,
and the Happiness of my Government
are so much concern'd. But above all, I
must recommend to you the Care of the
Navy, the Strength and Glory of this
Nation; That you will put it into such
a Condition, as will make us considerable
and respected abroad. I cannot express
my Concerns upon this occasion more
suitable to my own Thoughts of it, than
by assuring you I have a true English
Heart, as jealous of the Honour of the
Nation as you can be: And I please my
self with the hopes, that by God's Bles|sing
and your Assistance, I may carry
its Reputation yet higher in the World,
than ever it has been in the time of any
of my Ancestors.
And as I will not call upon you for
Supplies, but when they are of publick
Use and Advantage, so I promise you,
That what you give me upon such Oc|casions,
shall be managed with good
Husbandry: And I will take care it shall
be employed to the Uses for which I ask
them.



NUMB. XIII.
Two Remarkable Letters of a Foreign
Minister to their Ambassador in Eng|land,
relating to King Iames's precede|ing
Speech. Translated from the Ori|ginals.

Paris, June 29. 1685.
Monsieur,
THE Copy of his B. M.'s Speech to
the Parliament, inclos'd in yours of
the 9th Instant, S. V. affords sufficient
matter of thoughts here. It is of a strain
that looks quite contrary to what we expect|ed,
or what you your self in yours of the
11th of the last Month made us believe it
would be. The King can scarce believe
there is any Change in the Affections of that
Prince towards him: And yet knows not
what to make of that new Manner of ex|pressing
himself on so publick an Occasion.
If he and his Parliament come to a cordial
Trust in one another, it may probably change
all the Measures we have been so long concert|ing,
for the Glory of our Monarch, and the
Establishment of the Catholick Religion. For
my own part, I hope the Accession of a Crown

has not lessen'd the Zeal that on all occasions
appear'd in him, when but Duke of York.
Nor will the King's inviolable attachment
to the Interest of the Duke in the most diffi|cult
Emergents, permit him now, when
King, to forget his Obligations and Engage|ments
to him. There is better things to be
hop'd for, from one that has run so great
hazards upon the account of his Religion,
and who has so often express'd his Resent|ments
of the good turns the King did him
in his Brother's Life-time.
Yet it's fit you take all possible care to
search into the Motives and Advisers of
this Speech: And I am commanded to tell
you, That this is one of the greatest pieces
of Service you can do his Majesty in this
Iuncture. There are not wanting some
here that would attribute it to a Change in
the King of England's Inclinations; and
they pretend to have Hints of it from some
about his Person: What truth is in this
Suggestion, you are to spare nothing to find
out. If the Parliament come once to settle a
Revenue upon him, such as may put him out
of our Reverence, your Business there will
be the more difficult to manage; for doubt|less
he must have Ambition, and likewise a
desire to please a Nation, who had but an ill
opinion of him before: And nothing can be

more taking with them, than a Breach with
us. It will be strange indeed, if in the
Death of King Charles, France has chang'd
for the worse. But whatever others fear, I
must once more confess for my self, That I
am of the same Opinion I was always of,
even that we must necessarily gain by the
Change. Your Bills are sent this Post. No|thing
can be more earnestly recommended to
you in his Majesty's Name, than a narrow
Enquiry into this Affair, by
Monsieur,
Your most humble Servant.

The other runs thus:

Iuly 8. 1694.
Monsieur,
IT's unlucky that hitherto you have not
been able to find out what we are to ex|pect
from this Change in England. In
yours of the 13th of the last Month, S. V.
you seem to call in question that King's In|clinations
to the Common Cause; and you
surprize us with your Fears that he may
come to forget his Obligations to the King.

With the same Post we receiv'd better News
from a sure Hand; yet you are to watch as
narrowly as if your Fears were well grounded.
There is a great matter in dependance, with
relation to the Edict of Nants, which must
not be declar'd, till that King's Inclinations
be fully known. And yet there is nothing
in the world the King desires more eagerly
to see done than it, if once it might be done
safely. Receive inclos'd an Answer to eve|ry
one of your Queries, which make use of
as occasion offers. Only the last is referr'd
to your own discretion, it depending entire|ly
upon your own knowledge of the Person:
If he can be brought in, it will be a notable
piece of Service. Much may be known, by
enquiring exactly how the Prince of Orange
stands in the King's Affections; and how
the Ministers are affected towards him.
For the Hollanders in general, he seem'd
on all occasions neither to love nor fear them;
nothing has fallen out of late to alter his
mind. On Friday Monsieur Less. comes
off, who is to show you his Dispatches, and
you are to act in concert with him. I am,




NUMB. XIV.
Some Passages out of the Duke of Mon|mouth's
Pocket-Book, that was seiz'd
about him in the West.
An ORIGINAL.
L. Came to me at Eleven at Night
from 29.Octob. 13. Told me 29 could never
be brought to believe I knew any thing of
that part of the Plot that concern'd Rye-House;
but as things went, he must behave
himself as if he did believe it, for some
reasons that might be for my Advantage.
L. desir'd me to write to 29, which I re|fus'd;
but afterwards told me 29 expected
it: And I promis'd to write to morrow, if
he would call for the Letter at S. L. show'd
a great concern for me, and I believe him
sincere; though 3 is of another mind.
L. came as he promis'd,14. and receiv'd the
Letter from 3 seal'd, refusing to read it
himself, though I had left it open with S.
for that purpose.
L. came to me at S. with a Line or two
from 29 very kind,20. assuring me he believ'd
every word in my Letter to be true; and ad|visd
me to keep hid, till he had an opportu|nity
to express his belief of it some other

way. L. told me that he was to go out of
Town next day; and that 29 would send 80
to me in a day or two, whom he assured me
I might trust.
L. came for me to,25. where 29 was
with 80. He receiv'd me pretty well; and
said 30 and 50 were the Causes of my Mis|fortunes,
and would ruin me. After some
hot words against them, and against S. went
away in a good humour.
I went to E,26. and was in danger
of being discover'd by some of Oglethorp's
men, that met me accidentally at the back|door
of the Garden.
A Letter from 29 to be to morrow at seven
at night at S. and no body to know it but 80.Nov. 2.
He came not,3. there being an extraordi|nary
Council. But 80 brought me a Copy
of 50's intercepted Letter, which made ra|ther
for me than against me. Bid me come
to morrow at the same hour, and to say no|thing
of the Letter, except 29 spoke of it first.
I came and found 29 and L. there.4. He
was very kind, and gave me directions how
to manage my business, and what words I
should say to 39. He appointed 80 to come
to me every Night, till my Business was ripe,
and promised to send with him directions
from time to time.
L. came from 29,9. and told me my Busi|ness

should be done to my mind next Week;
and that Q. was my Friend, and had spoke
to 39 and D. in my behalf; which he said
29 took very kindly, and had express'd so
to her. At parting he told me there should
be nothing requir'd of me but what was both
safe and honourable. But said there must
be something done to blind 39.
L. came to me with the Copy of a Letter
I was to sign,15. to please 39. I desir'd to
know in whose hands it was to be deposited;
for I would have it in no hands but 29. He
told me it should be so; but if 39 ask'd a
Copy, it could not well be refus'd. I referr'd
my self entirely to 29's pleasure.
L. came to me from 29,24. and order'd me
to render my self to morrow. Caution'd
me to play my part, to avoid Questions as
much as possible, and to seem absolutely con|verted
to 39's Interest. Bad me bear with
some words that might seem harsh.
I render'd my self.25. At Night 29 could
not dissemble his Satisfaction; press'd my
hand; which I remember not he did before,
except when I return'd from the French
Service. 29 acted his part well, and I too.
39 D. seem'd not ill pleas'd.
29 took me aside,26. and falling upon the
business of L. R. said he inclin'd to have
sav'd him, but was forc'd to it, otherwise he

must have broke with 39. Bid me think no
more on't. Coming home, L. told me he
fear'd 39 began to smell out 29's Carriage.
Thatsaid to 39 that morning, that
all that was done was but sham.
Several told me of the Storm that was
brewing.27. Rumsey was with 39, and was
seen to come out crying, That he must accuse
a man he lov'd.
A Letter from 29,Dec. 19 bidding me stay till I
heard further from him.
I receiv'd a Letter from L. mark'd by 29
in the Margin,Jan. 5. to trust entirely in 10; and
that in February I should certainly have
leave to return. That Matters were con|certing
towards it; and that 39 had no sus|picion,
notwithstanding of my Reception here.
A Letter from L. that my business was
almost as well as done;Feb. 3. but must be so sudden
as not to leave room for 39's Party to coun|terplot.
That it's probable he would chuse
Scotland rather than Flanders or this
Countrey; which was all one to 29.
The sad News of his Death by L. O cruel
Fate!16.
Note, That by 29 and 39, King Charles and the
Duke of York seem to be meant. But I know not
what to make of the other Numbers and Letters;
and must leave the Reader to his own Conjectures.



NUMB. XV.
A Letter of the late Duke of Monmouth's,
writ in his Retirement in Holland, a
little before his Attempt in the West.
An ORIGINAL.
I Receiv'd both yours together this morn|ing,
and cannot delay you my Answer
longer than this Post; though I am afraid
it will not please you so much as I heartily
wish it may. I have weigh'd all your Rea|sons,
and every thing that you and my other
Friends have writ me upon that Subject;
and have done it with the greatest Inclina|tions
to follow your Advice, and without
prejudice. You may well believe I have had
time enough to reflect sufficiently upon our
present state, especially since I came hither.
But whatever way I turn my thoughts, I find
insuperable difficulties. Pray do not think
it an effect of Melancholy, for that was ne|ver
my greatest fault, when I tell you, That
in these Three Weeks Retirement in this
Place, I have not only look'd back but for|ward;
and the more I consider our present
Circumstances, I think them still the more
desperate, unless some unforeseen Accident
fall out, which I cannot divine nor hope for.
[Here follows sixteen lines all in Cypher.]

Iudge then what we are to expect, in case we
should venture upon any such Attempt at
this time. It's to me a vain Argument,
that our Enemies are scarce yet well setled,
when you consider, That Fear in some, and
Ambition in others, have brought them to
comply; and that the Parliament being
made up for the most part of Members that
formerly run our Enemy down; they will be
ready to make their Peace as soon as they
can, rather than hazard themselves upon
an uncertain Bottom. I give you but hints
of what, if I had time, I would write you at
more length: But that I may not seem ob|stinate
in my own Iudgment, or neglect the
Advice of my Friends, I will meet you at the
Time and Place appointed. But for God's
sake, think in the mean time of the Impro|babilities
that lye naturally in our way; and
let us not by struggling with our Chains make
them streighter and heavier. For my part
Ill run the hazard of being thought any
thing, rather than a Rash, Inconsiderate
Man. And to tell you my thoughts without
disguise, I am now so much in love with a
Retir'd Life, that I'm never like to be fond
of making a Bustle in the World again.
I have much more to say, but the Post can|not
stay; and I refer the rest till meeting;
being entirely
Yours.



NUMB. XVI.
King James the IId's Remarkable Speech
to the Parliament, after the Duke of
Monmouth's Defeat.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
AFter the Storm that seem'd to be
coming upon us when we parted
last, I am glad to meet you all again in
so great Peace and Quietness; God Al|mighty
be praised, by whose Blessing
that Rebellion was supprest. But when
I reflect what an Inconsiderable Number
of Men began it, and how long they
carried it on without any opposition, I
hope every body will be convinc'd, That
the Militia, which hath hitherto been
so much depended on, is not sufficient
for such occasions; and that there is no|thing
but a good Force of well-disciplin'd
Troops, in constant Pay, that can defend
us from such as either at home or abroad
are dispos'd to disturb us. And in truth,
my Concern for the Peace and Quiet of
my Subjects, as well as for the Safety of
the Government, made me think it ne|cessary
to increase the Number to the Pro|portion

I have done. This I ow'd as well
to the Honour as to the Security of the
Nation; whose Reputation was so infi|nitely
expos'd to all our Neighbours, by
having lain open to this late wretched
Attempt, that it is not to be repaired
without keeping such a Body of Men on
foot, that none may ever have the
thought again, of finding us so miserably
unprovided. It is for the Support of this
great Charge, which is now more than
double to what it was, that I ask your
Assistance in giving me a Supply answer|able
to the Expence it brings along with
it. And I cannot doubt but what I have
begun, so much for the Honour and De|fence
of the Government, will be con|tinued
by you with all the Chearfulness
and Readiness that is requisite for a
Work of so great Importance.
Let no man take exception that there
are some Officers in the Army, not quali|fied,
according to the late Tests, for their
Employments: The Gentlemen, I must
tell you, are most of them well known
to me; and having formerly serv'd with
me in several Occasions, and always ap|prov'd
the Loyalty of their Principles
by their Practice, I think them fit now
to be employ'd under me: And will deal

plainly with you, That after having had
the benefit of their Services in such time
of need and danger, I will neither ex|pose
them to Disgrace, nor my self to the
want of them, if there should be another
Rebellion to make them necessary to me.
I am afraid some men may be so wic|ked
to hope and expect that a difference
may happen between you and me upon
this Occasion: But when you consider
what Advantages have arisen to us in a
few Months, by the good understanding
we have hitherto had; what wonderful
Effects it hath already produced in the
Change of the whole Scene of Affairs
abroad, so much more to the Honour of
the Nation, and the Figure it ought to
make in the World; and that nothing
can hinder a further Progress in this way,
to all our satisfactions, but Fears and
Jealousies amongst our selves. I will not
apprehend that such a Misfortune can
befal us, as a Division, or but a Coldness
between me and you; nor that any thing
can shake you in your Steadiness and
Loyalty to me; who by God's Blessing
will ever make you all Returns of Kind|ness
and Protection; with a Resolution
to venture even my own Life in the De|fence
of the true Interest of this Kingdom.



NUMB. XVII.
Some Passages of a Letter from a Foreign
Minister to their Ambassador in Eng|land,
upon the occasion of the King's
Speech immediately preceding; dated
November 29. 1685.
Done from the ORIGINAL.
WE are now out of pain about the
King's Intentions. This last Speech
to the Parliament has sufficiently clear'd all
our Doubts, together with whathas
writ upon that Subject. It's no more than
what I really expected; for I had always a
better opinion of him, than to think he could
bear tamely the Fetters which Hereticks
would endeavour to impose upon him. For the
time to come, I hope he will act en Maistre.
Your Conduct there pleases extreamly; and
above all, your last Dispatch about what
pass'd at your Audience. All you have pro|mis'd,
shall be made good to a Tittle; and it's
hop'd that others will be as zealous to keep
their Promises to us. The Inclos'd you must
deliver, but not till you see the Person has
deserv'd it; for I am more and more persua|ded,
as well as you, that we cannot be too
much upon the Reserve with him, c.



NUMB. XVIII.

The Harangue of the Rector of the
Iesuits College at Rome, to the Earl of
Castlemain, upon his Embassy to the
Pope.
IN tanto strepitu Mundi plaudentis gra|tulantisque
Tuo in Vrbem adventui,Nouveau Voyage d' Italie, p. 259, 260. hoc
est, immortalibus JACOBI II. Magnae
Britanniae Regis in Catholicam Ecclesiam
meritis, Gregorianum hoc Palladis Athe|naeum,
nec debuit tacere, nec potuit Quam|obrem,
ego Literariae hujus Vniversitatis
nomine, prim gratulor INNO|CENT
XI. felicitati, qud Ipso
regnante, Pontificio accesserit Diademati
Augusta haec  Triumphalis Corona; unde
illud cum Apostolo usurpare jure Merit va|leat,
Gaudium meum,  Corona mea.
Hunc laetissimum ferre Mortalibus Diem,
longissimi aevi spatio distulerunt Superi,
tm ut diuturnis Terrarum votis ingentia
haec Coeli dona responderent, tm ut simul
invenirent regnantem in Anglia Iacobum II.
Romae, Innocentium XI. Gratulor quoque
Christiano Orbi, necnon Catholicis Regibus,
quod tanto Dominatore Britannorum Scep|tra

gerente, tam grande advenerit,  Ipso|rum
Coronis adversus Christiani nominis
hostes munimentum,  Orthodoxae Fidei or|namentum.
Imminent quippe ab invictissi|mi
Regis Clssibus, tum Lybicis praedonibus,
tum Asiae  Palestinae Littoribus, flamma|rum
procellae, magis metuendae qum Maris.
At Tibi, Oceani Regina Magna Britannia,
quae  nostro olim Orbe divisa, nunc gemini
fais commercia Mundi; quid non liceat
ominari faustitatis sub tanto Principe. Eri|gespes;
erige vota; nec timeas si maxima,
sed nisi maxima. Non libet in die hac fau|stissima
commemrare qum lugubres passa
fueris unius amplis saeculi spatio, toto Orle
Terrarum admirante atque ingemiscente,
catastrophas. Sed si haec una erat via, qu
Iacobus II. Britanniae solium ascenderet,
prope est ut exclamen, tanti fuisse. Profect
invidebit ibi Posteritas, non mod praesen|tium
temporum felicitatem, sed  praeteri|torum
Calamitates tam grandi mercede re|demptas:
eaque, quibus nunc frueris bona,
et si post ingens  Te pretium persolutum
Tibi reddita fuerint non  Te coempta arbi|trabitur,
sed quadam Superum prodigenti
dona data. Tibi demum gratulor, praestan|tissime
Orator, quod tam faustum diem, 
videris in Anglia,  detuleris in Vrbem.
Nam de Sapientia Tu, qu per eruditissi|mos

libros Haeresim profligasti, nihil attinet
dicere: nihil de Fortitudine, qu Carceres
ipsos pro Catholica Religione tuenda, non
tam pertulisti, qum decorasti: nil de Pru|dentia;
Nobilitate, caeterisque dotibus
Tuis. Hoc unum universa Tua decora
comprehendit, quod ad maximum totius
Regni negotium, hoc est, ut splendidissim
fungereris apud Innocentium P. M. legatio|ne,
Iacobus II. Magnae Britanniae Rex
maximus, Te unum elegit, quia unus dignus
erat eligi, alter eligere.


The Speech of the Rector of the College
of Iesuits, to his Excellency Roger
Earl of Castlemain.
SIR,
YOU must not think this College alone
can be mute; and if they could, their
Silence must be a Crime, at a Time when
this City is filled with Vniversal Ioy, upon
the News of your Excellency's Arrival;
and all Places resound the Praises of James
the Second, and the Obligations the Ca|tholick
Church has to that Illustrious Prince.
I, in the Name of this Learned Body, do
in the first place congratulate thee, Inno|cent,
in whose Reign this flourishing Impe|rial

Crown is added to the Papal Diadem.
It is now your Holiness can properly use that
Apostolick Expression, My Joy and my
Crown. Heaven has deferr'd this happy
Day thus long, That so great a Blessing
might not be obtained, without long and un|wearied
Prayers; and at last effected, when
Two such Princes as James and Innocent
should concur to reign, the one in England,
and the other in Rome. What a Support
have all Catholick Kings gained by this Ac|cession?
What an Honour has the Orthodox
Faith receiv'd, and what a Defence against
the Enemies of the Name of Christ? The
Thunder of his Invincible Fleet will strike
greater Terror into the Pyrates of Barbary
and the Levant, than Storms and Waves
can do. How highly blest art Thou, O Bri|tain!
Empress of the Ocean; once secluded
from the Earth, now Mistress of the Com|merce
of the Eastern and Western World?
What Prosperity may'st thou not hope for,
under the Reign of so Excellent a Prince!
Raise thy Hopes; Raise thy Courage; and
banish all unjust and unseasonable Fears. I
have no Inclination at this time to recount
those Disasters and Calamities which Eng|land
has been the Theatre for above an Age
past, to the Grief and Astonishment of the
rest of the World. But if Providence has

made these the Steps for James the Second
to mount the Throne, I can hardly refrain
declaring how cheaply thou hast purchased so
great a Blessing. It is certain, their present
Happiness will create Envy in succeeding
Times; and however dear it has cost them,
Posterity will esteem it more the Bounty and
Profusion of Heaven, than a Recompence
of their Sufferings. In the last place, I
must congratulate your Excellency, who has
first seen this happy Day at home, and has
next been the Messenger to bring it hither.
I shall not here presume to praise your Great
Wisdom, your Learned Writings against
Heresy; that steady Courage you have
shewn in those many Prisons you have ho|nour'd
for your Zeal to the True Religion;
your prudent Conduct, or your other extra|ordinary
Qualities: All these are summ'd up
in one; and your Character is in fine com|pleated,
by the Choice your Great Master
has made of you, to sustain the most consi|derable
Affair of his Kingdom, The present
Glorious Embassy: In which all the World
must own Him to be the most competent
Iudge, and You the fittest Person.




NUMB. XIX.
The Answer of the Vice President and Fel|lows
of Magdalen-College, Oxon, be|fore
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners;
Why they could not in Conscience comply
with the King's Mandate.
THE said Vice-President, and other
deputed Fellows answered and said,
That the said Colledge of St. Mary Mag|dalen
in Oxon is a Body Corporate, go|verned
by Local Statutes, granted and
confirmed to them by His Majesty's Roy|al
Predecessor, King Henry the 6th, for
Him and His Heirs and Successors, un|der
the Great Seal of England; which
are also since confirmed by several other
Letters Patents of others of his Majesty's
Royal Predecessors, under the Great
Seal of England. That by the said Sta|tutes
of the College (to the observation of
which, each Fellow is sworn) it is or|dered,
That the Person elected President
thereof, shall be a Man of good Life
and Reputation, approved Understand|ing,
and good Temper, Discreet, Provi|dent,
and Circumspect, both in Spiritual

and Temporal Affairs. And at the time of
Election of a President, the said Fellows
are bound by the said Statutes, to take
an Oath that they shall nominate none
to that office, but such as are, or have
been Fellows of the said Colledge, or
of New-Colledge in Oxon; or if they are
not actually Fellows at that time of Ele|ction,
that they be such as have left their
Fellowships in their respective Colledges
upon credible accounts. And when two
qualified persons shall be nominated at the
time of Election, by the greater number
of all the Fellows, to the said Office of
President; the thirteen Seniors also
swear that they will Elect one of them,
whom in their Consciences they think
most proper and sufficient, most discreet,
most useful, and best qualified for the
Place; without any regard to love, ha|tred,
favour, or fear. And every Fel|low
when he is first admitted into his
Fellowship in the said Colledge, swears
that he will inviolably keep and observe
all the Statutes and Ordinances of the
Colledge, and every thing therein con|tained,
so far as does or may concern
him, according to the plain, literal, and
grammatical sense and meaning thereof,
and as much as in him lies will cause the

same to be kept and observed by others;
and that he will not procure any Dispen|sation
contrary to his aforesaid Oath, or
any part thereof, nor contrary to the
Statutes and Ordinances to which it re|lates,
or any of them; nor will he endea|vour
that such Dispensations shall be
procured by any other, or others, pub|lickly
or privately, directly or indirectly.
And if it shall happen that any Dispensa|tion
of this sort, of whatsoever Authority
it shall be, whether in general or parti|cular,
or under what form of Words so|ever
it be granted, that he will neither
make use of it, nor in any sort consent
thereunto. That upon Notice of the
Death of Dr. Clark, Late President of the
said Colledge, the Vice-President called
a Meeting of the said Fellows, in order
to the appointing a day for the Election
of a new President, and the 13th of April
was the time prefix'd, with power to pro|ogue
the same as they should see cause,
till the 15th, beyond which time they
could not statutably defer their Election;
and in pursuance thereof a Citation, or
Premonition, was fix'd upon the Chap|pel-door
of the said Colledge, signifying
the same, and by which the absent Fellows
were Summoned to repair home, as the

Statute in the Case requires. And the
said Vice-President, and other deputed
Fellows farther say, That on the 11th of
April aforesaid, they received his Majesty's
Letters Mandatory, to elect and Admit
the said Mr. Anthony Farmer President
of the said Colledge: But forasmuch as
the said Vice-President, and Fellows,
apprehended the right of Election to be
in them and believed His Majesty never
intended to dispossess them of their
Rights: And forasmuch as the said Mr.
Farmer had never been Fellow either of
Magdalen, or New-Colledge in Oxon,
and had not those Qualifications which
in and by the said Statutes of the Col|ledge
are required in the Character of a
President, as they in their Consciences
did, or do verily believe; and in regard
that they could not comply with his
Majesty's Letter, without the violation
of their Oaths, and hazard of their legal
Interest and Property, wherewith they
are by the Statutes possessed, and which
by their Oaths they are bound to main|tain,
they represented the same by their
humble Petition to His Majesty. And
having deferred their Election of a
President to the last day limited by
their Statutes, then they proceeded

to Election, and having first re|ceived
the Eucharist, and taken the
said Oaths, as the Statutes enjoyn, to
chuse a Person so qualified as is before
expressed, they did Elect the Reverend
Mr. Iohn Hough, B. D. and one of the
Fellows of their Colledge, a Person every
way qualified to be President; who has
been since confirmed by the Bishop of
Winton their Visitor, as the Statutes of
the said Colledge direct.
And that they might not lye under His
Majesty's Displeasure by their Proceed|ings,
they did on the 19th of April
make an humble representation thereof
to His Majesty, by his Grace the Duke
of Ormond, Chancellor of the University
of Oxon, setting forth their indispensable
Obligations to observe their Founder's
Statutes.
All which Matters the Vice-President,
and other deputed Fellows, do humbly
offer to your Lordships, and pray to be
dismissed with your Lordships favour.



NUMB. XX.
The Petition of the said Vice-President and
Fellows, offer'd to King James.
Humbly sheweth,
THat upon the 27th of August we re|ceived
Your Majesty's Letters Man|datory,
Dated August 14th, requiring us to
admit the Right Reverend Father in
God Samuel Lord Bishop of Oxon, to be
our President; and dispensing with all
Statutes and Constitutions to the contra|ry.
It is an unexpressible Affliction to
us, to find our selves reduced to such an
extremity that either we must disobey
Your Majesty's Royal Command, con|trary
to our own Inclinations, and that
constant course of Loyalty which we
have shew'd in all instances hitherto upon
all occasions whatsoever; or else break
our Founder's Statutes, and deliberately
perjure our selves.
For our Founder hath obliged us un|der
Oath, when we came in Fellows,
inviolably to observe his Statutes; and
one Clause therein injoyns us never to
admit, or make use of Dispensation

granted by any Authority whatsoever,
whereby we may be absolved from the
same. In this Statute for the Election of
a President, he commands us upon Oath
to Elect such a Person into the place of
President within 15 days after the vacan|cy,
who either is, or has been Fellow of our
own, or New-Colledge: Which we re|presented
to Your Majesty in our hum|ble
Petition, sign'd April 9th, wherein
we offered our selves ready to Elect any
Person capable of the same, who your
Majesty should be pleased to recommend;
and having waited the utmost time limit|ed
by our Statutes, and receiv'd no Ans|wer
to that effect, we did then according
to the exigence of our Statutes (having
first taking the holy Eucharist, and our
several Oaths to that purpose) nominate
and Elect such a Person, as we in our
Consciences did believe to be every way
qualified for that Place: By which Act
of ours, we have conveyed all that right
to him, which our Founder hath intrust|ed
us with; and it does not lie in our
power to admit any other. Our Founder
in another Statute obligeth us under the
pain of Perjury, a dreadful Anathema,
and eternal Damnation, not to suffer any
of his Statutes to be altered, infringed,

or dispensed with, and commands us un|der
the same Sacred Obligations, not to
execute any Orders or Decree whatsoe|ver,
contrary or repugnant to the said
Statutes; by which said Statutes and
Oaths, we are utterly incapacitated to ad|mit
the said Reverend Father in God to
be our President.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
to give us leave to lay this our Case, and
our selves, with all submission, at Your
Royal Feet, most earnestly beseeching
Your Sacred Majesty, to extend to us
Your humble Petitioners, the Grace and
Tenderness which Your Majesty hath
vouchsafed to all Your other Subjects;
and not to believe us guilty of any obsti|nacy
or undutifulness, Crimes which
our Souls abhor; but to receive us into
Your Majesty's Grace and Favour, the
greatest temporal Blessing which our
Hearts can wish.
And Your humble Petitioners shall al|ways
(as in Duty bound) pray to Al|mighty
God, to bless your Majesty with
a long and happy Reign over us, and af|terwards
to receive You to an immortal
Crown of Glory.



NUMB. XXI.
A Copy of a Letter of the Irish Clergy
to King Iames, in favour of the Earl
of Tyrconnel; found among Bishop
Tyrrel's Papers in Dublin.
SIR,
SInce it has pleased the Almighty Provi|dence,The State of Ireland under K. Iames, by Dr. King, p. 294, 295.
by placing your Majesty in the
Throne of your Ancestors, to give you both
Authority and Occasion of exercising those
Royal Virtues which alone do merit, and
would acquire you the Crown to which you
were born; We, though comprehended in
the general Clemency and Indulgence which
you extend to the rest of our Fellow Subjects,
are nevertheless so remote from your Maje|sty's
Presence, that our Prayers can have no
access to you, but by a Mediator. And since
of all others the Earl of Tyrconnel did
first espouse, and chiefly maintain, these
Twenty five Years last past, the Cause of
your poor oppressed Roman-Catholick
Clergy, against our many and powerful Ad|versaries;
and is now the only Subject of
your Majesty, under whose Fortitude and
Popularity in this Kingdom, we dare chear|fully

and with assurance own our Loyalty,
and assert your Majesty's Interest; Do make
it our humble Suit to your Majesty, That
you will be pleased to lodge your Authority
over us in his Hands, to the Terror of the
Factious, and Encouragement of your
faithful Subjects here; since his Dependance
on your Majesty is so great, that we doubt
not but that they will receive him with such
Acclamations as the long-captiv'd Israelites
did their Redeemer Mordecai. And since
your Majesty in Glory and Power does equal
the mighty Ahashuerus; and the Virtue
and Beauty of your Queen is as true a Pa|rallel
to his ador'd Hester; we humbly be|seech
she may be heard as our great Patroness,
against that Haman, whose Pride and Am|bition
of being honoured as his Master, may
have hitherto kept us in Slavery. And
though we wish none the fate of so dreadful
an Example, but rather a timely Penitence
and Conversion; we yet humbly crave your
Majesty's Protection against all such, if it
may consist with your Royal Wisdom and
Pleasure, to which we with all humility
submit, in the establishing of the said
Earl of Tyrconnel in such Authority
here, as may secure us in the Exercise
of our Function to the Honour of God,
and offering up our Prayers and Sacri|fice

for the continuation of your Ma|jesty's
long and prosperous Reign o|ver
us.
Dublin, the
of July, 1685.
Your Majesty's most
Dutiful and Obe|dient
Subjects.



NUMB. XXII.
Colonel Luttrel's Order,State of Ireland, c. p. 430, 431. forbidding
above Five Protestants meeting any
where, c.
By the Governor of Dublin, June 18. 1690.
WHereas several Disaffected Persons
of the Protestant Religion, are of
late come to this City of Dublin, and some
of them Arm'd with Swords, Pistols, and
other Weapons, contrary to his Majesties ex|press
Commands by his Royal Proclamation,
bearing Date the 20th day of Iuly, 1689.
I. These are therefore to Will and Re|quire
all Men whatsoever, of the Protestant
Religion, now residing or being within the
said City of Dublin, or within the Liber|ties
of St. Sepulchre Donnor, or Thomas
Court, who are not House-keepers, or have
not followed some lawful Vocation therein
these Three Months past, to depart within
Twenty four Hours after the Publication
hereof, out of the said City and Liberties,
and repair to their respective Habitations,
or usual places of Abode in the Country, up|on

pain of Death, or Imprisonment, and
to be farther proceeded against as Contem|ners
of his Majesties Royal Commands,
and as Persons designing the Disturbance of
the Publick Peace.
II. And likewise, That all Protestants
within the said City and Liberties, not be|ing
of his Majesties most Honourable Privy
Council, nor in his Army, or actual Ser|vice,
shall within the time aforesaid deliver
up all their Arms, both Offensive and De|fensive,
aud all their Ammunition, into
his Majesties Stores in the said City, upon
pain of Death.
III. And that no Protestant whatsoever,
do presume at his peril, to walk or go in the
Streets, from Ten of the Clock at Night
till Five in the Morning, nor at any time
when there is an Alarum. In which case
all such Persons are required for their Safe|ty,
and for the Security of the Publick, to
keep within Doors till such an Alarum is
over.
IV. nd Lastly, For the prevention of
Riot and unawful Assemblies, These are
therefore to Will and Require all the said
Protestants, that no greater number of
them than Five shall Meet and Converse at
any time, either in any House within the
said City or Liberties, over and above the

Family of the House; or in the Streets and
Fields in or about the same, or elsewhere:
Hereby declaring, That all Persons who shall
offend against any Clause in this present
Order, shall suffer Death, or such other
Punishment, as a Court-Martial shall
think fit.



NUMB. XXIII.
The French King's Declaration,Memoirs pour servir a l' Histoire de la Pai de Ryswick, par Du Mont. Tom. 2 p. 66, 67. publish'd
at his Camp at Arnheim, to oblige the
Hollanders to surrender their Country
to him, Anno 1672.

De par le Roy.
SA Majest considerant combien il a pl 
Dieu de benir ses justes desseins,  faire
prosperer les enterprises, qu'il a faites depuis
son arrive  la Campagne: Et voulant
traiter avec la derniere douceur les Peuples
des Provinces, o elle pourra tendre ses
Victoires:  afin de leur faire scavoir ce
qu'ils auront  faire pour se rendre dignes
de ses bontez, sa Majest a fait dclarer 
dclare par la presente, que tous les Habi|tans
des Villes de Hollande, qui se rendront
volontairement  son obssance,  rece|vront
les Troupes, qu'elle trouvera bon de
leur envoyer pour leur sret  pour leur
dfense, seront non seulement traitez aussi
favorablement qu'ils pourtroient desirer;
mais aussi seront maintenus dans tous leurs
Privileges  Franchises,  auront toute
libert de conscience avec le libre exercice de
leur Religion.

Mais au contraire que ceux quine se vou
dront pas somettre, de quelque qualit ou
condition qu'ils soient, tcheront de resister
aux forces de sa Majest par l'inondation de
leurs Digues, ou autrement, seront punis de
la derniere rigueur. Et cependant on exer|cera
toutes sortes d' hostilitez contre tous
ceux, qui voudront s'opposer aux desseins
de sa Majest,  lors que les glaces ouvri|ront
le passage de tous ctez, sa Majest ne
donnera aucun Quartier aux Habitans des
Villes, mais donnera ordre que leurs biens
soient pillez,  leurs maisons brles.
Fait  l' Arme devant Aernhem ce 24 Iuin
1672.
Sign,
LOUIS.
Et plus bas,
Le Tellier.



The Declaration.
HIS Majesty considering how it has
pleas'd God to bless his just Designs,
and prosper his Vndertakings, since his
Arrival in the Army; and it being his In|tention
to treat the People over whom he
shall extend his Victories, with the highest
Clemency; to the intent therefore that
they may deserve his great Goodness, his
Majesty has caused to be declared, and does
by these presents declare, That all the Inha|bitants
of the Cities of Holland, who shall
voluntarily submit to him, and receive the
Troops he shall send for their Security and
Defence, shall be treted as favourably as
they can desire; and shall be maintained in
all their Privileges and Immunities, and
have Liberty of Conscience, and the Free
Exercise of their Religion.
On the contrary, All of whatever Qua|lity
and Condition, who shall refuse to com|ply
with these Offers, and shall resist his Ma|jesty's
Forces, either by the Inundation of
their Dies, or otherwise, shall be punished
with the utmost Rigor. At present, all
stilities shall be used against those who

oppose his Majesty's Designs; and when the
Ice shall open a Passage on all sides, his Ma|jesty
will not give any Quarter to the Inhabi|tants
of such Cities, but give Order that
their Goods be plunder'd, and their Houses
burnt. Given at the Camp before Arn|heim,
this 24th of Iune, 1672.
Sign'd,
LOUIS.
And underneath,
La Tellier.
FINIS.








Books Printed for and Sold by
Tim. Goodwin.

THE History of the Revolution in Por|tugal
in the Year 1640; or an Account
of their Revolt from Spain, and setting
the Crown on the Head of Don Iohn of
Braganza, Father to Don Pedro the present
King, and Katherine, Queen Dowager of
England: Written in French by the Excel|lent
Pen of the Abbot Vertat, (Author of
the History of the Revolutions in Sueden;)
and done into English. Twelves.
Lex Parliamentaria; or a Treatise of the Law
and Custom of the Parliaments of England.
By G. P. Esq Octavo.
Memoirs of Denzil Lord Holles, Baron of
Ifield in Sussex, from the Year 1641, to
1648. Octavo.
The Compleat Horseman; discovering the
surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
Faults, and Imperfections of Horses: The
Signs and Causes of their Diseases; the
true Method both of their Preservation and
Cure; with Reflections on the regular

and preposterous use of Bleeding and Pur|ging:
Also the Art of Shooing, with the
several kinds of Shooes, adapted to the
various Defects of bad Feet, and the Pre|servation
of good. Together with the best
Method of breeding Colts, backing them,
and making their Mouths, c. By the
Sieur de Solleysell, Querry to the present
French King for his Great Horses; and
one of the Royal Academy of Paris. To
which is added, A most excellent Supple|ment
of Riding; collected from the best
Authors: With an Alphabetical Catalogue
of all the Physical Simples in English, French,
and Latin; by Sir William Hope, Deputy-Lieutenant
of the Castle of Edinburgh.
Folio.
The Gentleman's Jockey, and approv'd Far|rier;
instructing in the Natures, Causes,
and Cures of all Diseases incident to Horses.
With an exact and easy Method of breed|ing,
buying, dieting, and otherwise order|ing
all sorts of Horses, as well for common
and ordinary use, as the Heats and Course.
With divers other Curiosities: Collected by
the long Practice, Experience, and Pains
of I. H. Esq Matthew Hodson, Mr. Holled,
Mr. Willis, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Holden, Tho|mas
Empson, Mr. Roper, Mr. Medcalfe, and
Nath. Shaw. The Eighth Edition, with
Additions. Octavo.

The Roman History, from the building of the
City, to the perfect Settlement of the Em|pire
by Augustus Caesar; containing the
Space of 727 Years; design'd as well for
the understanding of the Roman Authors,
as the Roman Affairs. The Fourth Edition,
carefully revis'd, and much improv'd: By
Lawrence Echard, A. M. of Christ-College in
Cambridge. Vol. I. Octavo.
The Roman History, from the Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar, to the Re|moval
of the Imperial Seat by Constantine
the Great, containing the Space of 355
Years. Vol. II. For the Use of his High|ness
the Duke of Glocester. The Second
Edition. By Lawrence Echard, A. M. Octavo.
Politica Sacra  Civilis: Or a Model of Ci|vil
and Ecclesiastical Government; where|in,
besides the Positive Doctrine concern|ing
State and Church in general, are de|bated
the principal Controversies of the
Times, concerning the Constitution of
the State and Church of England, tending
to Righteousness, Truth, and Peace. By
George Lawson, Rector of More in the
County of Salop. The Second Edition.
Octavo.
An Account of Denmark, as it was in the
Year 1692. The Third Edition. Octavo.

An Account of Sueden: Together with an
Extract History of that Kingdom. Octavo.
Of Wisdom. Three Books. Written Origi|nally
in French by the Sieur de Charron:
With an Account of the Author: Made
English by George Stanhope, D. D. late Fel|low
of King's-College in Cambridge: From
the best Edition, Corrected and Enlarged
by the Author a little before his Death. In
Two Volumes. Octavo.
A New Voyage to Italy: With curious Ob|servations
on several other Countries; as,
Germany, Switzerland, Savoy, Geneva, Flan|ders,
and Holland. Together with useful In|structions
for those who shall travel thither.
Done out of French. The Second Edition,
enlarged above one Third, and enriched
with several New Figures. By Maximilian
Misson, Gent. In Two Volumes. Octavo.
A Compleat Body of Chirurgical Operations,
containing the whole Practice of Surgery:
With Observations and Remarks on each
Case. Amongst which are inserted the se|veral
ways of delivering Women in Natu|ral
and Unnatural Labours. The whole Il|lustrated
with Copper Plates, explaining
the several Bandages, Sutures, and divers
useful Instruments. By M. de l Vanguion,
M. D. and Intendant of the Royal Hospi|tals

about Paris. Faithfully done into Eng|lish.
Octavo.
A Relation of a Voyage made in the Years
1695, 1696, 1697, on the Coasts of Afri|ca,
Streights of Magellan, Brazil, Cayenna,
and the Antilles, by a Squadron of French
Men of War, under the Command of
M. de Gennes. By the Sieur Froger, Volun|teer-Engineer,
on Board the English Falcon.
Illustrated with divers strange Figures,
drawn to the Life. Octavo.
Travels into divers parts of Europe and Asia,
undertaken by the French King's Order, to
discover a new way by Land into China:
Containing many curious Remarks in Na|tural
Philosophy, Geography, Hydrogra|phy,
and History. Together with a De|scription
of Great Tartary, and of the diffe|rent
People who inhabit there. By Father
Avril, of the Order of the Jesuits. Done
out of French. To which is added a Sup|plement
extracted from Hakluit and Purchas,
giving an Account of several Journeys over
Land from Russia, Persia, and the Mogul's
Country, to China. Together with the
Roads and Distances of the Places.
Twelves.
A Compendium of Universal History, from
the Beginning of the World, to the Reign
of the Emperor Charles the Great. Written

Originally in Latin by Monsieur Le Clerc.
Done into English. Octavo.
A Political Essay; or Summary Review of
the Kings and Government of England
since the Norman Conquest. By W. Py,
Esq. Octavo.
The Art of preserving and restoring Health;
explaining the Nature and Causes of the
Distempers that afflict Mankind: Also
shewing that every man is or may be his
own best Physician. To which is added a
Treatise of the most Simple and Effectual
Remedies for the Diseases of Men and
Women. Written in French by M. Flamand;
M. D. and faithfully translated into Eng|lish.
Twelves.
A Defence of the Thirty Nine Articles of the
Church of England: Written in Latin by
I. Ellis, S. T. D. Now done into English.
To which are added Lambeth Articles. To|gether
with the Judgment of Bishop An|drews,
Dr. Overall, and other Eminent and
Learned Men upon them. Twelves.
The Present State of Christendom consider'd:
in Nine Dialogues, between 1. The pre|sent
Pope Alexander VIII. and Lewis XIV.
2. The Great Duke of Tuscany, and the
Duke of Savoy. 3. King Iames II. and
the Mareschal de la Feillade. 4. The

Duke of Lorrain, and the Duke of Schon|berg.
5. The Duke of Lorrain, and the
Elector Palatine. 6. Lewis XIV. and the
Marquis of Louvois. 7. The Advoyer of
Berne, and the Chief Syndic of Geneva.
8. Cardinal Ottoboni, and the Duke de
Chaulnes. 9. The Young Prince Abafti,
and Count Teckley. Done out of French.
Octavo.
Bellamira, or the Mistress: A Comedy: As it
is Acted by Their Majesties Servants.
Written by the Honourable Sir Charles
Sedley, Baronet.





