




A
SERMON
Preached at the
Anniversary Meeting
Of the SONS of
CLERGY-MEN,
IN
St. PAUL's Cathedral,
DECEMBER 3. 1700.
By Richard West, M. A. Fellow of St. Mary Magd.
Coll. Oxon: And Chaplain to the Right Reve|rend
Father in God, Gilbert L. Bishop of Sarum.
LONDON:
Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford, at the Prince's
Arms, in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCC.




To the Much Honoured, 
Robert Constable, Esq
Dr. Tho. West.
Mr. Humphry Dene.
Mr. Iohn Bernard.
Mr. Richard Beaumont.
Mr. Tho. Hussey.
Mr. Henry Smith.
Mr. Matthew Shore.
Mr. Tho. Burnand.
Mr. Matthi. Hickeringill.
Mr. Ioseph Grace.
Mr. George Guy.
 Stewards of the Late Feast of the Sons
of the Clergy.
Gentlemen,
THIS Sermon was Preached upon a very
Good Design, and at Your Request;
and the same Reasons have prevailed
with me to make it Publick. Which is all the Apo|logy
I think my self obliged to make for it. Whether
or no the many Excellent Discourses that have al|ready
come abroad upon This and the like Occasions,
have awakened mens Zeal, 'tis certain there is a
very Publick Spirit of Charity now among us.
The Generous Examples of the Members of your Cha|ritable

Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy,
have not, 'tis probable, been a little instrumental
to that purpose. The breeding up of Poor
Children to Industry, to a true sense of Re|ligion,
and particularly in the Doctrines and
Worship of the Church of England, is one of your
great Designs; and God be thanked, You have had
in this Noble and Ancient City, and in other Places,
very many Followers. By this means you may
hope to raise the Honour, and promote the Interest
of our Church, and to secure to your selves
those Blessings which will always attend the En|couragers
of such Honourable and Pious Underta|kings.
I am,
GENTLEMEN,
Your most Faithful,
Humble Servant,
Richard West.





A
SERMON
Preached before the
Sons of the Clergy.

PSALM CXXII. v. 8, 9.
For my Brethren and Companions sakes,
I will now say peace be within Thee.
Because of the House of the Lord our
God, I will seek thy Good.

THis Psalm gives us a full and lively ac|count
of the pious zeal and concern
which King David exprest for the Good
of the Church; and by what Steps and Me|thods

he thought it most advisable to proceed,
for the advancing the Interest of it; Namely,
by promoting Peace and Unity among its
Members, and by seeking and praying for one
anothers Good.
I shall have no occasion to press the neces|sity
of following this Great Example; nor shall
I enter upon a description of the Vertues
here recommended; The Charitable design of
our meeting this day, to establish a lasting
Friendship among Brethren, and to consult
one anothers Good: Our forward Intention
to assist those amongst us that call for our Help,
that they may not be destitute of a Lot and
Inheritance with the rest of their Tribe, has
already made any further discourse upon either
of those Topicks, Superfluous and Unnecessary.
And therefore I think it to be more my pro|per
business, to entertain you with the pro|spect
of those Happy Effects, which will neces|sarily
follow such Noble and Christian Designs.
The Duties which the Text recommends to
us, are Peace and Charity. And in the sincere
study and observance of both these, our present
Undertaking has firmly engaged us; so that to
consider the success which will necessarily at|tend
it, may be of some use to create in us

that true Pleasure and Satisfaction which ought
always to accompany the doing of Good.
The Method therefore I shall take in the
following Discourse, shall be only this.
I. In the First place, I shall endeavour to re|present
the Blessed Effects, that will certainly fol|low
our practise of these Vertues.
II. And then in the Second Place, I shall consider
the Advantages we enjoy for the promoting
such good Works, and the returns we are obli|ged
to make to God for them.
I. First then, I shall endeavour to represent the
Blessed Effects that will follow the practise of
these Vertues. I need not observe how much
the Happiness of Society depends upon it; that
Men of Peaceable and Charitable Tempers are
the greatest Benefactors to Mankind; and that
we more especially answer the Ends and Designs
of our Being, when we are most useful and ser|viceable
to others. Nor shall I mention how
these good Offices raise a Man a Name and
Reputation in the World, command an uni|versal
Reverence and Esteem, and are the most
certain marks of a Noble and Heavenly Di|sposition.
I shall also omit those many Prayers
and Blessings they will obtain for us, and that

certain Interest they will secure us in Heaven.
These are the natural consequences that
flow from the exercise of these Duties; and they
equally belong to all those that consult the Be|nefit
of Mankind either of these ways. But
there are other Advantages which we have more
particular reasons to expect from our present En|deavours;
and which we are more obliged
than others to have an especial regard to.
I. And first, We may Hope by this means to
advance the Interest of Religion.
II. Secondly, To raise the Honour of our
Church.
III. And Lastly, To Vindicate the Clergy
from Contempt.
And First, That our design of promoting
Peace and Charity will be of great advantage
to Religion. And that I am perswaded is a
Satisfaction that we of this Assembly should be
ambitious of purchasing at any rate. For it
must be a very pleasing Thought to every one
of us, that we can be able to strengthen the In|terest,
or support the Authority of that Re|ligion,
to which we owe so great a share of
our Well-being and Happiness in this Life, and
all our Hopes of a Better.

And that we shall do a very considerable ser|vice
to it, by this means, is evident, from the
great stress the Divine Author of it, has laid up|on
these Duties, and the Blessings he has pro|nounced
to the observers of them. He has made
Love and Unity the Distinguishing Marks of
his Disciples in this World, and the Conditions
upon which he will pronounce that joyful Sen|tence,
Come ye blessed, in another. To the Peace|makers
he has given the Glorious Character of
being the Children of God; as tho they alone were
of a Divine Original, and had the true Image
of God stamp'd upon them.
If then there is so high a value set upon these
Vertues, and they have so much the preference
given to them above others, by God himself:
If they are the brightest Ornaments in a Christi|an's
Life, and transform him into a resemblance
of the Divine Nature; we may be assured, the
more we excel in them, the higher do we raise
the Honour and Reputation of Religion.
By this Method Christianity first flourish'd
and prevail'd in the World; that love and unity
which was so apparent among all its Disciples,
and those lively Instances which they perpe|tually
gave of Kindness and Charity, gain|ed
it every day fresh Admirers and Proselites.

This Practice won upon Mens Tempers, and
as mild and gentle as it was, overcame all op|position.
The like Behaviour will always re|commend
Religion; and then especially, when
it appears in the Lives of those who are dedica|ted
to the Service of it. They are in Stations
that make them more observed, and their Acti|ons
more nearly look'd into than other mens.
And therefore these Graces must shine brightest,
and their influence reach farthest, when they are
most visible in their Conversations. This shews
that Religion has a true force and efficacy upon
them; and they can propose with better ad|vantage,
that greatest Example of Kindness and
Charity that ever appeared in the World, to the
imitation of others, when they follow it in good
earnest themselves.
But it is yet more for the Interest of Religi|on,
when their Children follow their Steps, and
have bequeathed to them that best of Inheritances,
the knowledge and practice of these Duties; and
it will be much for the Reputation of Religion,
that those Early Impressions of Vertue and Piety,
which were made upon their Minds, still retain
their full strength and vigour, and that no other
avocations can take off the Engagements were
laid upon them to do good unto all men, but especi|cially

to those of the Houshold of Faith. For here it
is, that the Obligations of Religion, as well as
nearness of Relation, first challenge our Servi|ces.
We are indeed forbid to do Ill Offices to
any man, and are commanded to follow peace
with all in general; but we cannot be equally
serviceable to all; and there are some who have
a better claim to our regard than others. The
sense of Gratitude has a particular tye upon us;
and no one here can doubt but Religion upon
this account, can plead the best Right to our Ser|vices;
and consequently those who are nearest
related to it, may challenge our more especial
Consideration. This is the true and regular
method of shewing our Zeal for Religion; the
most proper means to make it valued and
esteemed, and the best hopes we have left of
raising the Credit of despised, neglected Vertue.
I need not shew the reverse of all this, or ac|quaint
you how much Religion will suffer by
our disregard of these Duties: I must not open
so Melancholy a Scene, when we are met to|gether
to rejoice and triumph at the good we
are capable of doing for the House of our God;
and where 'tis to be hoped there is nothing at so
great a distance from us, as a malicious, uncha|ritable
Temper. I will not suppose there is

any here that pretends to be on the side of Reli|gion,
that is not endued with the Spirit of it;
or that is come hither to pray, and use his En|deavours
for the peace of Ierusalem, that would
any way disturb its Tranquility. God forbid
that there should be any one among us, as there
was at the Marriage-Feast in the Gospel, not hav|ing
on his Wedding Garment. Our Saviour indeed
hath told us, that there may be Wolves in Sheeps
Cloathing; and we must not say, that 'tis impos|sible
there may be an unchristian Spirit, under
the fairest Pretences of Conscience and Zeal for
God and his Church; but we can't but be sensi|ble,
that the Crime is of a higher nature, and
the Injury done Religion much the greater upon
that account. We have a sad Instance in Holy
Writ of Corah and his Company,Numb. 16. Sons of Levi, that
rose up against Moses, and disputed the Authority
of the best of Princes and Lawgivers: They pre|tended
indeed to be Holy, and to consult the
Good of God's own People; yet we find that
their Offence was of a heinous nature, and their
Punishment very severe: Both of them were
probably the greater, for these two Reasons:
The one was, that they insulted so Good and
Mild a Governor, that had the Character of be|ing
the meekest man in all the Earth, and who 'tis

probable if God Almighty had not interposed,
and avenged his own Cause, would have dis|miss'd
them with this gentle Rebuke, Ye take
too much upon you, ye Sons of Levi. The other
reason was, That they were of that Tribe; their
being Sons of Levi render'd their Crime the more
unpardonable. For they being Teachers and
Guardians of the Law, their Characters and
Stations made them more observed, and their
Examples sooner followed than other Mens;
and therefore it was necessary their Punishment
should be more exemplary, by how much the
more fatal their Examples would have proved
to the Cause of God and Religion. Some in|deed
of these Mens Confederates were of ano|ther
Tribe, but 'tis probable that Corah was the
first, and the most considerable in the Conspi|racy;
since he is often mentioned in Scripture as
the Author of it, without any notice taken of
the rest. But God be thanked, these men were
but few in number, and 'tis to be hoped they
have had fewer Followers. 'Tis very observable,
that when these Men were destroyed, most of
their Children perish'd with them; not upon the
account, probably, of their being accessary to
their Crimes, but lest they should have suck'd
in the same Poison, and be infected with the
Pride and Arrogance of their Fathers.

There was once a Proverb in Israel, The Fa|thers
have eaten sower grapes,Ezek. 18. and the Childrens teeth
are set an edge: Ill-nature it seems was then often
propagated, and the Children grew bad by In|fection.
The Parents were of angry, turbulent
Tempers, and the Children felt the Ill Effects of
them. And this is very natural; restless and
haughty Spirits do a great deal of mischief; their
Ill Examples spread far, and their whole Poste|rity
is commonly much the worse for them.
And thus the Evil Practices of those who pretend
to Religion, prove very prejudicial to its Inte|rest;
and the more sacred their Characters are,
the Consequences are still the more fatal and
pernicious.
If we that have made it our business to en|quire
into Religion, who have been constantly
instructed in it, and have informed our selves
throughly of the Reasons and Designs of it,
should oppose it in our Actions; and if we that
have searched into the Natures of Vertue and
Vice, and understand the differences of Good
and Evil, should confound them in our pra|ctice,
'tis too certain that both Religion and Ver|tue
will fare the worse for us. If we our selves
do not follow the things that make for peace, do
not preserve that Unity which ought to be
amongst us, and keep our Friendships inviola|ble,

'tis too much to be fear'd that other men
will have less notions of these Duties, upon our
neglects. If we cannot forgive and pass by In|juries;
if our Resentments run high, and last
long; if we only carry an appearance of Peace
and Reconciliation, with a design to fall on
with greater fury, and more security; like Ioab,
to kiss, that we may the better kill; it will occa|sion
others to take more liberty in their Revenge,
and cite the Authority of their Teachers for it.
If we that have studied the Nature, and
known the Excellence and Advantage of Cha|rity,
and have often press'd and inculcated the
Necessity of it to others, should be mean or
narrow-spirited in our Contributions, 'tis probable
that we shall not only give Offence to others,
but put a Stop even to their Good and Cha|ritable
Intentions. If we, that cannot of all
men be ignorant, what we ought to do for our
Brethren and Companions sakes, should not con|tribute
all we are able to the encouraging and
promoting this Good Design, begun and carried
on purely for their Interest, it can't be supposed
that others who are removed something farther
from the Relation, should be more forward in
their Endeavours to support it. Good Exam|ples
do great service in all such cases; and the
higher mens Characters and Stations are, so

much the greater and stronger Influence have
they. The Royal Psalmist describes to us the
Joy and Satisfaction he felt in himself, when
he was called upon to assist at the Worship of
God. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us
go into the House of the Lord: Not only glad
of the opportunity of offering up his Prayers
and Praises to God; but also, doubtless, that
he met with an occasion of countenancing Re|ligion
by his Presence, and of encouraging
others by his Example.
And thus have I considered the great service
we shall do Religion by our present Designs
of promoting Peace and Charity; and have
also observed how much prejudice may be
done it, by the neglect of these Virtues.
The latter of these I should have pass'd by,
as being foreign to our present Business,
had I not thought my self obliged to take no|tice
of that double Pleasure which always at|tends
such good Actions; the one arising from
the sense of the Services we do; the other from
the thought of having avoided all those Incon|veniencies,
all that Uneasiness of Mind, and
Guilt of Conscience, which are inseparable
from the contrary Practices.
II. I proceed in the Second place, to represent
another Advantage of this Good Design, name|ly,

the raising the Honour of our Church: For
we are not only to consider the Service we can
do Religion in general, but also how we can
best answer the Obligations we are under to that
Church in particular, whereof we are Members.
And that these Virtues of Peace and Charity will
advance the Credit and Reputation of it, is
more than probable, since they tend most to
Unite and Preserve it. And when it is like Ie|rusalem,
compact together, and at unity in it self,
the gates of hell cannot prevail against it.
The Royal Psalmist repeats his Prayers and
Wishes for Peace several times in this short
Psalm. Whether or no there were then any
divisions in the Church, or any heats or con|tentions
among any of its Members, that occa|sioned
his being thus earnest and sollicitous:
'tis certain he very well knew, he could ask
for no other Blessing, that could gain it so
much respect and veneration abroad, that could
make it so strongly oppose the attempts of its
Enemies, or that could so firmly establish and
so long preserve it.
We are therefore very much indebted to the
Wisdom of those, who first formed this Chari|table
Corporation, and contrived this Annual
Meeting, for the preventing and making up, all
such unnatural differences among us, and for

the preserving that Love and mutual Agreement,
which is so necessary for the Honour and Secu|rity
of our Church.
We are this day, the best Constituted Church in
the whole World, and its Doctrines the most Pure
and Primitive; and I hope we may add, that it is
most Catholick and Apostolical in its practice of
Christian Duties. The first Believers did more
Honour and Service to Christianity by their good
Actions, than by their Faith; and they appealed
to their Lives, for a confirmation of their Do|ctrines:
And I hope it may still be used for an
Argument for the best Religion in the World,
that it is the best observed.
That we are reformed from the Errors and
Corruptions that were crept into the Church, is
owing to the pious Care and Zeal of our Fore|fathers;
but let it be owing to us, that this pre|sent
Age shall leave behind it more lasting Mo|numents
of Kindness and Generosity, of Love
and Unity. It is a great Happiness to be of
the True Faith; but it will be a greater, to su|peradd
to it the meek and peaceful Spirit of
the Gospel. This one would think should be
made the chief Mark of a True Church; for
nothing, not even Faith it self, without Charity,
can ever make a good Christian; and I don't
see, how it is possible it should ever build or
keep up a Church.

Love and Tenderness ought always to at|tend
Truth, for they are the best able to gain it
Friends: They are of an insinuating Nature,
and lay open an easy Passage to the Understand|ing.
A sowre, ill-natur'd Argument was hard|ly
ever known to convert an Adversary, how
strong and powerful soever it might be to si|lence
him. There's no body can bear to be
affronted even into Truth it self, or to be brow|beaten,
though it should chance to be into
Right Reason. Truth indeed is Bold, but
'tis never Insolent and Imperious: But Falshood
and Ignorance are generally so. And if we
judge of them by that Mark, we shall not oft|en
be mistaken: For we have great reason to
suspect that for Counterfeit, which is swell'd
with Pride and Ostentation. However it be,
Truth never wants an Haughty Advocate; and
a Good Cause is always the worse for an Ill|natur'd
Management. And what is more to
our purpose, the Best of Churches must suffer
great Prejudice, if there is found an Uncharita|ble
Behaviour among any of its Members. But
'tis my Business only to commemorate the Bles|sings
we enjoy, and not to tell of Mischiefs
which 'tis to be hoped we shall never feel.
III. Let us then consider the Third and last
Advantage of our Pious Designs, and that is, The

vindicating the Clergy from Contempt. This will
be Justice to the Memory of the Dead, as well
as a Service to the Living. And I doubt not
but we shall guard off Contempt from them,
at least set them above it, in relation to those
common Objections that are formed against
them: And these respect either their Self-Inte|rest,
their Poverty, or their Posterity.
I. And first, We shall in some measure vindi|cate
them from the Imputation of Self-Interest,
or Private Designs. We are indeed many times
upbraided upon these accounts; but if our
Enemies would but consider the many Chari|ties
that have been bestowed by that Order of
Men, they would be a little more sparing in
their Censures. We are told that Charity it self
shall cover a multitude of sins: And if God Al|mighty
will be so merciful as to pass by a great
many Offences for the sake of that one Virtue,
methinks Men might overlook some Defects
for the sake of it too. I am persuaded I may
venture to say, That the Good Works of a
great part of the Clergy speak for them; and
'tis but just that the Number of those who have
been serviceable to the World, should plead
something in the behalf of those who have been
less so. God Almighty would have spared even
Sodom, if he had found but Ten Righteous there.

But I might wholly have omitted the defence
of the Clergy, upon this Head of Self-interest:
If they had been led by Principles of such a na|ture,
no doubt but their Children would have
acted upon the same Motives, and we should
have seen no such Generous Designs encouraged
as we are now so happily engaged in.
Nor Secondly, will it appear, that the Pover|ty
of the Clergy is a sufficient ground of their
Contempt. Poverty indeed is what a Man has
no great reason to be ashamed of, especially
where 'twas not in his power to avoid it; and
'tis Providence that places Men in low Conditi|ons;
nor does it detract at all from real merit,
and therefore is not a proper foundation of Con|tempt:
Nor ought a Man to be much valued
upon the account of his Riches, if he has nothing
besides them, to defend him from being despi|sed.
But whatever these things may be in the
Theory, Wealth will command esteem, whe|ther
guarded by Internal Worth, or not: And
Poverty will be despised, let the Treasures of the
Mind be never so considerable. But I hope the
Clergy have no great reason to suffer much in their
Reputation upon that account. I think it would
be too mean to boast of their Riches, whatever
Advantages they might have that way; but we
may very lawfully commend their Bounty and
Liberality. I might mention a great many In|stances

of this kind, and recount a vast number
of their Publick Acts of Charity; and I am con|fident
I may suppose a great many more that
were always design'd to be kept private. But
I should not pass over in silence that Generous
Benefaction lately left by a Right Reverend Fa|ther,Dr. Tur|ner, Late L. Bp. of Ely who left 1200 l. to it.
to this Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy.
But the perpetual Good it will do, will be a
more lasting Memorial than any Commendati|on
that can be given it.
But I shall leave it to you to finish this Head,
and to testify by your own Examples, that the
Liberalities which Providence and your Fathers
have put you in a condition to bestow, have rai|sed
both you and them much above Comtempt.
III. And this leads me to the other Objection
against the Clergy, and which you also can best
answer; namely, that their Posterity are more un|happy
and unfortunate for the most part, than
others: And this is urged not only by those of the
Romish Communion, as a Judgment upon us for
transgressing their Order of Celibacy; but is
also pretended by some to be a Common Obser|vation
among our selves. I know not from
what particular Instances such general Conclusi|ons
are drawn; both the Scriptures, and Matter
of Fact declare on our side. The Psalmist as|sures
us, among all the Observations he had
made, He never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his

seed begging their bread. 'Tis indeed too certain,
that several of the Posterity of the Clergy are in
low conditions, but thanks be to God, there are
others of them that are in a capacity to raise
them higher, and that don't want Hearts to do
it: So that the meanest of them are so far hap|py,
that they are sure never to be destitute of the
especial regard and consideration of those who
are in better Circumstances. But the Scriptures
are yet more full and express in this Matter,
where they assure us, That they that turn many to
righteousness,Dan. 12. shall shine as the Stars for ever and
ever: Which does not only relate to their Glo|rified
State in Heaven, but also to the Happiness of
their Posterity on Earth: For the Stars are often
spoken of in Scripture in reference to Generati|ons
to come: As God often promised to the Fa|ther
of the Faithful, to increase his Seed as the
Stars in Heaven for multitude.
And this Day I hope this Prophecy is in a
great measure fulfilled, when there are so many
of us met together, to make Grateful Returns
to God for the many Blessings we enjoy. And
particularly we must not forget, that he has rai|sed
One from amongst us to be at the Head of the
Church; Another to be the Chief Guardian of Equi|ty
and Good Conscience; and that we had a Third,
but the very last year to be Governor of this great City.

And what more shall I say, to shew that God has
made good his Promise, That the Posterity of
the righteous shall be blessed?
There is indeed commonly one event to the
righteous and to the wicked; and the same Lot
happens frequently to both, if they take mea|sures
alike in Affairs of this Life. Providence
does not often deny equal Success to the same
Endeavours. But granting this to be for the
most part so, yet the Clergy have upon this ac|count
as fair a prospect, at least, as others, to
leave a happy Posterity behind them, since they
pursue the best Methods that can be taken for
that end.
II. And this brings me to what I proposed to
consider in the Second place; The Advantages
we have had for the procuring our own and
others Good, and the Returns we are obliged
to make to God for them.
Now the greatest Advantages a man can have
towards making his Life happy and useful, are
a careful Education, and Good Examples. These
make strong Impressions, and have a mighty
Influence upon every Action of his Life.
I. And First, We ought to esteem it a very great
Advantage to have had the Happiness of a Care|ful
Education; that the Principles of Kindness and
Charity were early sown in us, and had taken
deep root in our Minds betimes. This is a

Blessing which we can never over-rate. And
I question not, there is none of this Assembly
but has given God thanks many a time for the
Happy Effects of it. To this we ought not
only to impute the prosperous condition we are
in, but those desires we find in our selves to
be Benefactors to others: We that have expe|rienced
the advantage of having our Lives and
Manners formed in our younger Years to Ver|tue
and Religion, can't but find a pleasure in
contributing to the breeding up of others in
the same practice and exercise of them. Their
Misfortune and not their Fault has rendred them
uncapable of providing for themselves, and
'tis our Happiness that we are able to remedy
that Defect. 'Tis a satisfaction that we have
the Power, but 'tis certainly greater, that we have
the Wills to do it. And that we have both, is
probably very much owing to the careful ma|nagement
of our younger Years.
II. But Secondly, The other Advantage we
had, was the Benefit of Good Examples always
before us. And that is not a less Happiness
than the other. For Children especially act by
Imitation more than Instruction. A Virtuous
and Good Disposition is much sooner wrought
in them by Example than Precept. Prin|ciples
are not easily instilled into them, and not

quickly understood; and what they See, does
much more affect them than what they Hear:
The sight of a good Action fixes a lasting Idea,
and is never forgotten. And if we had such
advantages, the same are we obliged to convey
down to others. The Cause of Religion, the
Honour of our Church, and Gratitude to God,
do all require it of us. There are some who
take much Pains to make others Miserable, to
seduce them into bad Courses, before they have
learnt to know the Evil from the Good; and
are always contriving new Methods to make
Proselytes to Vice and Irreligion. It must cer|tainly
then be our Indispensible Duty, who
profess to be of a superior Order of Christians,
to fence against these Opposers of God and Re|ligion;
and to apply our utmost care and di|ligence,
that others who have equal pretensions
to Immortality with our Selves, should not
for want of right Management and good Examples,
be for ever miserably lost in another World.
The study of Peace and Unity among our
selves will do no small service to the Cause we
espouse. For Religion never appears so invi|ting,
as when 'tis adorn'd with a sedate and
quiet frame of Mind; that is its true and genu|ine
Shape; and it must appear Deform'd, when
it has lost its native Beauty and Excellence.

If therefore there are hatreds and variances
among our selves, both our Order and Re|ligion
will be aspers'd, and the Enemies of
God will take occasion to Blaspheme.
Let us then take care that we give not the
least suspicion of our dispensing with those ob|ligations
we are under, to promote Friendship,
and mutual Agreement among our selves; and
we need not fear any Attacks of our Enemies.
We shall then never be uneasie at any Reproach
or Calumnies that are thrown upon us, but
shall follow with satisfaction the Blessed Ex|ample
and Precepts of our great Master and
Saviour; and Pray for them that despitefully use us.
It would be almost a Scandal to us to be spoken
well of by those who treat our Religion it
self with Scorn. And indeed our Saviour hath
pronounced a Wo unto us, when all men shall speak
well of us. Let us then but have the pleasure
of discharging our Duties conscientiously to|wards
God and one another, and we shall never
be dissatisfied with the delight which others take
in contemning and reviling us. Let us give
no occasion to others to upbraid us with unhappy
differences among our selves, or with contemn|ing
and despising one another, and no other
Weapon formed against us can prosper.

But above all, let us put on Charity, the Great
bond of peace and of all vertues, and never be
weary of well doing. Let us never suffer the
ways of Sion to mourn, and never shut our Ears
against the Cries of Her Fatherless Children and
Widows: and then we may be sure that Heaven
will hear those many Prayers and Good Wishes
they will send up thither for us. And, as we have
had large Advantages, perhaps beyond most
others, by a Careful Education and good Examples, so
let us shew that we are truly sensible of them, by
giving others, as much as we are able, the same
Encouragements. By this shall all men know
that we are the true Disciples and Followers of
Christ; and by this means we may hope to see
both our Church and Religion Flourish; and that
Glory shall dwell in our Sion. O let Righteous|ness
and Peace Kiss each other; and then we
shall find that the Lord will Bless us, he will
Bless the House of Aaron. The Lord will Encrease
you more and more both you and your Children.
Wherefore praise the Lord, O Ierusalem, praise thy
God, O Sion; for he maketh Peace in thy Borders,
and hath blessed thy Children within Thee.
FINIS.




