





In's own defence the Author writes
Because while this foul Maggot bites
He nere Can rest in quiet
Which makes him make Soe sad a face
Heed beg your worship or your Grace
Vnsight vnseen to buy it



Maggots:
OR,
POEMS
ON
SEVERAL
Subjects,
Never before Handled.
By a Schollar.
LONDON,
Printed for Iohn Dunton, at the Sign
of the Black Raven, at the Corner of Princes
Street, near the Royal Exchange. 1685.




To the Honoured Mr. H. D. Head-Master
of the Free-School in D,
in the County of D.
THE great Cowley forgets not to ac|knowledge
his Master's Care and
Kindness while at Westminster; nor,
to come nearer, was Mr. Creech much tar|dier
in publishing his grateful Resentments
of the same Obligations from Mr. Curganven.You
may, Sir, justly wonder what makes
me drag in such Names into a Piece where
there is hardly like to be besides, one word
of Earnest, and perhaps not many of Sence:
You may be apt to judge me worthy not
much less Punishment than that Comoedi|an
who stole matter from the Sacred Hi|story
to patch up his Farce. But here I
must unavoidably take Refuge at the old
thumb'd Scrap, Sic parvis componere magnaOr,
to be more sincere; this seem'd a pret|ty
way of beginning; I was fond of the
Fancy, and knew not where to get a better.
However, tho' I ha' been bold enough to
make the Similie, I hardly dare be so saw|cy,

I mean o' my side, to apply it; nor,
tho' Mr. Dmay be as noble a Field for
Panegyric as any, venture to disgrace him
with prefixing here his Name, or my little
Praises. 'Tis enough that all who knew me
when under his Tuition, know what a fair
share I enjoy'd of his undeserved Favours;
and that all who know so many famous
Men as have had the happiness of their Edu|cation
there, are satisfy'd 'tis my own fault
I ha'n't made suitable Proficiency to what
might be rationally expected from such an
advantageous Foundation.As to my ad|dressing
these to you, though I can have no
full Excuse, yet my Presumption or Vanity
may admit, I hope, some Alleviation. This
is my first form'd Birth, of which, tho' ge|nerally
partaking all the Parent's ill hu|mours,
the greatest part of the World uses
to be, if not most fond, yet most concern'd;
and no wonder therefore, abstracting from
its Value or Defects, I am willing to pro|vide
for it, and prefer it, But tho' Grati|tude
commanded you should know the Au|thor,
and that exact Respect he is still ob|lig'd
to pay your former goodness; yet 
was too conscious of the mean way I testi|fy'd
it in, and the unworthiness of the Ac|knowledgment,
and had too tender a sense o
your Reputation, to let your name publick|ly

appear here, before I knew what Recep|tion
these true Trifles might find in the
World. The most, the best, the all I can
say for 'em, is what I remember many a
fair year past on such a kind of occasion:Accept
my Heart for Gift, and all,
which will be the highest Honour can be
pretended to by,
Sir,
Your Obliged Scbollar,
and
Humble Servant,
c.



THE
EPISTLE
TO THE
READER.
Gentle Reader,
IN the first place, pray take notice this is
addressed only to those that buy the Book,
for such as only borrow't, my good Friend
the Bookseller and I will ha' nothing to do with
'em: For is there any Reason or Conscience in't
that he should write so many Letters to me
about the business, and I take so much pains for
him, besides some appurtenances of Money for
Copy, Printing, c. only for a meer How d'ye?In
the next place, since it comes upper|most,
I am to tell ye bon fide, that is in Eng|lish
in verbo Sacerdotis, that all here are my
own pure Maggots, the natural Issue of my
Brain-pan, bred and born there, and only there.

Nay the Bookseller and I would have
you to know, these are no Scraps or Remains
of I know not who; which if you question, or
doubt, you are to be fobb'd off again with a Pri|soners-Basket
of Collections; I do ye to wit you
are egregiously mistaken in the matter, and prove
it by a couple of sturdy arguments. Onethat
never a Subject here was ever treated of,
at least in this Method, by Man, Woman, or
Sucking Child, from the beginning of the World
tothis present writing, and so downwards:
T'other argument, which you 'l find concludes very
strongly is,Because here wants a hundred
and fifty Copper-plates precisely, (curiously en|graven,
c.) which any that's but ordinarily
verst in modern History, knows to be as insepa|rable
a mark of an omnium gatherum as the
Cloven foot is of Mephistophiles. If you have
therefore the Luck to see one gaudy picture
at the beginning, which is even as it pleaseth
Painter, and Printer, set your Heart at rest there,
and hope not for a scrap of one more betweenGentle
Reader and Finis.But this is n't
a Quarter of what you and I have to say to
one another: I should be an hard hearted Bruit
of a Father indeed, if I could be so cruel as
to send this poor Brat of a Book abroad in|to
the wide World, without speaking so much as
one good Word for't. What may be objected
against it, is either as to the matter, or man|ner

of 't; and here, tho' with Mr. Rhombus
I should cut my Cheese into two particles, yet
since my Readers naturally fall into three parts,
I can't help't, to save my Life: They are either
the Wise, or Fools, who 'tis likely may be
disgruntled at the firstor the Trimmers, a Little o' one with t'other, who may be of|fended
at the Latter.Now, Quo' the first,'Tis
light, vain, frothy, airy,here's Time
mispent, and maybe some pains on Subjects be|low
the Gravity of a Man, at least of a Chri|stian,
to employ himself about. So much for
Ob: enter Sol.If those Gentlemen will
do me the favour to lend me an handful or two
of Beard, and be at the charge of grafting it
n, I'll oblige my self to a speedy, and thorough
Reformation in that case. Some time is no
doubt allowable for meer Recreation, this is cer|tainly
harmless; I hope nothing will be found here
that may either make me justly blush to own,
or another to read; and I hope they 'l grant this
kind of diversion a little more excusable than
fooling away two or three years, and it may be
as many Reams of Paper, in doleful Dittys of
Philander and Phillis, which uses to be the ge|neral
work of all that are Prentices to a Verse-wrightThey
have, I believe, heard of
the Great St. Basils Encomium on a Pismire,
as well as the Diversions of many famous Per|sons
on as Inconsiderable Subjects. I dare not

before them quote the Authority of the inge|nious
Preface to the Valentinian, (tho' hard|ly
one of 'em but must own when young they
have read both Plays and Romances:) But here's
somewhat I some time ago cabbag'd from Os|born,
that will I think help as well at a dead
lift.[Advice to a Son of Studiespag. 11.
parag. 17.] The way to Elegance of Stile,
is to employ the Pen upon every Er|rand,
and the more trivial and dry it
is, the more Brains must be allow'd for
Sawce. Thus by checking all ordinary
Invention, your Reason will attain to such
an Habit, as not to dare present you but
with what is excellent.]
Well! If all this won't satisfie, what think
ye of a knocking Argument, hight-necessity?
Who knows but my Shoes may want dearning,
or my Stockings happen to be a little out at
Elbows, (no Miracles in a Rhimester let me
tell ye) and in this case a Recruit of as ma|ny
yellow Ones as the Book-seller and I can
agree upon, will be no false Latin. They may
rejoyn,Why not something serious then, and
worthy my own pains, and others perusal? 'Tis
easily answered, That tho' such a design should
suit with my present Years and Inclinations, yet
who would be the Customers? Alas, their Par|ty
is but weak and small in the World; which
leads me to the second Part of my Text.

As concerning Fools, the Proverb is,A
Word to the Wise; but o' the contrary, I
hope to dispatch these more reasonable Gentle|men
a great deal sooner; their Objections sure
can't be very material, nor will their Weapons
make very deep Impressions, tho' soon shot:
However, being the greatest, the most conside|rable,
jovial, complaisant, agreeable part of
Mankind, 'twill be no small part of my Inte|rest
to oblige 'em. And why may'n't I have
my chance as well as others? If I take the
same Method by which another has pleas'd 'em:
If I write silly enough, why mayn't my Book
sell as well as any Christmas Tales and Won|derments
that has been clapt into Fist since
Bills were invented? I'm sure my Versesdribble
down daintily, as Bro. Bunnyan
has't, as well as the best Sing-song in e're
a Pilgrim's Progress of 'em all. But since
these are great words, and Comparisons are
odious, I'l make an end of 'em, and only as|sure
those whom it may concern,That 'tis all
perfectly new; 'tis all mirth,and I know not
what else 'tis recommends a Rattle to Chil|dren,
and Bartlomew Fair to Fools. But
if any chance to stick somewhere or other on
something that looks like Reason, which I'l en|gage
shan't fall out often enough to choak 'em,
why 'tis but taking a small leap, and They 're
safe and sound upon the Terra firma of Non|sence

agen.But now for the middle-siz'd
man, just in the Centre of Gravity, between
wise and fool,that cruel Indifferent, which
not a whining Lover in Chistendom but shall
tell you, is a thousand times more unsupporta|ble
than flat and plain hating. What's to be
done with this most unhoopable Reader? I
doubt he'l make as doleful a clatter among my
poor Maggots, as Lucian's Colossus, quar|relling
and hunching about for Elbow-room in
the Parliament of the Gods, who broke holes in
the very Roof of Olympus with his Steeple
Crown. This is that dreadful sort of Animal,
as common, and teasty, and mischievous in the
Play-house, as the Mesquito in hotter Coun|tries,
or Gnats in the Fenlands. By this time
I suppose you know what I mean by all this
clutter; neither better nor worse than that sort
of Creature call'd a Critic: And he 'tis likely
Tooth and Nayl falls abord the manner of my
work. Right Worshipful. 'Tis strain'd,af|fected,full
of Longe-petites, store of In|congruities,Uncorrect,TediousDi|gressions,
long-Comment run away with the
Text, c. If you have any thing more Mr.
Critic! pray speak now, or for ever after hold
your peace! No: This some will say is more
than enough, because unanswerable. But soft|ly;
One's Tale's good till another's is told.
Is any thing strain'd or obscure? In such un|common

Subjects, so purely out of the Road,
how can the Superstructure be otherwise! Pray
what Author could I consult o pillage a spark|ling
Verse from here and there, or, like some
Chymic Angel (as a late Author or two have
it) to nimm a golden Fancy, on such Themes
as these? Would some good Body would advise
what Shop in Paul's Church-yard, Duck-Lane,
or Little-Brittain, I should consult to
find a Treatise of the Causes, Essence and Pro|perty's
of a piece of Ginger-bread, or in what
part of the Transactions of the Royal Soci|ety,
I should find how many yards a nimble
Louse reaches at Hop-Stride-and-Jump?
This too, by the way, may in some measure ex|cuse
my Digressions, tho' even those may, like
an Episode in a Play, be so managed as to
become a Grace, rather than a Blurr to the
design, if they ben't too many;if proceed|ing
naturally from the main design, and all
helping towards it;if not over-tedious; all
which Requisites, or most of 'em, will, I hope,
square with mine. For the filling so much of
the Book with Explanation,Let's discourse
here for a while very gravely. Is't not bet|ter
to do thus than leave the Grammarians a
thousand year hence to scratch, and bite, and
break one anothers Heads about one's meaning,
as they do now about Perseus's, where, may
be, like the Quakers, we deny meanings, and

have, in that place, none at all. How would
poor Homer bless himself, were he, like his
own Ulisses, to return, and find how he is, since
his Death too, improv'd into a Statuary, a
Captain, a Moralist, a Politician, and would
you think it? a Divine too, and a thousand
other things he never so much as thought or
dream't of, poor old-Fellow, since the hour
he was born! But supposing the worst, or, if
you please, granting it, that Roguy Time
should be so sacrilegiously hungry as to de|vour
all these fine things in a Twelve-month
and a day, (as 'twould be a great Temptati|on,
I'll assure ye, to one sharp set to find 'em
under Pyes;) Yet, when for the reason before
alledg'd, it is impossible to have every where
common Notions on so uncommon Subjects,
I have by these Notes endeavoured to
make all plain to the meanest Capacity, with
as much brevity as could consist with clearness.
Nor in this very case is a noble Example want|ing,
were't not against the Rules of Decency,
to defend so little a thing with such great Au|thority.
For the Incongruities, which I doubt
not may, if any whose Eyes are sharpen'd
with Prejudice, or Iudgment, look close on
'em, be easily observed, (besides the Carelesness
and undress with which in many places the Verse
appears:) First, I remember I'm neither wri|ting
a Supposition in Philosophy, nor a System

of Divinity, nor an Epic Poem, where indeed
all ought to be most religiously observ'd. What
was said by a person, however by Wits of a
greater Genius expos'd, yet certainly, if thir|ty
Years Experience be any thing, no Fool in
Poetry, has certainly a great deal of truth in't.
He that servilely creeps after Sense,
Is safe, but ne'r shall reach at Excellence.
Or somewhat like it; tho' perhaps he may
be as apt to censure others in that case, as
many have him. If this ben't enough, I would de|sire
such as are yet dissatisfi'd, to take notice, that
tho' for Reasons told half-an-hour-agon, this
was printed, yet I could never be vain enough
to think 'twould procure the Author much Re|putation;
and therefore, as I wa'n't over am|bitious
of seeing my worthy Name adorning a
Pissing-Post, or glittering in a Term-Cata|logue,
so nor did I think it worth the while
to throw away better time in making it more
correct, or shewing it to any person, not trou|bling
my few Friends with my Resolution to pub|lish
it. If any are so unconscionable, that all
this won't satisfie 'm, but either for old Ac|quaintance,
or new Remembrance they must be
finding or making faults, the comfort on't is,
I have the same liberty, and am as free to
think what I please of theirs, if ever they have

or may come under the Predicament of the Au|thorI
can't remember any thing more,
but,You 're very welcome Gentlemen!
And therefore to conclude, with the help of
the Accademy of Complements, and my
Book-seller's Epistle,
So I rest,
Yours, Yours, Yours,
In ten thousand Obligations
of Love and Service,
c.



Books lately published by J. Dunton.
A Very delightful and useful Treatise, Entituled,
Heavenly Pastime, or pleasant Observations on all
the most remarkable passages throughout the Holy Bi|ble
of the Old and New Testament, newly Allegoriz'd,
in several pleasant Dialogues, Poems, Similitudes, Para|phrases,
and Divine Fancies: To which is added, (1) The
miraculous manner of the production of our Old Grand|mother
Eve, with the supposed manner of Adam's first
Nuptial Addresses to her, and the pleasant Circum|stances
of their Marriage. (2) You have an Account
of Eve's first Addresses to Adam, and her Industry in
making a Garment for her Husband. (3) You have
a pleasant Account of Adam and Eve's Winter Suits,
their Lodging and first Building, with an Account in
what pretty manner they first invented a fire to warm
them. (4) You have abundance of supposed Dialogues,
very full of delightful reading, c.
The Pilgrim's Guide: To which is added, The Sick
Man's Passing-bell. Both by Iohn Dunton.
A Continuation of Morning-Exercise Questions and Ca|ses
of Conscience, practically resolved by 31 Reverend and
able Divines in the City of London. In a large 4^t^o.
The Progress of Sin, or the Travels of Vngodliness,
in an Allegory. As also the manner of his Apprehen|sion,
Arraignment, Tryal, Condemnation and Execu|tion.
The second Edition: To which is now added,
Vngodliness's Voyage to Sea, with many pleasant Additi|ons
besides. By B. Keach. Illustrated with five lively
Cuts. Price bound 1 s.
The Travels of True Godliness, in an Allegory. The
seventh Edition: To which is now added five lively
Cuts, together with True Godliness's Voyage to Sea, with
many new Additions besides. By B. Kah, Author of
War with the Devil. Price Bound 1 s.





Maggots,

On a Maggot.
THE Maggot Bites, I must begin:
Muse! pray be civil! enter in!
Ransack my addled pate with Care,
And muster all the Maggots there!
Just at the Gate you 'l bless your Eyes,
To find one of so large a Size:
'Tis true he's hardly full as tall,
As the two striplings in Guildhall;
Yet is he Jolly, Fat, and Plump,
With dainty Curls from Snowt to Rump:
(^a) And struts, says Iordan what he can,
As goodly as any Alderman.
The Law of Poetry's not broke,
If, since an Horse in Homer spoke;
I steal, for my dear Worms Occasions
A scrap of Livy's fine Orations:

(^b) (And 'twill, no doubt, as much be said,
By him, as them for whom 'twas made.)
Within a Nut-shells Pulpit large,
As grave as Iudge that's giving charge;
Swelling as big as Iustled Bully,
Thus he holds forth like t' other Tully:
Take notice all that hither come!
(^c) Romanus ego civis sum.
'Twas I my self, 'twas I possest,
Scaevola's mighty Brain, and Breast;
I was the Worm in's Crown, that made,
The Hec. Porsenna's camp invade:
I did the' Heroick Iobb: 'twas I,
(^d) That made his Paw, like Drum-stick fry:
'Twould make the dullest Maggot smile,
To' observe his pretty motions, while,
His Mutton-Fist did Hiz, and Broil:
Of which I an account could give ye,
(^e) Truer by far than GoodmanLivy.
When the Spark Tarquin did prevail,
For all oretia's Tooth, and Nail;
And, which if true were ungenteel,
Kiss't her, poor Soul! against her will:
Was't not a very pleasant Whimm,
(^f) That she should kill her self for him?
When, I that saw it, durst have sworn,
She was as Innocent as Child unborn;
Pray let not Livy's Shams prevail!
I was the Worm, in Pate, and Tail:

That made the Matron bravely dye
A Sacrifice to Chastity.
(Good Folks that Love your Necks, stand clear
(^g) For I must leap five hundred Year:)
'Twas I brought down that Rampant Gypsie,
(^h) Whose Love and Pearls made Tony tipsie:
And, when she him no more could clasp,
(^i) The Maggot bit, as well's the Asp;
I stood at the Beds-feet, Intent
On her Last Will, and Testament:
I come she cryed, I com' dear Hony!
And then kickt up with Tony! Tony:
But I'me not only bold, and valiant,
For Wit, an't please ye! too's my Talent;
And by a better Title, I
May plead for God of Poesie.
Than those whom each dull Thief abuses,
In Dogrel Phoebus, and the Muses:
When Virgil all day long did write,
(^k) And lickt his pretty Cubbs at night;
I roll'd about his Brain, and there
Aeneas Good, and Dido fair,
Now plac'd a Scolding, now a Billing,
(^l) Sometimes begetting, sometimes killing.
What e're he of old Sybill prate,
'Twas I that propt his Hroes Fate;
And when Post-horses he did lack,
(^m) Lugg'd him to Hell a-Pick-a-Pack.
I am the very God, and like ye,
That fell in Love with Mrs. Psiche;

Let none my just pretensions scorn,
For Cupid was a Maggot born:
Then thriv'd, and grew, and by degrees,
Like his harmonious Brother-Bees,
Thrust out a Leg, and then a Wing,
And Bow, and Arrows for a Sting.
(^n) And when I please my self to Dart,
Into a ravisht Lovers Heart;
'Tis I who all their Souls inspire
With soft Wishes, gay Desire,
Melting Looks, and amorous Fire.
Hold! hold! 'tis time to grow more humble,
(^o) Least I like Phaeton, should tumble;
I'll Mount no more, but here sit steady,
Since I'me a Goddikin already.


NOTES.
(a) [And strut, say Iordan what he can,
As goodly as any Alderman.]
The Incomparable Mr. Jordan, (quem ho|noris causa nomino) who has made London as famous by his Lord Mayors day Poetry, as ever Pryn did Mount Orgueil.
(b) [And 'twill, no doubt, as much be said,
By him, as them for whom 'twas made.]
I suppose few Consciences but are a little too Co|stive in this Case, and for all Mr. Livy's Au|thority, are apt to believe Scaevola had other

things to mind than making fine speeches, and round Periods when his Fist was frying.
(c) [Romanus ego Civis sum.]
The beginning of Scaevola's Oration in Livy.
(d) That made his Paw, like Drum-stick fry:
'Tis a known Story, when Rome was besieged by King Porsenna, Mutius Scaevola went to the Camp, intending to stabb him, but mistook a Nobleman of his Train for the King, for this had his Hand broil'd over a Chaffing-Dish of Coals, (like a Pullets claw) but held it all the while unconcern'd and immovable: see the Story in Livy's Decades, Vol. 1. Book 1. p. 78.
(e) [Truer by far than Goodman Livy.]
For there would not be half so many prodigies in't.He somewhere or other, makes an Oxe speakand why not my Maggot as well?
(f) [That she should kill her self for him.]
Lucretia's Death, the cause, and manner on't is at every School-boys fingers EndsShe kill'd her self because Tarquin's Son Sixtus had ravish'd her.
(g) [For I must leap five-hundred Year.]
Supposing 'twere more from Lucretia to Cle|opatra, yet that's a good round Number, and Poets have seldom been old excellent at Cronolo|gy.Witness Virgil.
(h) [Whose Love and Pearls made Tony tipsie:]
Cleopatra dissolv'd in a Draught of Wine, gave Mark Anthony a Pearl worthI dont know what.
(i) 
[The Maggot bit, as well's the Asp.]
To avoid her being expos'd to the Conquerers Mercy, she clapt Vipers to her Breast, and dy'd.
(k) [And lickt his pretty Cubbs at Night.]
Virgils Commentators mention that as his custom, to compose some 40 verses, and reduce 'em all into 8, or 10.
(l) [Sometimes begetting, sometimes killing.]
This must be taken Sano Sensu. Take notice I mean Aeneas for one, and Dido for t' other.]
(m) [Lugg'd him to Hella-Pick-a-Pack.]
Aeneas his descent into Hell takes up a fair Cantler in Virgil; nor I believe, tho' the learn|ed differ here, will any quarrel about this Cir|cumstance; whither he rode thither on my Mag|got, or Old Sybilla's Broomstaff.
(n) [And when I please my self to dart,
Into a ravisht Lovers Heart.]
And no doubt will be as good Company there as the Fury's Snakey Worms, which they are bound to throw into every one they bewitch.
(o) [Least I like Phaeton should tumble.
Who fairly broke his Neck from his Fathers Coach-box, like Crashaws Dwarf from the Pis|mires back.



On two Souldiers killing one another for a Groat.
FUll doleful Tales have oft been told,
By Chimney warm in Winter cold,
About the Sacred Thirst of Gold;
To hear 'em half 'twould mad ye.
To Jayl how many Headlong run,
How many a hopeful Youth's undone,
How many a vile ungracious Son,
For this has murder'd Daddy?
Yet those that tumble Books, may find,
Unless (as who can help't!) They 're blind,
That Silver comes not far behind,
But's e'ne as bad as t 'other:
For this, who'd of such luck have thought?
For this, tho' not above a Groat,
Two Valiant Souldiers lately fought,
And murder'd one the other.
Well! who can tell how soon he' may dye?
Both, as good Friends as You and I,
Their hungry Wembs to satisfie?
Scale an enchanted Castle:
Painted without some think't a kin,
To that renowned Fort wherein
Quixot the Great such fame did win,
And with fell Gyants Wrastle. (^a)

As kind as ever in their Life,
As kind they sate as Man and Wife,
O! who among 'em scatter'd Strife;
That Petty fogging Fury?
But this is plainly prov'd by all,
Some Viper to their Hearts did crawl,
And so they 'l find it if you call
An Honest Poets Jury. (^b)
A Groat was dropt upon the Board,
This takes it up, That draws his Sword,
And tells him it must be restor'd,
Or else expect what follows!
Each gives the Lye, and at that Word
Each runs upon the t 'other's Sword,
And each, stretcht fairly Under-board,
In Blood and Liquor wallows.
So Aruns, and great Brutus fell, (^c)
And so they fought, th scarce so well,
So to Elysium, or to Hell,
They sunk, I know not whether:
So on New-markets Jolly Heath,
The Hawk, and Hearn strugling for Breath
Th not in Life yet joyn'd in Death:
Come tumbling down together. (^d)
Both grin at their expiring Foe,
With Sword in Fist both Huffing go,
To fright the trembling Shades below,
Bloated with Martial Glory:

Both in the Bed of Honour rest,
With Lawrel boghs, and Garlands dress't,
Perfum'd as sweet as Phenix-Nest:
And there's an end o' th' Story.
Yet take good Counsel, Courteous Friend,
And learn by their untimely End,
Not about Trifles to contend,
Or with another grapple:
Since Carrion-Strife has often wrought,
Such mischiefs as you'd ne're ha' thought,
And murder'd for a Silver Groat,
As well's a Golden Apple. (^e)


NOTES.
(a) Quixot the Great such fame did win,
And with fell Gyants Wrastle.]
Vid. Book the p. the of the renowned History of Don Quixot. Where the Knight was in great Peril by three dreadful Leather-Bottles of Wine, whom after a sore Battle, he at last Valiantly hew'd all to pieces.
(b) [An Honest Poets Iury.]
'Tis notorious how necessary Actors in any Poetical Murder, or Mischief, a Fury, and a Viper areVid. Virg. Aenead. B. 7. p. l. and if I may profane that great Name so much to quote it here, Mr. Cowleys Dav. B. p. l.
Virg.
Huic Dea caeruleis unum de crinibus anguem
Conjicit, inque Sinum praecordia ad intima subdit.
Cowley.
(c) [So Aruns, and great Brutus fell.]
Livy relates it in Book 1st. of 1st Vol. p. 72.  the first encounter, Aruns and Brutus both fell dea from their Horses, pierced quite through with one anothers Spears.
(d) [The Hawk and Hearn came tumbling dow together.]
The Custom of the Hearn when she sees th Hawk stooping at her, and no way of escape, is  turn her Long Bill upwards, upon which the Hawk not being able to stop, runs it self through, and so bot often drop down dead together.
(e) [As well's a Golden Apple.]
The Story is worn thed-bare of the Golden Apple which was the cause of the Wars of Troy.



The Argument.
A Tame Snake left in a Box of Bran,
was devoured by Mice after a great
Battle.
Written An. Dom. 1681.
NO Monarch's Death, no fall of Prince or King,
My humble rural Muse intends to sing.
Let others strive in everlasting-Verse,
First to make Hero's, then t'adorn their Herse.
Of stranger Tragedys I will complain;
Low Subjects best befit a lowly Swain.
Immortal Maro did immortal make
The loving Gnat that sav'd him from a Snake:
The Theme's inverted now, why should not I
Give my poor harmless Worm an Elegy?
Why should not I his luckless Fate bemoan,
Wrong'd and abus'd by all, but wronging none?
Bred in the Fields, he oft was bruis'd and broke
By ev'ry cross-grain'd Traveller's cruel stroke;
At length he leaves th' unhospitable Air,
And to the Town's Asylum does repair;
There all his Tricks and all his Slights imparts,
o to revive his Patron's drooping Hearts:

Now through a Ring he 'll softly gliding pass,
Now weave a thousand Circles in the Grass;
Now in a thousand folds himself he 'll tye,
Which with the Oraculous Gordian Knot shall vye:
This Alexander needs not cut in twain;
Next moment finds it all dissolv'd again.
Him no proud Louvres, nor Escurial's Hide,
What has a humble Worm to do with Pride?
A little Box which his kind Master gave,
His Pallace was, and would have been his Grave;
But sacrilegious Mouths him thence did tear,
And made their Guts his loathed Sepulcher.
Epicurizing there on homely Bran,
He Gluttony upbraids in wiser Man;
As happy as a harmless Snake could be,
Happy as Cadmus or Hermione.
Erinnis saw, and foam'd, and rav'd, and griev'd,
My Snake better than her black Vipers liv'd:
Unto great Moustapha she does repair,
With leathern Wings forcing the burthen'd Air;
Moustapha, cruel, secret, bold and wise,
Redoubted Monarch of the well-teeth'd Mice,
Approaching his proud Palace, she put on
The form of Mab, Empress to Oberon:
When the stern Prince of Mice in slumber lay
Tir'd with luxurious Revels of the day,

The Fury envying him so calm a rest,
Enthrones a Vice-Roy Viper in his Breast.
Then thus accosts him,Wake, lost King, awake,
Unless your last long Sleep you mean to take:
That Traytor who your Brother once o're|power'd,
And on yon fatal Lake his Limbs devour'd,
When with Physignathus he went to view
Regions before unknown to him and you;
The treacherous Water-Snake hard by does rest,
And will, I fear, attempt your sacred Breast:
Rise then, if you 're a King, and guard your Throne,
Revenge your Brothers Quarrel, and your own.
Thus said, no longer she above abides,
But down agen, a-down to Hell the Fury slides.
Up starts the Micean Prince, and stares around,
And with his Cryes the ecchoing Walls re|sound:
Off from his Bed he leaps, and takes his Launce,
A piece of an old Needle found by chance;
Then with another skip he nimbly flees
To his tough Shield made of the Rind of Cheese:

A Guard he cries, with Scrieches shrill and long,
And his bold Subjects to the Presence throng,
Like walls of Brass they all around him stand:
When Silence was observ'd at his Command,
He thus bespake his Princes,
Shall we be
Always content with sordid Slavery?
Not Long ago stern Iove fierce Tybert sent,
Who all the Flower of our sad Nation rent;
When freed from her a while we breath'd in peace,
New Foes, new Rebbels every day increase.
And is this all the Guard my Princes keep?
Thus could you kindly let your Soveraign sleep,
Whilst a fierce Viper does in ambush lye?
Thus could you undiscover'd pass him by?
Upon you Cliff, my Genius found him out,
With feeblewooden Walls inscons'd about.
There needs no more, if ye are Mice, begin,
Stand to your Arms, and take the Fortress in.
That happy Mouse that brings the Tray|tor's Head,
With Garlands Crown'd, shall round our Streets be led,
And my Fair Daughter grace his Nuptial Bed.

A dreadful new-form'd Army strait ap|pears,
Bright numerous Troops of eager Volunteers:
Unto the Castle their joynt Forces drew,
All Pioneers, and all Assailants too:
Its feeble Walls they madly undertake,
And quickly the too weak Foundations shake.
A spacious Breach but too too soon was made,
But my Snake knew not how to be afraid;
Rais'd his blew Crest, with Hisses fill'd the Air,
And bravely does for brave defence prepare.
Artophagus, the Young, the Fair, the Stout,
Get's o're the Rampire first of all the Rout:
But the Defendant nimbly thrusts him down,
And on a Rocky Mountain splits his Crown;
The fall does all his well-head'n bones dis|place,
His Brains Spurt out and stick upon the face
Of sad Sitaphagus, who was combin'd
By Friendship to him, as by Nature joyn'd:
Upon his bleeding Reliques down he fell,
Wishing for ever only there to dwell;
He'd his desire, for, crusht with a huge stone,
Even as in Life, so they in Death are one.
Their fates inrag'd the bold surviving Crew,
Who to the Breach like Bees in Clusters flew;
With Ivory Spears some lance his chequer'd Breast,
Some scaling Ladders raise, and mount, the rest;

Undermine all the avenues, and some,
Bring in Reserves, (without or Flute, or Drum
All their Efforts as yet are spent in vain,
Unmov'd he like a Rock does still remain:
Huge weights the Ladders crack, he sees his foes,
Mangled, and crush't by their own party's blows.
Great Moustapha himself does now draw nigh,
And his glad followers voices rend the Sky;
His Ianizary's to the assault he calls,
Who like themselves assail'd the tottering Walls;
Swarms of four-footed Warriours now had set
Their Arms upon a lofty Parapet:
A natural counterscarp of living store;
The Assailants strove at first to mine't, but they
Discourag'd with the Labour went away:
Here the Sly Snake swift through a Port-hole goes,
Unfear'd, unmarkt by his presumptious foes:
With various windings he attempts to shock
The now more than Half undermined Rock;
No little Prudence, and no little pain
Now loos'd the stubborn Earth which did re|tain

The unwieldy stone; the stone which now did bear
Innumerable Warriour, who repair
To the free breach, does on a sudden fall
And in Inevitable ruine plung'd 'em all.
Loud shreeks here scale the Heavens, and a warm flood
Springs up from the poor mangled Miceans blood.
The horrid paint press't from the reeking Dead,
Soon turns the Living's sable hiew to Red.
Heart-chilling fear, and black despair around,
The fearful, desperate Micean camp resound;
They can't for the retreats late signal stay,
He's the best Souldier thought that fastest runs away.
The Mighty Dragon he has hir'd they cry,
And raise a formidable Mutiny:
Moustapha from his Tent does hasten out,
By Love, or fear to stop the murmuring Rout;
Now he perswades, and now enrag'd does stamp,
Bidding his Guards kill all that leave the Camp.
A greater fear prevails with some to stay,
Tho' envying such as ran betimes away:
The enraged Tyrant of proud Micea's Lands,
Mounted upon a Captive Moustrap stands;

His furious Eyes sparkle with boyling Ire,
He breaths Destruction, Blood, Revenge, and Fire.
Then thus Accosts his Army.
Can it be!
How long have Micean Souldiers learn'd to flee?
Degenerate Mice! to lead you I disdain,
Throw down your Arms, and e'ne sneak home again!
Where are those Heroes who with me could dare,
And beat the Elephant, whose shoulders bare,
Without a Trope, huge Castles in the Air?
One of your Valiant Ancestors, in strife
With Man himself did save a Lyons Life,
And for his lawful Guerdon did possess
By her great Parent's Will the Lyoness;
Tho' some may his too luckless end deride,
Like Phaeton in great attempts he dy'd.
Was it indeed so long ago, when we
Took noble Arms against the Tyranny,
Of cruel Puss? (a Curse upon the Name!)
Where are your Souls? where is your dear-bought fame?
Well may the Rebel Frogs rejoyce to see
How their brave Conqu'rers poorly conquer'd be.

Well may they rise against us, well may they
Chase their poor low-soul'd, little Lords away.
Shall one weak foe or forces baffle thus,
And shall a Worm contend with Mighty us?
O Rowze your Souls, and wake your Rage and Hate,
Poor Wretch! Valiant he's not, but desperate;
See where your mangled Fellows gasping lie,
The Tryumphs of his Viperous Cruelty!
Be ready to revenge your Kindreds falls,
As soon as the too tardy Trumpet calls!
On then like Mice! the Manes of the Dead,
Call for Revenge upon his guilty Head.
A joyful Hum ran round the Camp, they shake
Their dreadful Arms, and preparation make
For General Assaults. This from on high,
The pensive wounded Snake with Grief did Spy;
His Walls were gone, his feeble Curtains rent,
His food, and all his Ammunition spent:
There's no hope; dye he must, yet e're he dyes,
Amongst his Friends he 'll leave some Legacies:
His batter'd Castle which must be his Grave,
To his kind Master once again he gave.
His Bones, if reserv'd from the murdring Hand,
Of the fierce Mice, to make his Hat a Band;

His Brains, if them some generous Mouse would bring,
To them he gives who say he has a Sting:
Who 'll give their sence the lye in meer de|spight,
Altho' they see he'l neither sting, nor bite.
This done, he scorns to sneak into his Grave,
But will at least a noble exit have;
Unto the Castle Wall he seems to grow,
Ready to meet his Death, to meet his foe:
Hundreds in Crowds over crusht hundreds come,
Some to meet Conquest, most to meet their Doom.
Weary'd with Death, and tir'd with killing now,
The Champions Body, not his Mind must bow;
Now first his Enemy's weak hopes begin,
And Floods of desparate foes all round come rolling in:
All round he glides, and be they ne're so strong,
Their Death he hasts, and does his Life pro|long.
But when he still encreasing Enemy,
Like a swoln Torrent does all stops defie;
His nimble Tail about their Legs he twists,
In vain his Fury every one resists:

Then from on high a-down himself does throw,
At once expiring with the expiring foe;
Encompass't round with Trophys, there he lies,
And in the Bed of Honour bravely dyes.


A Pindaricque,
On the Grunting of a Hog.

FReeborn Pindaric never does refufe,
Either a lofty, or a humble Muse:
Now in proud Sophoclaean Buskins Sings,
O Hero's, and of Kings,
Mighty Numbers, mighty Things;
Now out of sight she flys,
Rowing with gaudy Wings
A-cross the stormy Skys,
Then down again,
Her self she Flings,
Without uneasiness, or Pain
To Lice, and Dogs,
To Cows, and Hogs,
And follows their melodious grunting o're the Plain.


2.
Harmonious Hog draw near!
No bloody Butchers here,
Thou need'st not fear,
Harmonious Hog draw near, and from thy beauteous Snow
Whilst we attend with Ear,
Like thine prick't up devou't;

To taste thy Sugry voice, which here, and there,
With wanton Curls, vibrates around the circling Air,
Harmonious Hog! warble some Anthem out!
As sweet as those which quiv'ring Monks in days of Y'ore,
With us did roar;
When they alas,
That the hard-hearted Abbot such a Coyl should keep,
And cheat 'em of their first, their sweetest Sleep;
When they were ferretted up to Midnight Mass:
Why should not other Piggs on Organs play,
As well as They.


3.
Dear Hog! thou King of Meat!
So near thy Lord Mankind,
The nicest Taste can scarce a difference find!
No more may I thy glorious Gammons eat!
No more,
Partake of the Free Farmers Christmass store,
Black Puddings which with Fat would make your Mouths run o're:
If I, tho' I should ne're so long before the Sentence stay,
And in my large Ears scale, the thing ne're so discreetly weigh,
If I can find a difference in the Notes,
Belcht from the applauded Throats
Of Rotten Play-house Songsters-All-Divine,
If any difference I can find between their Notes, and Thine:
A Noise they keep with Tune, and out of Tune,
And Round, and Flat,
High, Low, and This, and That,
That Algebra, or Thou, or I might understand as soon.


4.
Like the confounding Lutes innumerable Strings,
One of them Sings;
Thy easier Musick's ten times more divine;

More like the one string'd, deep, Majestick Trump-Marine:
Prythee strike up, and cheer this drooping Heart of Mine!
Not the sweet Harp that's claim'd by Iews,
Nor that which to the far more Ancient Welch belongs,
(^a) Nor that which the Wild Irish use,
Frighting even their own Wolves with loud Hubbubb|boos.
(^b) Nor Indian Dance, with Indian Songs, Nor yet,
(Which how should I so long forget?)
The Crown of all the rest,
The very Cream o'th' Jest:
Amptuous Noble Lyrethe Tongs;
Nor, tho' Poetick Iordan bite his Thumbs,
At the bold word, my Lord Mayors Flutes, and Kettle-Drums;
Not all this Instrumental dare,
With thy soft, ravishing, vocal Musick ever to compare.



NOTES.
(a) [Nor that which the Wild Irish use,
Frighting even their own Wolves with loud Hubbubba|boos.
'Tis the Custom of the Irish, when any thing is stoln, or other sudden accident, presently to set up that note, [Hubbubba|boo] the next that hears it does the like, and so Intelli|gence is conveyed swifter than by any Hue-and-Cry with us.
(b) [Nor Indian Dance, with Indian Songs.]
A Taste of whose Humour, and Harmony has been often enough presented at the Play-house by the Indian Girls.



To my Gingerbread Mistress.
DEar Miss, not with a Lie to cheat ye,
I love you so that I could eat ye.
'Tis not that Gold that does adorn
Your Bosom like the rising Morn,
When dropping dry from watry Bed
Sol shakes his Carrot-Loggerhead:
'Tis not your Gold I mean to wooe;
Alas, 'tis You, and only You.
'Tis not that Coronet which does shine
With Beams not half so bright as thine,
Which scatter Glories that excell
The Nose of Zara's Dowzabel. (^a)
'Tis not the Rose of lip-like hiew,
Nor Virgin-Plumb's Caelestial blew,
Nor all the Nuts that plunder'd be
From the sad Squirrel's Granarie;
Nor Pears long cramm'd in faithful store,
As yellow as the Golden-Ore;
Nor Crumpling sweet, with Cheeks divine,
Yet not so fair, my Dear, as thine;
Nor Custards stuck with Plumbs and Flies,
Nor Heart-reviving Pudding-Pyes,
Tho' queasie Stomach's them contemn,
Bake't on thy n'own dear Granny's Wemm. (^b)
Ah! 'tis not, 'tis not this, nor all
The Goods in Cellar, Pouch or Stall,

Which Apple-Woman does provide
For such as make her Child their Bride:
King Harry Groats with Rust o're-grown,
And Edward Shillings more than one;
I'l say't, my Love, and say't again,
'Twas none of these that caus'd my pain:
'Twas first thy goggling, Egg-like Eyes,
Like those in Mahomet's Paradice, (^c)
Which did my Iack-with-a-Lanthorns prove,
And mir'd me up to th' Ears in Love.
Then all thy Dotes camepowdring in,
The Mother's manly Nose and Chin,
Thy Nose which (not thy Faces Friend)
Keeps a poor Lover at Arm's end;
Thy Chin which with kind Curl doth grace
Thy n'own dear Father's Wainscot Face;
A Mouth which should with Mopsa's vye, ^d
Altho' Pamela's self stood by;
Lips which like Paris Casements shew,
Still opening with a Guarda vou'z; ^e
There Caravans of Spices meet,
Not Western Civet half so sweet, ^f
Nor mellow Ducks in Claret stew'd,
When Atoms were in Altitude. ^g
But not to stay on every Charm,
In Iar-like Leg, and May-pole Arm;
Nor how my Conquress did prevail,
And wound with every Tooth and Nail:
Ah! 'twas, as too-too well you know,
Your Hand that struck the mortal blow.

That Mutton-fist, like Bolt of Thunder,
Poor Lover fell'd as flat's a Flounder.
Under a Willow I complain,
And grunt, and cry, and roar in vain;
And, as mad Lovers use to do,
Pick straws, andwhat a Fcare you?
From side to side I loll about,
Idle, ungainly, lazy Lout,
That was, e're you I saw, in sooth,
(Altho' I say't) a dapper Youth.
Here every hour with dreary Frown,
I lay my Head on Elbow down:
Help, or this Love will quite undo me!
Heark how it runs clean thro' and thro' me!
The sighs which up and downwards go,
That I am near the Rattles, show:
Think not that I false grief pretend!
Alas, I weep at either end!
My sweet Sweet-heart, how is't you are
So foolish? sure you be'n't so fair.
O be'n't so hard! what e're you grow,
The Baker sure ne'r made you so.
My Heart, not only with your stroke,
But my few Teeth will all be broke.
Melt then to cure my horrid Drowth;
O melt, altho 'tis in my Mouth,
Which waters at you; for 'tis true,
Nothing can quench my thirst but you.
Now my cold Fit is more severe,
I shall kick up with meer Despair.

These nipping Mornings pinch, and you,
To med the matter, freeze me too.
Dear Girl, for once, at my desire,
Prethee, from Ice be turn'd to Fire.
(What e're my Readers Judgment be,
I'm sure I here mean honestly,
Such a kind, harmless, lambent Flame,
As from Ascanius Temples came.)
O warm my Soul, for Cupid's cold-Iron-Dart,
And your more frosty frowns have kibe'd my Heart.


NOTES.
(a) [The Nose of Zara's Dowzabel.]
Vid.The famous and renowned History of Don Zaradel Fogo;the Lady of whose best Affections, (a piece of purtenance as necessary to a Knight Errant, as Mambrino's Helmet, or the Parallel of this Lady [Dulcinea de'l Fobo|so] to Don Quixot) whose Damsel that had wofully besmitten the gentle Knight, was, after all the Parentheses, YcleptDowzabella,Of whom the Poet thus,
"Whose gallant gray Eyes, like Stars in the Skies,
"Denoted, c.
(b) [Bake't on thy n'own dear Granny's Wemm.]
A Scotch Oven.A Traveller eating some

Cake on the Road in Scotland, complain'd 'twas
not well bake't: 'Twas reply'd, that was im|possible;
for 't had been all night baking upon the Hostess's warm Wemm.
(c) [Thy goggling Egg-like Eyes
[Like those in Mahomet's Paradice.]
Among the other pleasures in the Heaven of his own building, Mahomet's Alcoran promi|ses the Mussal-man Bed-fellows with Eyes as big as Eggs; esteemed as great a piece of beau|ty, it seems, by the Asiatick's, as great Lips by most of the Africans.
(d) [A Mouth which should with Mopsa's vye]
Altho' Pamela's self stood by.]
See the Description of charming Mopsa, in an ingenious drolling Poem at the End of Sir Philip Sidney.
(e) [Lips which like Paris-Casements shew,
When opening with a Guard vou'z!]
Such as walk late at Paris, and when the Windows open with that sound, avoid not in time, will soon, by their bounteous benevolence, smell out the meaning of the Allusion here.
(f) [Not Western Civet half so sweet.]
Paracelsus is reported, (with a great deal of washing you may think) to have reduced no better nor worse than a Siran't please ye, into an excellent PerfumeBalsamum Apo|plecticum, but Assa foetida to't,and after|wards christen'd it by the cleanlier name of Zi|betum Occidentale.
(g) [When Atoms were in Altitude.]
Willis in his Book de Fermentatione, gives that account of Putrefaction of Bodies; He says, the blood, c. ferments, and the Particles are highly agitated,(and a great deal more, which, if you ha'n't enough for your money, you shall have in the next Edition.)


On the Bear-fac'd Lady.
TOo charming Maid, whose Viznomy di|vine
Shoots Darts around like any Porcupine! ^a
Who give to Cupid's Arrows new supplyes,
Heading 'em from your Face, and not your Eyes,
Like Cleavland's Lover, Pallizado'd in, ^b
And fenc'd-by the sharp Turn-pikes of your Chin.
Happy the Man to whom you must disclose
The flaming Beauties of your Rain-bow Nose!
What tho' in vain t' approach your Lips he seek?
He may with leave come near, and kiss your Cheek;
If, as when Turks expect they should be heard
At Prayer, you will but turn aside your beard: ^c

All this were true, tho' Art should you dis|grace,
And shew her own, instead of Nature's Face.
But you discreetly choose the Russian way, ^
And closely veyl it till the Wedding-day;
Not Stega-like, by too sincere a carriage, ^e
Your Imperfections shew, and mar your Mar|riage.
You are resolv'd that Faith and Stomach too
Shall meet in him who must be blest with you
And by so just a Touch-stone mean to prove
The Mettal of his Courage and his Love:
Nay, Ioan, her self, whom he'l i'th dar embrace
When the Light comes, may have my La|dy's Face
He has his Chance, it may be good enough
For all Love's but a Game at Blind-mans-buff
He who to meet a Devil does prepare,
Like Spencer's Knight, may find an Ange there. ^
Missing a Snake, he may at last prevail
To hold a fat, tho' slipry Eel by th' Tail.
When Psyche thro' the Air to Cupid rode,
She fear'd a Dragon, but she found a God. 
Suppose the worst, a Rival's spight has sed
Here's Spouse enough, tho' she had ne're a Hea

A just proportion every where behold,
And Gold, the Cream o'th' Jest, remember Gold;
Gold! Gold! those subtle Charms must needs prevail;
Gold! Gold! enow, had she nor Head, nor Tail.
Sure this must even the flintyest Heart subdue;
Those Chains, those Pearls, those Lockets, all for you!
What if no Cubbs bless the ill-natur'd Joys?
Look, she's already stock'd with yellow Boys;
And she
May live like Etheldreda, undefil'd, ^h
While you
Lye with her Coin, and get her Bags with Child.


NOTES.
This Story, and the Lady's Pictureapper|taining thereunto,are notorious enough about London, without Explication of the Subject in general.
(a) [Shoots Darts around like any Porcupine.]
She's pictur'd with a Bear's-head, and conse|quently, her face all hairy.
(b) [Like Cleavland's Lover, Pallizado'd in.]
Alluding to that in Cleavland's Souldier;
"[O let the Turn-pikes of my Chin
"Take thy Half-moon Fortress in.
(c) [If, as when Turks expect they should be heard 
At Prayer, you will but turn aside the beard.
A late Traveller, and ingenious Observer at Constantinople, in the Relation he gives of their Customs in Devotion, has this among the rest; That when in the highest fit of Zeal, and Top of their Service, for an Amen, they are to ma|nage their Beards, or else the work is left un|compleat.
(d) [But you discreetly choose the Russian way,
And closely veil it till the Wedding-day.]
In the Description of Russia, among Struys's Voyages, he describes this for one humour religi|giously observed in all their Marriages;They never see one another till made fast.
(e) [Not Stega-like, c.
This old Lady, in the Play, out of sincerity used to let her Courters see all her Imperfections,as her No-Teeth, No-Eyes, One-Leg, and so frighted 'em all away.
(f) [He who to meet a Devil, c.
Like Spencer's Knight, c.
See Spencer's Fairy Queen; In one of the first Cantosinstead of an old-Witch, the Knight found a brisk young Lady.
(g) When Psyche, c.
She fear'd a Dragon, c.
Psyche was required by the Oracle to be ex|pos'd to a Dragon, as Andromeda to the WhaleWhen in pops Cupid, like Perseus himself, sets her at liberty, carrys her home, and all that
(h) [Shemay live, like Etheldreda, undefil'd,
Vid. Fuller's Church-History, p. 91. This Etheldreda, would you think it, was marryed to a Prince, and a King, and yet, by her own desire, liv'd still as pure a Virgin as everher Mother was when she was born.


An Anacreontique on a Pair of
BREECHES.
GEntly flow, my easie Strain,
Smoother than Tempe's Heav'nly Plain,
Smoother than e're Anacreon sung,
Anacreon sweet with silver Tongue,
When he by fair Bathillus lay, ^a
Melting his softer hours away.
No rough harsh sounds to gagg the Voice,
Nor hoarse Pindaric's grumbling Noise,
oft as the amorous Turtles call,
mooth as the whisp'ring Waters fall;

Smooth as thred-bare Breeches be,
Soft as the Fustian round my Knee.
Where shall I my work begin,
And stick the Muse's Needle in?
The Muses, which if Fame says true,
Were Sempstresses and Taylors too:
Where shall I use my artful Hand;
At the Knee, or at the Band?
Fruitless labour, fruitless pain!
All my skill and time's in vain:
Never will my Trouble end,
I eternally must mend;
For one hole starts out two more,
Hydra-like, or three, or four;
Patch on patch are new lay'd on,
Till th' old, like Iason's Ship, are gone. ^b
Match't full lawfully they 've bin,
For sure none were too near a kin.
From how many a narrow Hem
Has my Botcher cabbag'd them?
Spoils of Nations far and nigh,
Meer Babel of good Husbandry!
Not the Iay could Feathers boast
From so many a different Coast.
But since Friends at last must part,
Adieu, adieu, with all my Heart;
Ill, as Friends to Poets use,
Give y' a good Name, and turn you loose
Take your chance, your Fortune try,
Pray beg or starve, as well as I;

Trouble me with your Raggs no more,
Here's your Pass, and out of Door.
Ever honest, ever true,
You've stuck as fast as Shirt can do;
Which soon, if you no longer stay,
Will drop loose, and run away.
Long did your lean Pockets stare,
Like Camelions, filld with Air;
And what ever place were torn,
They be sure were ner o'reworn.
Generous Six-pence born with Pain,
Have often made 'em gape in vain;
Now they 'l save that dreadful Charge,
They can far cheaper starve at large:
Take this Groat, and do not prate;
Take the half of my Estate:
Scamper now as well as I,
To the barren Indys fly,
And see if e're a Slave that's there,
Is Master of a lighter Pair.
Never fear where e're you go,
You 're sure ne're to fall more low,
Till your selves with Earth you trust;
Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust.


NOTES.
(a) [When he by fair Bathillus lay.]
See Mr. Creech's admirable Translation of

Horace; Epod. 14.
" Thus soft Anacreon for Bathyllus burn'd,
" And oft his Love he sadly mournd.
(b) [Patch on, Patch are still laid on,
Till th' old like Iason's Ship are gone.]
The Story of Jason's Ship is almost as muc worn, as its Subject; which was so often mend|ed, and vampt up again, till not one plank of the Original-primitive Wood was left; tho' neither did that suffer so many Transmutations as the ol Gentlemans Knife that had had five new haf and seven new blades.


A Tobacco Pipe.
IN these raw mornings, when I'me freezing ripe
What can compare with a Tobacco-pipe?
Prim'd, Cock't, and Toucht 'twould bette heat a man
^a Than ten Bath-Faggots, or Scotch-warmin Pan
Let others vamp their founder'd Strength an Age
With Porringers of double brew'd Pottage!
And those who thus to charge themselves  loath
Break-fast upon a Quart of Barley-broath!

Fire-balls of liquid flame; Death in each drop
Let others guzzle at a Brandy-shop;
Till all their moysture, all their Treasure spent,
They stand, scorcht Scheletons, their own sad Monument!
Where each of these accustom'd Cordials fails,
Let others Bite, and others blow their Nails!
I have an Vniversal Medicine chose,
Which warms, at once, my Gutts, and Hands, and Nose.
^b Which like the noble Coco-Tree, is good
For Physick, or for Rayment, or for Food:
^c All you experimental men of Thought,
Who ever Whirligigs to Gresham brought;
Which London with implicit Knowledge sees,
^d Made up of I's, and O's, and A's, and B's;
Show me one Engine which your Stores enshrine,
That shall Pit, Box, and Gallery with mine?
When your rackt Brains to birth some Embryo bring,
That's oft for nothing Good, but mine for eve|ry
Thing,
Ungrateful silly man, who makes divine
^e Those who at first invented Corn and Wine!
Nay he's begodded too whose casual Knocks,
^f On the Anvil, first found out a Tinderbox.
Ungrateful Man! whose memory slips that Name,
From whom Tobacco pipes Invention came!
But his more bulky worth's too big for fame.

Whose Trump would crack with that vast work alone,
Nor any Pipe can sound his praise besides his own.
His Brother-Glyster-pipe, that do's ascend,
And almost meet half-way at t' other end;
(New method for Impaling!) ne're could do,
That good of one side, which this can of Two:
My Ambodexter either way will go,
Now Struts above, now humbly creeps below;
Above its Virtues, ne're admitted strife,
Below 'tis said that once it sav'd a Life.
For, when One in that speaking Trumpet spoke,
He laugh'd so long till his Imposthume broke:
Up to its proper place we 'll now return't,
(But wipe it first, or if you please, lets burn't!
For the Tooth-ake 'tis a specifick aid,
^g For every Amorous Boy, or Lovesick Maid:
An hundred Med'cins usd and usd in vain,
By each Old Woman taught to' asswage the pain;
By each Old Woman, who their Vertues try'd,
Forty' year ago, when her third Husband dy'd;
Apply the Pipe! this Instrument will cure,
^h The Surgeons Fire, or Pincers scarce so sure,
Tho' they the most effectual Method take;
Cut off the Head, I'll warn't no more 'twill Ach,

This gently heals, while Chrystal streams distill,
As from the Mother-Rock some plenteous Rill,
(Tho not, like that, enough to drive a Mill.
Thence Chrstal Streams with gentle murmures flow,
^i Where little Nimphs may play, for ought we know,
Fine Tod-pole Nymphs soon rotten and soon ripe,
With tapring Tails like Sire Tobacco-pipe;
^k Like those which Virtuoso Glasses spy,
A thousand times less than a lusty Lowses eye:
Sometimes another way to work 'twill go,
Up spouts a Deluge from the Abyss below;
This Physick is more safe, (tho' not so fine,)
Than Bumpers, crown'd too oft with spright|ly
Wine:
A Glass is not a better cure than that,
For Care, or Toothach, both of which would kill a Cat;
But if we sad experience credit may,
The Pipe's o'th' Two by far the surer way.
No Brawls, no Wounds, nor Bangs, nor Scars appear,
With such as will discreetly frollick here:
But Wine, confounded Wine one can't miscall,
Wine on a Poets word, 's the Deel and all; 
That Fiend, when conjured up, I tell you true,
Even with Tobacco-pipes can murders do.

Wine, that mad Bully, for a painted Drabb,
With these blunt swords e're now has giv'n a Stabb.
When such as use my Pipe but wisely will,
Employ its Aid to cure and not to kill;
Not Bezoar stone, nor that miraculous Horn,
Which decks the strange Invisible Vnicorn:
Can deadly Poysons subtle streams, as well,
As my Tobacco-pipe, when charg'd expell.
^l The long-livd Harts medicamental Breath,
Gives himself Aid, and the blew Vipe Death;
So, if this Sov'raign Antidote you try,
On Spiders, streight they swell and burst, and Dye;
To what e're luckless Post the Plague advance,
^m 'Twill chase it thence, like Tires of Ordi|nance:
^n Tho' all around with bloomy Deaths beset,
Here is the never failing Amulet;
Tho' in the Cart with bloated Corps you lay,
^o Like the blind-Piper, you might rise, and play:
Fenc't but with this Tobacco-pipe,
And when long hence you bless the welcome stroke,
Then, when the Pipe is out, your Glass is broke;
The Pipe, the immortal pipe if us'd before,
To after-Years transmit your Glory's o're;

For that can best (as you may quickly prove
Settle the Wit, as Pudding settles Love.
Twill fix your Iudgment, render grave and sage,
And make the Reason overtake the Age:
For this his wondring Servants us'd to lay,
^p Before a Lord full thirty Pipes a Day;
With this was Herebord acquainted; when
He smoakt, and writ, and spit, and smoakt again.
Poets the Glass with Fancy do's inspire,
The Pipe mounts our Philosopher far higher;
And moulds him Syllogisms, tough, and strong,
And polishes his Labours all along.
Demosthenes his works o'th' Lamp did smell,
His o'th' Tobacco-pipe, and that's as well;
And least he should be idle forc'd to stand,
When for a prop, it askt his Helping hand;
Like such a Scholar, he, with wondrous skill,
^q Did a fine Hole thro' greasy Beavor drill;
And when the' ngenious Mechanism was done,
Upon that Rest in  plants his Gun.
Sure when Prometheus climb'd above the Poles,
Sliely to learn their art of making Souls;
When of his Fire he fretting Iove did wipe,
He stole it thence in a Tobacco-pipe:
Which predispos'd to live, as down he ran,
By the Souls Plastic power from Clay was turn'd to Man,

And what, even now will make it seem more like,
^r Some sparks remain in't still, if you 'l but strike:
This had, ith' dark the smoaking Drunkard known,
That he'd so much about him of his own;
He never would for the cold Glow-worm grope,
^s Puffing his Pipe in vain with Fire I hope!
Not only with dull usefulness content,
This Engine too is fit for Ornament:
When wooing Cockny's Locks will curl no more
Than his Good natur'd Fathers horns before;
When Christmass Box with little Wool is big,
And Barber will not trust him for a Wig:
When all means fail, what think ye in the end,
But the Tobacco-pipe must prove his Friend?
On this, till Half-asleep, with pains, and care,
Ten-times as long as at his yawning prayer,
In dainty Frizz he twists his frighted Hair.
Hair, which would make Alecto's Vipers start,
With whose sure Ropes he'l noose his n'own sweet-heart:
Whether she rolls to Hampton in a Boat,
With gaudy-yellow-Tabby-Petticoat;

Or mounting the Exchange, she bridles in
The dainty Dewlaps of her portly Chin;
Still younkers charming, dangling Locks inspire,
Like any Squibb, whole streams of amorous fire;
And the warm wamblings of unnam'd De|sire.
Peaceful Tobacco-pipes none ought to scorn,
Which can defend, and not alone adorn;
When unprovok'd 'tis true, They 're soft, and tame,
And only big with calm, with Lambent Flame:
So does the Jolly Cannons cheerly roar,
On bright high-days salute the cluster'd Shore;
But in stearn war spews loads of deadly flame,
As much a Lyon now, as once a Lamb.
So these when with no other weapons sped,
Have many serv'd instead of murdring Lead;
'Twill either lead, or drive, and makes with ease,
Either a Mould, or Bullet, which you please.
When Hercules at old Evanders house,
Reform'd from cutting Throats, to keeping Cows;
^t Cacus thought it not fair one should have all,
And kindly dragg'd some of his Heard to Stall:
The Heroe swears to find his Victuals stole;
And tracks at last, the subtle Fox to Hole:

^u Whose charg'd Tobacco-pipe as soon as come,
Smoaks even his Hunter out of house and home;
This was his Sword, and this was his defence,
Frighting poor Hang-dog, Club and all from thence:
^x Heroick pipe! worthy both Pipes and Tabours!
Thou'rt Cock of Hercules and all his Labours.
And now to relish a long Winters Tale,
O for a Nut-brown Cup of Christmass Ale!
But all the craft's in getting it; 'tis froze,
And drops scarce half so fast as Moyster Nose:
The Pipe to Pot was ever kind and true,
And that or nothing must the business do;
Heat it Red hot and change it for a Tap,
'Twill quickly thro' the Chrystall force a Gap.
Now bring the Boles, drink in your own defence!
For now a new born River bubbles thence;
This ever has the safest Course been found,
To giv't a Glster, when the Hogs-heads bound.
Let stiff Don-Diego load the lowsie Brush,
That hedges in his mouth with snotty Snush:
In vain he the far nobler smoaker mocks,
And in one Knick-knack wears both Pipe and Box,
New fangld London thus perhaps may do,
And ke old Misses, leave old Friends for new:
The West is the Tobacco-pipes chief Throne,
He there like Saxon Monarchs reigns alone:

Wild-Irish-Brats, as soon as Breath they draw,
Are dos'd with a kind Cup of Vsquebagh.
Discretion bids us learn where e're we can,
Since wiser Brutes have often tutor'd Man;
^y Thus Western Children, tho' not quite so ripe,
As theirs, are wean'd on a Tobacco-pipe:
This does the Sucking Bottles place supply,
'Tis Pap-Meat when They 're hungry, drink when dry;
When hot this cools, this warms when They 're a-cold;
^z A perfect Kolmacho for Young, and Old;
The Child with ne're a Tooth, and the Old Crone,
Whose two black Stumps check such as say she has nne:
Who, crept thro' fourscore year, with care, and pain,
Has made a shift to grow a Child again.
The Miner there, with an Implicite Faith,
^a Crediing what his Vpper-neighbour saith;
Who seldom taking pains to Look abroad,
Believes a Sun as he believes a God:
For the Companion of his Hopes and Fears,
Takes a Tobacco-pipe, well struck in years;
^b Od as himself, lam'd by som Hurles rage,
Short, and  repid grown with nameless age,
Still like some Sea-worn Cliff, it lesser grows,
Just matcht at last to his Commodious Nose:

With this, nor was sweet Orpheus arm'd a well'
With Harp, with this he siks almost to Hell.
By some strange chance, from an old plun|der'd Vein,
^c Like Tyrian Pick-axe, brought to Light again:
See where 'tis fall'n among a Ring of Boys,
Who from it blow thin worlds of gaudy Joys.
Fine, soon-ripe Bubbles, Alamode, and Gay,
Dress't in the Glory's of the blooming Day:
Bright as Court-Madam, tho' they hardly be,
Perhaps as tender, or as frail as she;
Created both by Breath, both upwards born,
Proud in the Beautys of the Rainbow Morn:
And thus, when sailing thro' the heavier Skys,
By Breath 'twas made and liv'd, by Breath it dyes;
And that same Blast on which it self it rears,
Dasnes the airy Iewell into Tears.
A Wondrous turn! my pipe at last (You see!)
Is Pulpit grown, and preaches Vanity;
'Tis sign he's sickRogues at the fatal day,
Thus curses use to' unlearn, and learn to pray:
Then from some careless Boys's loose hand he flyes,
And tumbles down, and Breaks his Neck, and dyes.



NOTES.
(a) [Than ten Bath Faggots, or Scotch-warming Pan.]
The Bath Faggots are so notorious for their exceeding Littleness, that two of 'em were carry'd thence in a Gentlemans Portmantean as far as Cornwall for a Rarity, one of which, to this Day (or very lately) hangs up there for a Sign. [Scotch-warming-pan] is the Hostesses brown Daughter.
(b) [Like the Coco-Tree, is good,
For Physick, or for Rayment, or for Food.]
See the Divine Herberts Poem on Provi|dence. 
[The Indian Nut aloneIs Meat, Drink, Cordage, Sayling, all in one.]
(c) [All you experimental men of Thought.]
Sowse! comes the Critick with a Dilemma a top of this poor Verse; if [Experimental] quo' he; how [Men of Thought]? Why to give a civil Answer to a civil QuestionThe Experi|ments must be thought on, and scolded, and quar|rell'd for too, both before and after they are made.
(d) [Made up of I's, and O's, and A's, and B's.]
Letters often put for References in Engins,
from the Picture to the Explanation,and
here, Mr. Reader, take notice, were I in my So|bers
Sences, writing Reasonable prose, I should

not be so sawcy to reflect on those great, worthy
Persons; But 'twill here I hope be taken only for
a little Spice of Furor Poeticus.
(e) [Those who at first invented Corn, and Wine.]
Ceres, and Bacchus worship'd in most places of the Pagan World.
(f) [Whose casual Knocks,
On the Anvile, first found out a Tinderbox.]
Vulcan, who being the god both of Fire, and all Iron-work, 'tis to be suppos'd invented that necessary piece of Houshold-stuff; at least there's as good Record for his making this as Aeneas's Ar|mour.
(g) [For every Amorous Boy, or Love-sick Maid.]
Among other new Discoveries in Philosophy, this is universally now receiv'dThat Love is the cause of Tooth-ach.
(h) [The Surgeons Fire, or Pincers scarce so sure.]
For the Toothach, (besides the present Re|medy sold under the Exchange) some burn a Vein in the Earand if that failsOut with't!
(i) [Where little Nymphs may play for ought we know.
(k) [Like those which Vertuoso Glasses spy,
A thousands times less than a lusty Lowses eye.]
This is not to be understood, without stepping in|to
the new World of Microscopes: where among

the rest, One Mr. (what's his hard name?) Lew|enhoec,
a Dutchman, discovered in Rain-water
Animalentes consisting of six Globubs, two horns,
and a tapering Tayl; one of 'em, a thousand
times less than the eye of a Fat Louse: vid
Transactions of Royal Society.Vol. ele|venth,
p. 821.
(l) [The long-liv'd Hart's medicamental Breath.]
Natural Historians report of the Hart, that by the force of its Breath, Serpents are ferretted out of their holes, on which it feeds for Physick: vid. Guillems Heraldry.
(m) ['Twill chase it thence, like Tires of Or|dinance.]
At a certain City, either in Germany, or France (Tournay or Towres I think 'twas) when the Plague was begun, by the command of the Magistrate all the Guns on the Walls were se|veral times discharg'd together, which purified the Air, and remov'd the Sickness.
(n) [Tho' all around with bloomy Deaths beset.]
I have heard of one, in the great Plague at London65. That going over a pit where many of the Dead were heap't in, perceiv'd a bloo|my smell to arise thence, faint, like that of White RosesHe went home, told the story, made nothing of't, but in a day or two sicken'd and dy'd of the same disease.
(o) 
[Like the Blind-piper, you might rise and play.]
His story is known to most, sure, that know London: Lying dead drunk he was thrown up in a Cart of the dead, in the Plague-time; when he woke he fell a playing, just as he was tumbling into Pit-hole, and so scape't.
(p) [Before a Lord, full thirty Pipes a day.]
A London Lord, who every Morning made his People fill him thirty Pipes, and lay 'em for service in his Study.
(q) [Did a fine Hole thro' greasiy Beaver drill.]
The famous Herebord is reported to be a great Friend to the Tobacco-pipe: but wanting his Hand to turn the Leaves, invented a way to rest his Pipe thro' a Hole in the Brim of his Hat.
(r) [Some Sparks remain in't still, if you but strike.]
A Tobacco-pipe strikes fire on a CaneBut that's not allIn the Translation of the Aca|demy del Cimento, p. 159. Tobacco-pipes, if broken in the Night emit sparkles like a Flint.
(s) [Puffing his Pipe in vain withFire I hope.]
A drunken fellw riding home by night with a Pipe in's Mouth, at last spyd a Glowworm on the ground, and when his Pipe was out, alights, and holds it to the Glow-worm to light it.
[In dainty Friz he hoists his frighted Hair,]
Experto crede Roberto?
(t) 
[Cacus thought it not fair one should have all:]
See Virg. Aeneads. Hercules turn'd Grazi|er, and fed his Cows near Cacus his Den, who dragg'd some of 'em backwards into his Hole:Hercules, as an honest man should, very careful of his Cattle, makes a Shift to track him, by the help of the Calves. What do me Cacus but as you 'l find next note.
(u) [With charg'd Tobacco-pipe, as soon as come.]
This is the most probable conjecture to be made of Cacus his defence'tis plain he smoak't Hercules away'Tis very likely 'twas with a pipe of of Tobacco. See Virgil else.
Faucibus ingentem fumum mirabile dictu,
Evomit, involvitque domum caligine caec,
Prospectum eripiens oculis.
A very Periphrasis for Tobacco.
(x) [Pipe worthy both Pipes and Tabours.]
Cry ye mercy for the Pun! but I could'n for my Heart get e're another Ryme.
(y) [Thus Western Children, c.
Are Wean'd on a Tobacco-pipe.]
'Tis common in some parts of the West, for Children, no higher than their Lace-peels, to sit Working and Smoaking.
(z) [A perfect Kolmacho for Young and Old.]
Kolmacho is an hard word(In English (all heal) given to a new invented Cordial.
(a) 
[Crediting what his Vpper-Neighbours saith.]
'Tis the Custom among the Spaniards, for their Slaves to continue ever in the Mines. Eve|ry body knows not to the contrary of the Cornish Minerssuch as do, I'd entreat 'em to hold their peace and not spoil a fancy.
(b) [Lam'd by some Hurlers rage.]
Scarce ever an Hurling but some or more are lamed or kill'd(Ware Critick here!)
(c) [Like Tyrian Pick-axe, brought to Light again.]
Here's a fair opportunity to show ones Learning, and read half an hour on Barat-anack, and Cas|siterides, but I shall only tell such as don't know't better than my self, that the Tyrians came hither for Tin, and some of their Brazen Instruments have been found in Old Mines.



On a COW's TAIL.
THou who didst round Cecropian Pastures rove,
Turn'd Bull, an horny and an hairy Iove! ^a
(Tho' sure that shape had better serv'd than now,
When beauteous Io was transform'd to Cow) ^b
Who a meer Brute did'st of meer Thunder make,
A four-leg'd Lover for Europa's sake;
And when thy purchase was from shore con|veigh'd,
(The shining Cargo of a Royal Maid)
Did'st to a Rudder turn thy well-hung Tayl,
Whil'st her loose flowing Garments serv'd for Sayl:
Pilot my tottering Bark with Aid Divine,
Vent'ring thro' Seas far more unknown than thine!
Help me in my Cows Tail, the rest shall be
Part of a grateful Hecatomb to Thee. ^c
The Tail full oft above the Head prevails,
And Heaven and Earth resound the Praise of Tails.

See where in Heaven the Dog's bright Tall does shine,
A Cynosure not half so long as mine:
On Earth walk where you will, in every place,
One Tayl or other slaps you o're the Face.
The Kingly Lyon whirls his Sceptral Train,
Roaring at the encountring Gnat in vain;
The Victor Gnat in the next Fight does fail,
And drops beneath the Cow's all-conquering Tail;
That Tail which kills whate'r it's force with|stand
As sure's a Club,in Hercules's hand's.
When the mad Dog-star scatters sultry Bea
And drives the tossing Herd to shades and Streams;
Armys of Flys, of different Notes and Wings,
Goad 'em all ore with their vexatious stings;
Vainly does now the bare-dock't Horse com|plain,
And wish for his dismember'd Tail again;
Who of his Freedom us'd before to boast,
Then gain'd, when such a Burden he had lost.
(So the sly Fox, who of his Tail could mak
Hook, Net and Line, at every Brook and Lake
And when too faint he the hot Hunter flyes
With pissen Tail strike out the Terrior's Eyes 

When not so well he from the Trap had fled,
But with his Tail compounded for his Head;
To scape his salt Companions Mockery,
He'd have 'em tail-less all as well as he.) ^e
But now the Cow with brandish'd Tail falls on,
Proclaiming open War with Accaron;
Millions of Insect-Warriors at her fly,
Millions of Insect-Warriors murmuring dye.
So falls a murdering Chain-shot whizzing round,
(Amazing, like less dreadful Thunder's sound)
When thro' a Troop of Iron Horsemen born,
Beneath the Reaper's Hook so drops the Corn.
So when the scaly Lord of fruitful Nile,
The dreadful Spear-contemning Crocodile,
Is by his trembling Enemies beset,
Trusting in vain a feeble Dart or Net;
With his Tail's Whisk he long-long Ranks o'rethrows, ^f
And stalks in Triumph o're his prostrate Foes.
The Turks when they 'll their Enemies as|sail, ^g
For a red Flag hang out an Horse's Tail:
Unjustly done, when it must be confess't
From this, the Cow's the far more valiant Beast.
But if from cloudy Wars we start away
To downy Pleasure's happy Sun-shine day,

There the Cow's Tail does other Tails surpass
As far as the brisk Horse the lazy Ass.
This the sage Priests of mighty Apis knew,
What e'r the rude unthinking Vulgar do.
Apis is gone; heark the lamenting Crowd
Raving about, bellow his loss aloud:
Apis is gone, nor can their Tears prevail; ^h
Yet they'd not care, had he but left his Tail. ^i
Priests, Prince and People search the Stalls around,
Until the happy, happy Tail is found,
Whilst every trembling Son of Nile prepares
T'adore the sacred Tail with two white Hairs. ^k
Nor less should th' Indian this blest Relique prize,
Without whose kind support he sinks and dies.
Where Orellana's Sea-like Waters lave ^l
The steepy Banks with a resounding Wave,
Or De-la-plata's headlong Flood-gates roar, ^m
Rolling fresh Oceans down each mouldring Shore;
Where no proud Bridge dares the wild Ri|ver
ride,
At a Cow's Tail the Indian stemms the Tide; ^n
Ferry'd without expence of Coin or Breath,
Safe, tho' but a hairs length 'twixt him and Death:
Safer than Damocles, when at the Board ^o
A single Hair sustain'd the shining Sword.

Ladys by the soft Magic of their Eyes,
Like Angels, wafting thro' the scattering Skys,
Weak prostrate Mortals dazle and sur|prize.
From Head to Foot, their Charms, their Port and State,
A Cow's Tail to the life does imitate.
Have you e're seen a Nymph at some bright Hall,
In a Triumphant Masquerade or Ball,
Move soft and smooth like Gales of Western Wind,
Whilst her loose flowing Train sweeps far behind;
Even so, believ't, the Cow's Tail dangles down,
Like supernumerary piece of Gown:
The Ancients or Historians Lies have told,
^p Pure Carrots call'd pure Threds of beaten Gold:
Tho' Goats Pulvilio's hardly ranker smell,
Nor any wrizzled Succubus of Hell:
But all which to our nicer World appear
or Marks of Beauty, all concenter here;
The Tail's Complexion is a lovely Fair,
Shaded around with charming cole-black hair.
Now, Tail right Worshipful! I'l lead thee home,
As great as conquering Scipio entring Rome;

Thee to a place of rest I'l calmly bear,
Like Turkey Rams in a triumphant Carr. ^q
For such as faults with my Cow's Tail have found,
Here's a fair Rump;Genteels! you 're welcom round
Hur Cow shall now with any Cow compare;
Let any say hur Cow is hurs, that dare. ^r


NOTES.
(a) [Turn'd Bull, an horny and an hairy Iove.]
See the Tale of Jupiter's transmogrifying his Divinity into a Bull for the love of Europa,  every Post-dawber's in Town!but rarely de|scribed in Lucian, in a Dialogue between No|tus and Zephyrus. Quaere, in this case, as was said in another of the fighting Bishop: If  Butcher had here sawcily knock'd down the Bull, what had become of the God-ship?
(b) [When beauteous Io was transform'd to Cow.]
Related in the authentick Chronicle of Ovid Metamorphosis.The Chapter and Vers you may find at your leisure.
(c) [Part of a grateful Hecatomb to thee.]
ThisHecatomb is an hard Greek word,

usually taken for a Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen.But tho' mine be a Cow, every body won't see the Bull in the case.
(d) [A Cynosure not half so long as mine.]
The Constellation call'd the little Bear, in Greek is Cynosura, which is in plain English, Dogs-Tail.
(e) [Proclaiming open War with Accaron.]
The God of Flyes,The same with Belze|bub in sacred, and Muyoides, and Jupiter Apomuyus in Profane Authors. Vid. Cow|ley's Annotations on Plagues of Aegypt, p. 82.
"And Accaron, the Aiery Prince, led on their various Host.
(f) [With his Tail's whisk he long-long Ranks o'rethrows,
That Creature is reported to have a prodigious force in his Tail, with which he sweeps down what|e're comes near.
(g) [The Turks, when they 'l their Enemies assail,
For a red Flag, hang out an Horse's Tail.]
This is a Custom common with them to the Tartar, and many other of those barbarous Na|tions. If I misremember not, they deduce this Custom from their great Ottoman, the top of the Oguzian Family.
(h) [Apis is gone, nor can their Tears prevail,]
(i) [Yet they'd not care, had e but left his Tail.

The Aegyptians worshipping an Oxe, is not ori|ous; nay, that was one of their Di majorum Gentium; their Saints and little sucking Gods, were Rats, Birds, Cats; and Leeks, Onions, (Welch Deities.) But the manner of Devotion to their Oxe, under the name of Apis, Sera|pis, Isis, Osiris,made even that too as ex|travagant as all the rest. Among other Perqui|sites necessary for the Election of a new God, which was every year after they had drown'd the old; one indispensable was,Two pecu|liar Hairs, and no more, on the Tail;But why no more, nor less, as Dr. Fuller says, the Devil knows. This too explains the Verse follow|ing;
(k) [T'adore the sacred Tail with two white Hairs.]
(l, m) Ovellana, and Delaplata, Two famous Rivers in the Indys.
(n) [At a Cow's Tail the Indian stemms the Tide.]
Thus Peter Martyr in his Decads.He says, 'tis common with the Indians to tye a Stick cross-ways at the Tail of a Cow, and seating themselves thereon, drive her into the water; who being used to the sport, swins very faithful|ly with the Cargo behind.If any doubt of the truth on't, 'tis but stepping over for a day or two to the Indys, and they may be speedily satisfy'd.
(o) 
[Safer than Damocles, when at the Board,
A single Hair sustain'd the shining Sword.]
Damocles one of Dyonisius's Flatterers, ad|miring the Tyrant's felicity, was by his order to taste what 'twas, adorn'd with the Royal Robes, and waited on as a Prince; but for the sharp sawce with his sweet meat, when thus in all his Grandez|za, at Table, a naked Sword was hung over his Head, ty'd only by a Hair, which soon spoil'd his sport, and made him glad of liberty again.
(p) [Pure Carrots call'd pure Threads of beat|en Gold.]
Yellow hair was accounted a great piece of Beau|ty, not only by the old Romans, and that part of the World; but here in England too: Among other Receipts for finifying the face, c. in an old English Book, there's a way to make the Hair yellow.
(q) [Like Turkey Rams in a Triumphant Carr.]
Mr. Sands and others that write of the East|ern Countrys, describe a kind of Sheep there, whose Tails weigh forty-pound a piece, and are alway drawn afer 'em by a little Cart.
(r) [Let any say hur Cow is hurs, that dare.]
Alluding to a Story of a Welch-man who stole a Cow with a cut Tail, and brouht it to Market, but artificially sew'd on anther Tail;The own|er sees it at the Market, loks wistly on't, and concludes, if it had not a Tal too much, he durst swear 'twas his own: At this hur Welch Plud

draws hur Knife, cuts the Tail off above the place where 'twas sow'd on, throws t'other piece into the River, and bids him now own it if he dar'd.


The Lyar.
FOR Naked Truth let others write,
And fairly prove that Black's not white;
Quarrel and scold, then scratch and bite,
Till They 're with Cuffing weary:
Give me a Lye, trickt neat and gay,
As fine as any Hedge in May!
Most think so too, altho' they 'll say,
Perhaps, the clean contrary.
The Courtier first is counted rude,
If he's with Lying unendu'd;
Nay, when he's in his Altitude,
He gives it Oaths for Clenching:
The brisk and young sowre Truth despise,
And kick her back to th' Old and Wise;
Wenching's the Gallant's Life, a Lye's
The very Life of Wenching.
Room for the Man of Parchment next,
Whose Comments so confound the Text,
And Truth's High-road so much perplext,
One scarce can e're get at it;

With his own practice not content,
He 'll either quote, or he 'l invent,
He 'll find or make a President,
And gravely lie by Statute.
Next the poor Scholar loaden comes
With packs of Sentences and Summs,
Scratches his Head, and bites his Thumbs,
For Truth is all his vigour;
Like Lynceus self, O who but he ^a
The Essences of things can see;
When he deceives but orderly,
And lies in Mood and Figure.
Who but the Poet ought t' appear
I'th end? who should bring up the Rear,
But he who without Wit or Fear
Lays on his Lyes by Clusters?
Never of sneaking Truth afraid,
He'll her with open Arms invade,
And dreadful Armies in his Aid
Of his own Hero's musters.
Well, since on all sides 'tis confest,
A quiet life must needs be best;
Who'd think it hard to purchase rest
By such a small complying?
Let him that will speak Truth for me!
Truth the worst Incivilitie!
I'd rather in the Fashion be,
Since all the World's for Lying.



NOTES.
(a) [Like Lynceus self, c.
This Mr. Lynceus was, you must know, a mighty quick-sighted fellow;He could see thro' Walls, Houses,and Ships at Sea, at the greatest distance, andBut that's enough al|ready to believe at once.


On a Hat broke at Cudgels;

"And then like greasie Coraubeck,
"Pinn'd up behindno scabby Neck
To shew Sr.(The Ramble.)


NO silly Frog, nor Mouse, no Snake nor Gnat,
Hag-rides my Muse, 'tis an unlucky Hat,
Whose sudden Rise, and Fall I mean to tell:
O for a Dose of the Castalian Well, ^a
The Tunbridge of Olympus! well may I
My whistle wet, for sure the Subject's dry.
At School of Hat I've made a Pitcher trim,
And suck't sweet Water from its greasie brim;

But tho' it ent o th' Well so oft before,
At last 'tis crac't, alas! and holds no more.
Of all the Coverings which have e're been found,
Or black, or blew, or green, or square, or round,
Crowns lin'd with Thorns, (with Reverence be it sed,)
Beavers with Wigg, a Felt with Logger-head;
High Cap of Maintenance, low Cap of Fool,
High Cardinals Cap, low Cover of Close-stool;
Little or great, broad, narrow, course or fine,
Ne're was such an unlucky Hat as mine.
When Mr. Haberdasher was content
For many a supple Cringe and Complement,
To trust me for't at Interest twelve per Cent.
From some good-natur'd Friend, I know not who,
I made a shift to wring an Hat-band too.
Now all that see me wondring round me stand,
Like Nunckle quite disguiz'd in a clean Band.
As if to N. or M. I backwards came,
They on me stare, and ask me what's my name?
They dream I'm grown pileo dontus, free ^b
From rusty Chains of lowsie Poetry:
But all their kind surmizes were in vain;
Nature held fast, I soon grew Cat again. ^

A Cudgel splits the Brim, new Lights surprize
The sudden Breach, and blind my dazzled Eyes;
Then lest the Fissure should a mark be sed
Of Satan's cloven Foot upon a Poet's Head;
Some gentle Lad an't please ye! overkind,
Like Bully-Hec's, buttons it up behind.
Well, he deserv'd each angry Muses Curse,
For this but made the better side the worse.
'Twas tuckt so close, My Honour seem'd to be
One of Quevedo's Knights of th' Industrie. ^d
Thus had you seen't, you might be bold to swear,
Armies of hungry Rats had feasted there.
Since Charity saves him from just Vengeance, all
My teen on the unlucky Hat must fall,
Whose Traytorous Ancestors by Kings com|mand,
Were with the Cardinals exil'd the Land. ^e
Those golden days, those happy dayes of Yore,
When honest Caps the brightest Courtier wore,
May they come in agen, and quite displace,
With luckier Omens, all thy luckless race.
May'st thou, if that be possible, sink down
Below the Scandal of a Poet's Crown,

In Healths toss't up, pawn'd e're the Reck|ning's pay'd
Then in the Kennel by thy Master lay'd:
Then cry'd about with an old Coat or Shoe,
Be ever travelling, like the wandring Iew! ^f
Nor will I ever call thee back agen,
Till Poets are made Lords, or Aldermen.



NOTES.
(a) [O for a Dose of the Castalian Well!]
In Poetical Jargon this is only a Variation of Helicon; but the downright meaning is,a Glass of good Canary.
(b) [They dream I'm grown pileo donatus.]
To give the Slave liberty of wearing a Hat, was either a Token or Formality of his Freedom.
(c) [Nature held fast, I soon grew Cat again.]
Alluding to the Fable of the Cat turn'd into a Woman, who running even then after Mice, was again returned to the place from whence she came.
(d) [One of Quevedo's Knights of th' Industrie.]
In Quevedo's [Buscon,] or a kind of a Spa|nish Rogue, he has a pleasant description of a Fraternity who honour'd another with the most Noble order of Knights of the Industrie. A|mong other fancies this was one;They but|ton'd

their Hats of one side, only because the Rats had eat away all that Brim.
(e) [Werewith the Cardinals exil'd the Land.]
In King Henry eighth's time, either an Or|der, or an Act was made, that none should presume, what ever figure he bare, to wear any Hat, but only woollen Caps then all in use.
(f) [Be ever Travelling like the Wandring Iew.]
This wandring Jew, (if there be any Truth in Ballads, as I hope none that reads this questi|stion) ever since the Death of Christ has been trotting round the World: For fuller satisfaction consult the Penny Chronicle of his Life.


A Covetous old Fellow having taken occa|sion
to hang himself a little; another
comes in, in the nick, and cuts him down;
but instead of Thanking him for his
Life, he accuses him for spoyling the
Rope.
YOu Dog! y' ha' spoyl'd my Rope! 'twas strong, and tight,
And cost I'me sure a Groat but to'ther Night;
A good substantial Rope to give its Due,
'Twould hold an hundred heavier Rogues than You.

I'll swear the Peace! I stood in fear o' my Life;
He vi  armis came; he brought a Knife;
With which, tho' I for certain cannot know't,
I doubt the Villain meant to cut my Throat.
How e're he spoil'd my Goods, the best I had,
He cut my Rope I' me sure, and that's as bad;
I'll trounce the Rogue; I'll try from Court to Court,
If there be any Law in England for't:
Must such an Arbitrary Cur as he,
Divest one of ones Right, and Property?
Noif the Iudge such tricks as these allows,
A Man shan't hang himself in his own House:
And who dreads not such presidents as that?
Nay, 'tis in vain! I'll ne're referr't, That's flat.
When sweetly dangling 'twixt the Earth and Sky,
I was rappt up in Hempen-Extasie;
(Which all who view'd my lovely Snowt might know,)
When all my dreggs of Man were dropt below:
The envious wretch dragg'd back my Stare|ing
Soul,
Just clambring up against the steepy Pole,
And when with Liberty grown free and Wild,
Chain'd it to a Corps, (an't please ye!) all de|fil'd,
What Soul alive for both the Indys riches,
Would e're descend to such a pair of Breeches?

Lets hang him up for saving me, and then
If e're I cut him down, e'ne hang me up agen!


(^a) On a Supper of a Stinking Ducks.
COme all you brisk Lads that have ever been seen,
At the place that you wot of hightClerken-well-Green!
^b First of all Merry Mac come and taste our good cheer,
For our Hearts will all vibrate thy Lyricks to hear.
One and all run and Saddle your Cane, or your Beast,
And hasten full speed to the bountiful Feast!
In pow'rful Gambado's, or finical Boot;
In a thrid-bare old Cloak, or a new Sur le tout!
Or flaming with Fringe, or meek Kid on your Hand,
With blustering Cravat, or reverent Band!
Both peaceable Hazle, and Kill-devil Steel,
Both Tory-Bamboo, and Fanatick-Brazeel!
^c Remember Batts Axiom, your Curtlass pre|pare!
Whet Stomachs, and Knives! Here's a Bill of the Fare;

Here's Duck upon Duck, for no more you must look;
If you 'll have any more you must go to the Cook.
I tell you the Truth, and I tell you no lye!
They shine and 'twere Butter, or Stars in the Sky:
Zich glorry-vatt Ducks but zildom are zean,
^d Whore shou'd they be bore but about Taunton-Dean.
If they stink Mrs. Muse your nice Nose you may hold!
Disparage 'em not for They 're bought, and They 're sold;
^e Consider as cheap of the Poulter they had 'em,
As e're of the Higler(the Servant!) c.
Here Dick, BlackBess for thy absence should frown,
^f Look over thy Shoulder, and 'tweak off their Down:
But prythee deal gently, for 'twould be no Wonder,
They 're so soft, and so young, if they fall all-asunder.
'Tis true I confess, if my Nostrils can tell,
They send out a kind of a Civity smell:
Yet more then a Bustard the Poulter might prize one
Like them, for their flavour like pasty Veni|zon

Some will say they 've a whiff like a Worm|eaten
Bitch,
^g Or a Tartar Rgoo, ready dresst in a Ditch:
^h Or a cleanly blue-Pigbut ne're keck honest fellow!
For They 're wholesome enow, tho' a little too mellow.
^i They 're black, but where Indians do paint the De'el White,
That colour be sure's most heavenly sight:
^k They dropt from the Moon out of Breath, and the Thumps
Which they took on the Ground have disco|lour'd their Rumps.
^l Cozen Iohn! 't had been better if y' had not been so fickle,
But in our Garden-Cellar had laid 'em in pickle
Tho' the Cook says They 're sweet, I'll ven|ture
engage her,
That the Ducks should ha' stunk with the T's for a Wager.
Pothecary's Bills have full often half broke us,
^m With chargeable Vomits of Cardus and Cro|cus:
When these Ducks from the Bum-gut to Keck|horn
would draw,
And like a Turn'dPudding-bag empty the Maw;
O Spirits of Arm-pits, and Essence of Toes!
O Hogo of Vlcers, and Hospital Nose!

O Devils Dung fragant, and tarrifi'd feather,
With Snuff, and with Carrion, Ana, jumbled together!
^n O Jelly of Toads! India's hasty-Pudding!
O Playsters of Issues champt down o' the sud|den!
With fat blubby Pease, that are grimy all o're,
Thick butter'd with delicate matter and Gore!
Well! If these you survive, I'll believe 'tis no Fable,
^o That Indians gut Adders, and bring 'em to Table:
But after, if your Pest' lentBreath sally on us,
Wee 'll get to the Windward, or Mercy upon us!
^p Hoyst 'em up with a Rope at the Fire! 'tis no matter,
Tho' they drop in the dripping, and crawl in the Platter;
So do's the sweet Phaenix on Frankincense-Faggot,
^q Sit roasting her self till she turn to a Mag|got.


NOTES.
(a) [On a Supper of a Stinking Ducks.]
The story thusAt a Clubb of Younkers, after a Frost a couple of Wild-Ducks were bought. A

thaw coming the day after, these having before been frozen hard, fell in, appear'd all black, and stunk most harmoniouslyyet, that nothing good might be wasted, the Purchasers dress't 'em, and eat the first pretty nimbly, not staying to tast it; but by that time, Clon being a little pacifi'd, advancing to the second, it drove 'em all off, and was given a decent burial at last in the Boghouse.
(b) [First of all Merry Mac come and taste our good cheer!]
The name of one Gentleman belonging to the Club, old excellent at Lyric verse, which you may learn from the next line.
(c) [Remember Bats Axiom, c.
In the ingenious Dr. Bat upon Bat'tis thus
"It is a Law that holds with Saint, and Sinner,
"That he that has no Knife should have no Dinner.
(d) [Whore shou'd they be bore but about Taunton-Dean.]
The Ducks were caught in a decoy-pond in Sommerset-shire, and that Country having, 'tis probable their Bellys, or Noses full of 'em, were transported to London for Sale.
(e) [Consider as cheap of the Poulter they had 'em,
As e're of the Higler(the Servant,) c.]
Here is certainly some mistake in the Copy, and something or other is wanting to Rhyme to [Had 'em] which the Reader is desired, (if he can) to correct with his Pen.
(f) 
[Look over thy Shoulder, and tweak off their Down.]
For had he lookt foreright his Nose had been so egregiously affronted there could be no enduring it.
(g) A Tartar Ragoo, ready dress't in a Ditch.]
A Dead Horse, on which, after 't has been air|ing in a Ditch for a Fortnight, or a Month, the Tartars will revel, as if 'twere the fattest old Bar|ren Doe in Christendom.
(h) [Or a cleanly Blew-Pig.]
For satisfaction in that Story consult the Poem concerning it!
(i) [They 're black, but where Negro's do paint the De'el White.]
A humour of theirs notorious, of whom the Poet
"Who, in contempt, will paint the Devil White:
Tho' by his leave and mine too, whatever they think of White Devils, or White Men, 'tis cer|tain they are old Dogs at White-Women, who, for some certain Reasons, (such as made Apu|leius gracious) best known to themselves, are not behind hand in Loving them, perhaps because their Complexions differ.
(k) [They dropt from the Moon out of Breath.]
'Tis the opinion of some Learned men, (too great and grave to be affronted with seeing their Names here) That Wild-fowl, Storks, Wood|cocks, c. fly away at the Winters end to the Moon, or some Islands in the Air near it; and

thence at Winter return again. Who knows what may be?
(l) [Cozen Iohn, 't had been better, c.
Garden-Cellar had laid 'em in pickle.]
One of the Company, sometimes known by that Name, was at first for giving 'em their Nunc di|mittis into Boghouse.
(m) [With chargeable Vomits of Carduus, and Crocus.]
I thought I should catch you napping, cryes Mr. Critick, (or he may if he will) how long has Carduus-posset been so wonderful chargable? Ans. 1. If not chargeable Simpliciter, 'tis Secundum quidThere's a Pothecary's large bill, and Paracelsian Conscience in the Case. Is that In|sufficientwhy have at another of 'em'Tis true in sensu composito, tho' not diviso, as the learned have itthus tho' one alone be n't dear, both together may. If neither of all this pother will satisfie, why I can easily stop your Mouth with Bays's answer, which if thought on sooner might have saved all this.
Why 'tis Sirbecause Sirwhy what's that to you Sir? Rehearsal.
(n) [O Jelly of Toads! India's hasty-Pudding.]
'Tis their custom to get a great Iar, and among other Ingredients, as Wine, Chamber-pots, To|bacco, Spittle, they clap in three or four good size|able Toadsthis stopt up till all is dissolv'd, is their very Nectar, with which they 'l be as drunk

as a Princea Beggara Tinkera Wheel-bar|row, or Davids Sow.'Tis no Fable, but credibly related by most that write of 'emas Ba|ratti's Travels, Gages Travels, c.
(o) [That Indians gut Adders, and bring 'em to Table.]
Snakes are a Princely Dish in those Countreys.
(p) [Hoist 'em up with a Rope at the Fire!]
They were roasted in a String.
(q) [Sit Roasting her self till she turn to a Maggot.]
In the Fable of the Phaenix, 'tis reported, that after the old one is burnt, a Worm first comes out of its Ashes, and soand soand so.


To the Laud and Praise of a
Shock Bitch.
^a LEt lofty Greek and Latin go,
And Priscian crackt from top to Toe,
Since he at School full often so
Misus'd us;
From High and mighty Lines I fall,
At powerful Shock's imperious Call,
And now in downright Doggrel crawl
My Muse does.

Tho' my froze Hogs-head e'ne is burst, ^b
I'le do what none before e're durst,
And on her Praises make the first
Adventure;
O for some Album-Graecum now!
'Twould clear my musty pipes I trow;
Then would I yelp as loud as thou, ^c
Old Stentor!
Come hither Shock; I'll ne'r complain,
Nor kick thee from my Lap again,
Tho' other Lips thy Mouth so dain|ty
touches;
Give me one Buss, I'le prize thee more
Than tinsil'd Lord does brazen Whore;
Or thenor thenor thenor then
No-body.
Let lowsie Poets sit and chat
Of Money, and they know not what!
Of Love, and Honour, and all that
So silly!
Let Play-house-Hero's live or dy,
Or spew, or stink, or swear, or lye,
To court the Glance of one bright Eye
From Philly!
Let the entranced loving Ass
A Picture wooe, and buss the Glass,
Covering his Mistresses surpas|sing
Beauty!

Then steal from Cowley, or from Don,
(Since none will miss 'em when They 're gon)
Two hundred thousand Stanza's on ^d
Her Shoo-ty!
All other Fairs avaunt, avaunt,
For Shock's sweet praise my Muse must chaunt,
And sweat, (ah, wou'd she wou'd!) in Rant ^e
Extatic.
'Tis Shock alone is my desire,
She does my addled pate inspire,
As much as any Muse, with Fire
Poetic.
View every Limb in every part,
From Head to Tail, from Rump to Heart,
You 'll find she not one Pin from Art
Has gotten;
When Courtly Dames so gawdy, tho'
They dress their mouths in pimlico,
A Dog won't touch 'em, they are so
Ripe-rotten.
Muse, what d'ye mean? what Flesh can stay,
And dive in Helicon to day,
Or swim in any Streams but A|qua-vitae?
Put up your Pipes, to dinner go,
Whilest I dismiss the Guests below:
You 're welcome Gentlemen! and so,
Good-buy-t'y'e!



NOTES.
(a) [Let lofty Greek and Latine go.]
And here let me tell ye, is a fair occasion to give you to understand the Author has a smatch of Latin Verses toofor some were made be|fore these English on the same Subject: But for fear of clapping in a false Concord or Position, or so, (the very thoughts whereof will be dreadful, as long as I can unbutton my Breeches) I think e'ne best as 'tis.
(b) [Tho' my froze Hogs-head en'e is burst]
See the Academy de'l Cimento, and others, about the Nature of freezing, which rarifies and dilates, not condenses or lessens the Water. Thus a Vessel stopt close, with no vent, when frozen, if precisely full, will bust out the Hoops for Enlargement.
'Twas in the middle of the great frost these were wrote.
(c) [Then would I yelp as loud as thou, Old Stentor!]
Stentor was a kind of a City Cryer in Ho|mer,A speaking Trumpet was but a Bag|pip to him, (for all by their Names they should be Cousins) he would lift up his voice just a loud as fifty men, not one more, nor one less.
(d) 
[Two hundred thousand Stanza's on Her Shoe-ty.]
Iust so many in Quevedo's Buscon, the Po|et makes on a Pin dropt from his Mistress's SleeveI think sincerely a greater Maggot than all nine put together.
(e) [And sweat, (ah wou'd she wou'd) in rant Extatic.]
Once more, lest you should forget it, 'twas ve|ry cold weather when this was on the Anvile.


An ELEGY
On the untimely and much lamented
Death of Poor Spot, as loving a
Bitch as ever went upon two Legs,
who departed this Life, An. 1684.
O Spot! how dull a Dog am I,
That cannot for thy Murder cry,
Nor whimper?
Tho' thou full oft on thankless me,
Now from the ground, now from my knee
Didst simper.
How e're, accept this grateful Verse,
To pin on thy untimely Herse
Provided.

Even so Renowned Bat of old, ^a
A poor good-natur'd Hound condol'd, ^b
As I did.
Tell me, O tell me, you that know,
How Spot the higher Powers so
Offended?
What was the pretty Traytor's Crime,
That her fair Dayes in Beauty's prime
Were ended?
She, ever vigilant and brisk,
Her nimble Tail around would whisk,
Like Fan. S^r.
With Vmph she never went away,
But, by her mumping mean'd to say
Anan S^r.
She was not ugly, rank, nor old;
Tho' she ne'r sung, she was no Scold
Uncivil:
Sweet-Hearts she had, Him, Him, and Him,
O Envy! Envy! O thou Limb
O th' Devil!
With Mouth and Tayl, come when you will,
She smil'd, and would endeavour still
To please ye;
Altho' 'tis true, she was not Fair,
Her Cheeks ne'r shin'd, her Muzzle ne're
Was greasie.
One fault alone in her we find;
Were she not pleas'd, she must be kind
To Neighbours;

Which brought poor Tray to a sad pass, ^c
When he, to please the Love-sick Lass
O're-labours.
Well, gone she is, and who can help't?
Ah! gone she is before she whelpt;
Ah cruel!
Let none at too just Sorrows scoff,
Now cross-grain'd Fate has robb'd us of
Our Iewel!
But since poor Spot must go and buss
For our brisk Lord, old Cerberus ^d
So musty;
Come Lads, let's bid her all adieu,
And own ne're dy'd a Bitch more true,
And trusty!
Go Spot, to the Elysian Plain,
Go Spot, and meet thy Tray again
Far kinder!
What tho' Erynnis on thee scowl,
And make her Snakes about thee howl?
Ne're mind her.
There Spot, be ever brisk and gay;
There thou, without the Bans forbid, thy Tray
May'st marry;
In Fields gilt o're with many a Flower,
In Walks as fine as those of our
King Harry.



NOTES.
(a) (Even so renowned Bat of old,)
Bat Kempster of eternal memory,who has in like manner(as Sternhold says) im|mortaliz'd the memory of Captain Narbourn's Dog, which now must live as long as Bat in spight of Envy.
(b) (A poor good-natur'd Hound condol'd.)
Good-natur'd, because,because,'Tis but looking in the Book, and you 'll know all bet|ter than I can tell you.
(c) (Which brought poor Tray to a sad pass,
When he to please the Love-sick Lass, O'relabours.)
Tray was one of Madam Spot's most obse|quious and most humble Servants, but by being too complaisant and obliging, had almost kill'd him|self. This is no Tale, but a sad Truth,Ask all the Neighbours else.
(d) (For our brisk Lord, old Cerberus.)
My Lord was Tray's Successor: of him see more, and Spot too, in the (Carmen Cynege|ticon.)



A Box made like an Egg, was be|tween
Iest and Earnest, between
Stoln and Borrow'd; but at last,
(see the Honesty!) after a Year's
Possession, restor'd with this in the
Belly on't.
AS an Egg is Full of Meat,
So, in sooth, am I of Sorrow,
That your Box so fine, so neat,
I without your leave should borrow.
Now I sigh, and now I groan,
O're and o're the Crime repented;
Moan and sob, and sob and Moan,
To my very Gus tormented.
How did I in Doggrel Rhymes,
Mind my fault, and wail and grieve it?
Should I tell you twenty times,
Ne're the sooner you'd believe it.
But since your Box has, fie upon't!
Brought me to so much Confusion;

To the lawful Owner on't
Thus I make a Restitution.
Down to Dinner now they call,
Gizzard now begins to grumble;
Pray my Service unto all,
So I rest,
Your Servant Humble,
c.


The Beggar and Poet.
HAppy the Man who free from Care and Strife, 
With Dog and Bell gropes thro' the Road of Life!
Beggar at large, without o Fear, or Shame,
He'll all the World his Benefactors name.
He, like the famous ancient Scythian Race, ^b
Shifts not himself as often as his place.
Tir'd with the pillage of one fruitful Plain,
He and his Cattle soon decamp again:
He with a proud Repulse when warmly vext,
Throws you a hearty Curse, and tries the next.
No long Harangues to squeeze the stub|born
Pence,
No Oratorical Impertinence,
Nor grateful murd'ring both of Truth and Sense.

He'll in two Lines compendiously impart
The System of his truly Liberal Art;
Pray Sir, the Gift: And when the Farthings stir,
I hope you 'll never live to want it Sir!
When Beadle Death does him at last attend,
Let him go where he will, in this he's sure to mend:
Death kindly Land and House provides him, more
Besides the Cage, than e're he had before.
Thrice miserable they whom want and Fate
Eternal Mumpers made at Learning's Gate:
Their Souls indeed they cram with notions high,
But let poor Colon live by Sympathy:
To Honourable Beggars they give place,
Lean younger Brothers of the lowsie Race.


NOTES.
(a) (The Beggar, and Poet.)
I confess I can't very well get clear of a Tau|tology in this place: But for the defence of my Title; tho' many will tell me 'tis some kin to Idem per Idem, and that Beggar and Poet are the stark-self-same-specifical-numerical thing: Yet let 'em consider 'em as I do, (sub diversos for|males

conceptus) as the Learned have it; and then all's well agen.
(b) (He, like the famous ancient Scythian race,
Shifts not himself as often as his Place.
The manner of living practised by the old No|mades, and the Tartars, their now Successors, is much alike, if not the same: In olden times they used to remove Bag and Baggage from Post to Pillar, as often as the Pasture was eaten by their Retinue. Some of the Fathers that have travelled into Tartary of late Years to make one Proelite, give just the same description of their Manners.See Hackluit's Voyages.


Plures aluit Aristoteles quam Alex|ander.
^a THe Great Grecian Robber of his House|hold
was careless,
Compar'd to his bountiful Tutor old Arles,
Whose Barns, 'tis no wonder, grow fatter and faster
Than his, since their Diet was Meat for his Master.

^b An hungry starv'd Army o're Desarts and Stones,
This lead till he fought 'em to nothing but Bones.
But far more are the Slaves whom his Tutor does fetter;
And you 'll see by and by how he feeds 'em far better.
Like Tantalus, One his poor Souldiers did mock,
And fed 'em with nothing but a Bit and a Knock:
Sure they leapt at a Crust, since to frighten poor Strangers,
^c He built up their Cupboards as high as their Mangers.
Th 'tis true, they as well as their Captain did fare;
He forsooth was a God, and could live upon Air!
When his Army's all mortal, and poor hun|gry
Sinners,
Must eat up their Foes if they 'll get any Din|ners.
A hunting lean Glory thro' the World he does roam,
While the subtle Phylosopher batters at home;
^d Nor had all his Souldiers, tho' they scap'd from the Faggot,

One Mouthful of Flesh to oblige a poor Mag|got.
But Learning, tho' Envy unjustly does charge her,
Crams all her coop Houshold, tho' a thousand times larger:
He could not afford all his Army one Suttler,
She makes the fat Stagyrite both her Cook, and her Butler.
See what a large Drove, which his Power confesses,
Humbly gae at his Hatch for Commons and Messes!
He kindly provides gaudy-dayes all the year,
And this is a Bill of their prodigal Chear.
^e A Scholar's light Egg pickt as clean as a bone,
^f Or a worse than a Scholar's, a Logical one:
Chymerical Pullets, digested too soon,
^g Dress'd at his ownFire by the Man in the Moon.
Such Dishes as these, 'tis confess'd, are de|sign'd
For Stomachs abstracted, and Palates refin'd.
For your poor duller Mortal other Provenders found,
And Coquu, if he's able, will please 'em all round.

Broath which for meer Element one may mis|take,
'Tis smaller than Tiff, and as lean as a Rake;
So pure, and so clear, that 'twould Christal disgrace,
If you heave't to your Nose, you may see all your Face.
When at last the whole Hogs-head of Porridge is o're,
And Colon still swears and grumbles for more,
Sometimes you've a Commons, and some|times
you've none,
The fat greafie Flap, o the Prentice's bone.
When they've serv'd out their time, and at last are got free,
Their Table advances, as does their Degree:
There's Pudding, and Pudding, and Pudding, and then
^h Like Aesop's Tongues, Pudding, and Pud|ding
agen.
Let no man then envy the Schollar's renown,
Since ewer are fed by the Sword, than the Gown;
Since the more They 're the merrier, as ever they were,
(Tho' the less there be of 'em, the better (they fare.



NOTES.
Plures aluit Aristoteles quam Alexander. In plain, sober, earnest English, [Aristotle feeds more than Alexander.] Which is to be prov'd.
(a) (The Great Grecian Robber, c.)
So call'd from the Story of the Pyrate, who be|ing taken by Alexander's Captains, and brought and accused before him, answered, undauntedly, that Alexander was the greater Thief of the two, who robb'd with whole Armies, when he himself only with two little Ships.
(b) (An hunger-starv'd Army o're Desarts and Stones,
This lead, c.)
See Quintus Curtius's History. He lead 'em over vast Desarts to the Conquest of the In|dys.
(c) [He built up their Cupboards as high as their Mangers.]
When Alexander had conquer'd the Indys, at his departure he built Mangers for his Horses as high as a man could reach, and other things pro|portionable, to amuse posterity, and make 'em conceive a nobler Image of him and his Army: tho', as one says wittily, if his horses had eat no Oates but out of those Mangers, they would

not have been very fit for Service; for such feed|ing would soon have starv'd even Bucephalus himself.
(d) [Nor had all his Souldiers, tho' they scap'd from the Faggot,]
The Funeral-pile; it being the Custom of the Ancients to burn, not bury their Dead.
(e) [A Schollar's light Egg pickt as clean as a bone,
(f) Or a worse than a Schollar's, a Logical one.]
Either the Egg made with the Scrapings of the Egg-shell, Bread and Butter, c. or that ap|pointed to the Schollar, who proving two Eggs were three;One and one's two, and one and two's three,had only the third allot|ted him for his share.
(g) [Drest at his own Fire by the Man in the Moon.]
Aristotle's own Fire, (which since he found, he is like to keep) dreamt of in Concavo Lunae.
(h) [Like Aesop's Tongues, Pudding, and Pud|ding again.]
Aesop feasted his Master with nothing but Tongues, when order'd to buy the best and the worst of Meats.



(^a) A King turn'd Thresher.
FArewell ye gay Bubbles, Fame, Glory, Renown!
Farewell you bright Thorns that are pinn'd to a Crown,
Your little Enchantments no more shall pre|vail;
Look, look where my Sceptre is turn'd to a Flail!
O who can the Bliss of a Monarch discern,
Whose Subjects are Mice, and whose Palace (a Barn?
In spight of curs'd Fortune he Kings it be|low,
While he looks all around him, and sees not a Foe.
The groans of the murder'd in Death and Despair,
Ne'r reach his calm Kingdom, but dye in the Air:
Fierce Battles roar on; but too weak is the voice,
For he threshes and threshes, and drowns all the Noise.

^b The Soul of Domitian sunk into a Clod,
^c Dyonisius his Scepter was as light as his Rod;
^d And the Little-Great-Charles with his Sho|vel
and Spade,
Dug a hole, and lay down in the Grave he had made.
But a thousand times brighter my Stars do appear,
And I ne'r was a Monarch in earnest till here:
On a heap of fresh Straw I can laugh and lye down,
And pity the man that's condemn'd to a Crown.
No Armyes of Frogs here croak by my Throne,
I can rise, I can walk, I can eat all alone:
Reliev'd from the Siege of importunate men,
I enjoy my Original Freedom agen.
Scarce peeps out the Sun with a blushing young Ray,
^e E're my brisk feather'd Bell-man will tell me 'tis day;
Proud with his Serallio behind and before,
He cheerly triumphing, struts along by the Door.
Here's an honest brown George which my Scrip does adorn,
Here's a true Houshold Loaf of the hiew o' my Corn;

Here's a good Rammel-Cheese, but a little decay'd,
As fat as the Cream out of which it was made.
^f When Death shall cross Proverbs, and strike at my Heart,
When the best of my Flails is no fence for his Dart;
I'le open my Arms, not a Groan, not a Sigh,
Drop't soft on the Straw, with a smile I will dye.


NOTES.
(a) A King turning Thresher.
I think I may venture to pronounce this purely, a Maggot, and so others that know no better may be apt to think too; but I can assure 'em the Foundation of the Story is as infallibly true, as any inLucian's true History.
(b) [The Soul of Domitian sunk into a Clod.]
When his Envy could not be sated on the Chri|stians, he left the Empire in Discontent, and re|tir'd to the Salonian Gardens,as Cowley
(c) [Dyonisius his Scepter was as light as his Rod.]
That Tyrant driven from his Kingdom, tra|velled into Greece, and set up School-Master;

where his Cares are here affirm'd as heavy as when a King.
(d) [And the Little-Great-Charles with his Sho|vel and Spade,
Dug a hole, and lay down in the Grave he had made.]
Charles the fifth Emperour of Germany, who after as great a Rufflle in the World as has been made this several Centuries; after War, not on|ly against most of Europe, but Argirs, in Afri|ca too; at last on some disconent, or the un|pleasing face of his business, resigned the Empire, and retired to a little House and Gardn, which he cultivated with his own hand, and there liv'd and dy'd.
(e) [E're my brisk feather'd Bell-man will tell me 'tis day.]
Meaning Chaunticleer,as Gransire Chau|cer has it; or in new English, no better nor worse than a Cock,that Baron Tell-Clock of the Night,as Cleveland christens him.
(f) [When Death shall cross Proverbs, and strike at my Heart,
When the best of my Flails is no fence for his Dart.]
The common old Proverb here mean, is, thatThere's no Fence against a Flail.



On a Discourteous Damsel that call'd
the Right Worshipful Author(an't
please ye!) Sawcy Puppy.
A PANEGYRIC.
UGly! ill-natur'd! impudent, and proud!
Sluttish! nonsensical! and idly loud!
Thy Name's a ranker Scandal to my Pen,
Than all thy words could be spew'd up agen.
Yet will I do thy Vgliness the grace,
To touch thee, tho' I'm forc'd to turn my face;
Touch thee as Surgeon touches rotten sores,
Touch thee as Nures T,or Beadles Whores.
Belch of a Toad whom Hell to Mortals sends,
^a Vampt up from Bottle-Ale and Candles-ends.
Hadst thou no Dick with whom thou mightst be free,
Thus to let fly thy Whetstone-jeers on me?
What Skip-kennel without his eyes offence,
Taught thee all this Dog-and-bitch Eloquence?
^b Thou for Doll-Troop, hadst ended Ragoo's strife,
He'd hvng'd, and never ventur'd such a Wife.

That thick deformity which daubs thy Snowt
Would make a Hell-soul'd Ravisher devout.
An Incubus from such a Face would flee;
'Twould baulk a Satyr more deform'd than thee.
E'ne get a Mask, or with thy Visage daunted,
The Londoners will swear their Streets are haunted:
Below the Plague, below the Pox and Itch,
Take your own Farewell, You 're a saw|cy
Bitch.


NOTES.
(a) [Vampt up from Bottle-Ale and Candles Ends.]
Not much more honourable than the Rehear|sal's Parthenope.
Whose Mother, Sir, sells Ale by the Town-Walls.
(b) [Thou for Doll-Troop hadst ended Ragoo's strife,
He'd hang'd, and never ventur'd such a Wife.]
Monsieur Ragoo, an Officer in a Troop of Horse, having taken occasion to step aside a plun|dering, was to be hang'd a little: But however

the chance turn'd, he had choice given him, ei|ther to take a vertuous Lady call'd Doll Troop, to be his Wedded Wife, or else to snickle up: af|ter deep consideration upon the case, and weigh|ing the Circumstances, c. he resolv'd to cast Lots; the Lay was so even, to decide what him|self could not do, and so got the worse end of the staff, without Redemption to be all-to-be-marry'd.


On a CHEESE.
Pinguis  ingratae permeretur Caseus Urbi. Virg. A Pastoral.
AMoret and Strephon lay
On a Couch of downy Hay,
In the wither'd Age of Day:
Blest that one the other sees,
Blest with a spicy western Breeze,
^a Blest with a noble Rammel Cheese.
Each at t' other darts their Eye;
Each at the glittering Treasure by.
A sight that Strephon's passion moves;
Scarce Amoret he better loves:
To Amoretta's Heart so near,
Strephon's self was scarce more dear:

Scarce the Pride o'th' blooming Vale,
Woven around her May-day Pail;
Nor could either prove ungrate
For such a Gift to smiling Fate:
Oft with Vows and Flowers they ran
To smiling Fate, and smiling Pan;
Thus they pray, and thus they sing,
While all the answering Valleys ring.

Strephon.
Sprinkle all the dappled Mead!
Round the Turfy Altars lead!
Every Nymph and Fawn invite
To laugh and revel here at Night!
Jolly Toasts shall never fail,
Quite drunk with nappy nut-brown Ale:
Here's a Cheese would make a Feast
Where a King might be a Guest.


Amoretta.
Stay my Strephon! 'tis in vain;
Too low and humble is your strain:
You the Gift must higher raise,
Or you 'll Satyr while you praise.
Let stiff Princes dream alone
On their steep unenvy'd Throne!
Our brighter Cheese out-shines their Crown,
And weighs the gilded Bauble down:
We'll a nobler Note begin;
Call and rouze the God within!

Sing the Cheese, and by his Aid,
Whence it came, and how 'twas made.


Strephon.
Each Flower that e're in Garland grew,
Amoretta! move for you,
And every Herb that sipps the Dew;
Each their distant Influence joyn
To an Invention of Divine:
The Daisy's pretty twinkling Eye,
The Infant Violet blooming by;
Primrose of refreshing smell,
And the Cowslip's spotted Bell.
Fragrant Tyme, and new-born Grass,
Where no rude Feet did ever pass;
All their Essences combine
To an Invention so Divine:
Each of these transfus'd, agrees
First in Milk, and then in Cheese;
In the Cow's Alemby wrought,
Whence, when to perfection brought,
Amoretta's whiter hand
Springs of Nectar can command;
^b Cataracts which oft prevail
To overflow the largest Pail:
And when the laughing Virgins come
With their new-found Treasure home,
Amoretta shall declare
How the Miracle they rear.



Amoretta.
Soft as Wooll, and white as Lambs
Lickt by their Officious Dams;
White as those fair Lillies grow
In our Copps,as white as Snow,
Next the Creamy Curds arise,
And with calm Glories greet the Eyes:
He that sees 'em dawning, sees
The Image of an Embryo Cheese.
^c So from Clay Prometheus can
Mould the mighty Form of Man:
So the rising Vision shows,
As when the World from Chaos rose.
Then 'tis bruis'd, and prest till all
The pale Tears around it fall.
Thus when Iove intends to mould
A Hero out of purer Gold,
Hee'll shut him up in pain and Care,
And like Alcides, pinch him there;
'Till he by kind Afflictions trod,
Emerges, more than Half-a-God.


Strephon.
Thence in happy Triumph born,
Like groaning Loads of Welcome Corn,
On a cleanly shelf 'tis plac'd,
With so rich a Burden grac'd;
Or, lest the Foes its Walls attacque,
On a well-munited Rack.

^d Like Atlante's Palace fair,
Towring high in yielding Air,
By Ariosto built aloft,
All the Walls of costly Thought,
Or that sturdy Indian Rock
^e Which Ammon's Son so long did mock;
There it reigns, and there defies
Feeble Hosts of Rats and Mice:
Up they squint, but all in vain,
Up they leap with fruitless pain,
Down they drop, a-down again.
Reynard so with longing Eyne
Views the Cluster'd loaden Vine;
So when the Wolf a Fold has found,
Fenc't with Quick-setTurn-pikes round,
About he stalks, and grinns, and scowls,
About he stalks, and vainly howls.


Amoretta.
^f So the Titans hizzing fll,
When of old they dar'd rebell:
Olympus they on Ossa pack,
Both on Pelions craggy back;
And, against the Thunder hurl'd
Half his own dismantled World:
^g On the calm Couch of golden peace,
In undisturb'd eternal ease;
He scorns their Plots, and laughs above;
So sits my Cheese, and so sits Iove.



Strephon.
This dear day the happy birth
Of Amoretta bless't the Earth;
All the Lads of Mirth and Song,
O're the Plains shall Dance along:
And he that best can sing each Grace,
In my Amoretta's face,
Shall have the present Iove has given,
^h Shall have the Ancile dropt from Heaven.
This prais'd, this lov'd, this envy'd Cheese,
For a Reward shall all be his.



NOTES.
(a) [Bless't with a noble Rammel Cheese.]
(Rammel) is a word, I think not much used bout London, but common in the West, op|sd to Skim-Cheese. Thus you find it pretty ften in Mr. Creeches Theocritus.
(b) [Springs of Nectar can command.]
Hony soit qui male y pense.
(c) [So from Clay Prometheus can,
Mould the beauteous form of Man.]
Prometheus, being 'tis likely used to build Gae|les, and Dirtpyes in his Youth, when he came  Age, set up the Trade of a Manfounder, for  Jove was so angry (as well he might,  to 'ther took his work out of his hands, with|out

ever serving his time to the Trade) that, what do me he but trusses him up, rives him on Mount Caucasus, and sent an unconscionable Vulture to tear out the Heart of him. See more in Tobacco-pipe. Read the story in Lucians Dialogues, Book 1. p. 48.
(d) [Like Atlante's Palace fair.]
A gawdy Magical Pallace in Orlando Furi|oso, which cost Poet and Painter, and at least Engraver, a great many fine strokes to express it. The Louvre, or Escurial are but Hog-styes to't, as any body may be satisfi'd that will but take the pains to compare 'em.
(e) [Or that sturdy Indian Rock,
Which Ammons Son so long did mock.]
A Fortress long besieg'd by Alexander, in Sagitiana, I think 'twas, but 'tis good to be sure, and therefore ask Quintius Curtius, who knows better than any of us!
(f) [So the Titans hizzing fell.]
Qu. Pray Mr. Author why is your Shepherd|ess so learned here, and in other places? how comes she to talk against decorum in Pastorals, and to fly upon the highropes at this rate?
Answ. Because all things here are designed  be alike extravagantlet this serve once for all for I'll trouble my self no more about it!
(g) [On the calm Couch of golden peace.]
Any one may discern this is a stroke of Lucre|tius, alluding to that first Principle of the Epicu|reans,

so well express'd by that Poet, and so
much better made English by Mr. Creechthus.
"For what so ere's divine must live in peace,
"In undisturb'd, and everlasting ease, c.
I have forgot the rest, but you shall have it all as soon as I can get it my self.
(h) Shall have the Ancile dropt from Heav'n.]
The Ancile was a certain very holy Relique among the Romans, being the very handy-work of Jupiter himself: but least this precious busi|ness should be stole from the Temple, while Gods and Men were asleep, two more were made so exactly like the right, and one another, that a Thief must have very good luck to be able to distinguish the original from the counterfeit. In the safe keeping it, they believ'd the Cityes safety consisted.


A Full and True Account of a Jour|ney
with its Appurtenances.
^a NOw Heav'ns jolly Carman left weeping and whining,
Scrubb'd up Sunday face, and fell fairly a shining;

The Cits are alive, and tothey run,
As Flyes from a Cow-turd will swarm in the Sun.
Spouse Rampant takes Arms, Coucht Cuckold she tells,
He must get her a place to go visit the Wells;
Not a Pothecaryes Wife that is leaving the Town,
But will pawn all her Glyster-pipes for a new Gown.
'Tis the Devil that drives, and needs Travel they must;
A long comes the Coachman with Bring out your Dust!
So sweet is his Load, and so neat, and so pure,
Yo'd swear he was under-commission'd i'th' Sewer.
Not a Fop of the Pit, or a Jilt o' the Box,
^b But dresses, and crawls to the Wells with a Pox;
So throughly the Waters have purgd all the City,
^c That They 're strangely reform'd, and grown civil, and Witty.
Least the Dunns my poor Carcass to pieces should tare,
Ill ene like my Betters take Sanctuary there;
For melting, or getting, or spunging a Penny,
As poor, and as dull, and as sawcy as any.

But the walks were bepester'd with Cravat, and Fan,
And Beaver, and Wigg, and sometimes a Man:
For curing old Aches, and getting new pains;
For cooling and heating the blood and the reins.
Old Sol from Aurora's Alcove newly peeping,
While more than three Quarters lay grunt|ing
and sleeping:
When routed Cravat-string, and Ruffles I'd rally'd,
From Dog-hole of Lodging one Morning I sally'd,
I walkt, and I strutted along like the rest,
And I thought hard of nothing as well as the best;
Till a Bevey of Ladys swum hastily by,
All finer than ippence, they dazz'd my Eye.
I follow the Track, and the Vision pursue,
Meditation farewel, now the Game is in view:
Tho' I quickly got up they were enter'd be|fore,
And cruelly shut the unmerciful Door.
Tho' my Eyes kept a Fast, yet my Ears I could treat,
And yours shall take part while the Tale I repeat

But Madam, sayes one, while They 're chatting together,
If one may be so bold, pray what Wind blew you hither?
She replyes, with a Sigh drawn up to her Chin,
'Tis a weakness, Obstructions, and weakness within.
My Husband's as likely a Man as you 'll see,
A Man every Inch of him, take it from me!
Ay and I'll assure yec.
Nay! never despair, Madam, 'tis not too late:
Your changing of pasture may make you grow fat;
I speak by experience, stay here but a Little,
And I warn't you return as round as a Kettle.
No doubt on't, says one, but if ever she will,
She must take a good dose of a Soverain Pill,
That cured meHold there says the next, I deny't t'ye;
^d I was helpt by some drops of Specimen vitae.
They stirr'd, and I fled for my Ears, and my Eyes,
Since a noble Retreat with a Victory vyes!
I retired in spight of my Foes and my Fears,
And bravely brought off both my Eyes and my Ears.

Now Reader, by a Figure which Poets may use,
Pray suppose it is Evening!If you wont you may chuse.
As Lasses and Lads do advance in Decorum,
When Crowder at Christmass hops squeak|ing
before 'em;
So Tag-Rag, and Bob-tail to dancing do throng,
And th' Flower ofcome flaming along.
Here a Hell-full of Hogo's comes driving just on us,
^e Let's get the wind side on't, or Mercy upon us;
A Plague's on the Green, and it newly arose
FromSome-body'spowerful Armpits and Toes.
Have a care of the Lad with his hair in his Hat,
As you value his anger touch not his Cravat!
Pray keep your distance, with Reverence stand,
If you ruffle his Ruffles, his Cane is at hand.
Sirrah Iack! rub my Shoes with the Nap|kin,
with Care,
Your Master commands you, refuse if you dare:

Unmannerly Winds the sweet Curls to dis|place
Of so pretty, so lovely, so charming a Face!
But hang a good Face, that's a womanish toy,
Give me such a shape as this Lad does enjoy!
But speak not a word as you value your life,
Of his Buttocks and Shoulders, and the thing call'd his Wife!
If you love your own Ribs, stand further good Friends,
Room, Room for a Pudding ty'd up at both Ends!
Whose goodly large Belly struts crowding before him,
No less than a Lady behind does adore him.
Make much of him, Madam, and use him in haste,
Or quickly his Service alas will be past;
For if half an inch further his Paunch does but come,
^f You must e'ne be content with the deaf and the dumb.
Here creeping and cringing to a thing of a Fortune,
That weighs fifteen thousand, stands hope|ful
young What-d'ye-call-him!
And e're he does live on the Land, 'tis but reason
If he take for Security Liv'ry and Seisin.

A Knighthood comes next with a finical face,
And a couple of Arms which he moves with that Grace,
That he thinks his deserts will ha' cursed ill hap,
If some Lady Fair don't fall in his Lap.
Now the sport is all over, all travel that can
To the place whence they came, with their Whore and their Man;
And I when my Guinys and Credit were spent
Sneakt home in the Crowd, like a Fool as I went.


NOTES.
(a) [Now Heavens jolly Carman left weeping and whining.]
The Iourney was at the beginning of Summer, after a great Rain.
(b) [But dresses, and crawls to the Wells with a Pox.]
There's many a true Word spoke in jest.
(c) [They 're strangely transform'd, and grown civil, c.]
Very good news, if it be'n't too good to be true.
(d) [I was helpt by some drops of Specimen vitae.
The Dispensatory wherein that Cordial is to be

found, is,2^d part of the Souldiers For|tune.
(e) [Let's get the Wind-side on't, or mercy up|on us!]
In the Plague time, in London, people would tack about one another to get to the Wind-ward, lest that should bring the Disease on them by the breath of any infectious.
(f) [For it half-an-inch further his Paunch does but come.]
Some persons have been reported of that vast and irregular bigness, that they ha'n't been able with one part of their Body to relieve t'other.


The Leather Bottle.
MR. Iove! tho' your Chittiface Ganymed skink,
I scorn to exchange or my Plate, or my drink;
For without fear or wit the Immortals will hector,
When out of thy Bole they are fuddled with Nectar.
Whatever your Cronys the Poets have spoke,
Your Godship, when here, were a notable Soak;

And when from your Gang you were spirited up,
^a In the midst of the Stars you planted your Cup.
^b As a Lady of Rome, in a great deal of State,
Produc'd all her brats for her Cupboard of Plate;
So if for the sight of my Treasures you call,
Here's my dear Leather-bottle, my one and my all.
^c Gigantic Borrachio's Sir Quixot did fright,
And maugre poor Squire, made an Ass of the Knight;
Had my Bottle been there, 'twould ha' been more compliant,
For he ne're could mistake such a Dwarf for a Gyant.
My Vessel tho' little, dim Envy may see,
Is as neat and as pretty as pretty may be;
^d When the Heidleburg Tun is an ill-contriv'd Sloven,
Tho' its Vent-hole's as big as the mouth of an Oven.
How cool and how sweet is the Liquor that's here,
^e It dribbles down daintily, lively and clear!
Not Ice can preserve it as well from the wea|ther,
Nor Water, nor Sand, as a Bottle of Leather.

^f Oraculous Bottles inspir'd of old
Each worm-eaten Witch that Wonderments told:
^g This Engine curst Sycorax her self could subdue
And this did a Viceroy out of Trincalo hew.
When the Sun does with Thirst the poor Hay-maker throttle,
And tann all their Faces till they look like the Bottle;
'Tis this sets 'em right, 'tis as speedy and handy
As old Mother Midnight's kind Bottle of Bran|dy.
Let others plod on, till they'r crazie and brain-sick,
^h For malleable Glasses, like the Consuls of Dantsick:
Let this fall where you will, all its thumps are in vain,
You may bulge it, and bulge it, and out with't again.
My Bottle besides is old Dog at Dispute,
And can Suarez, and Scotus, and Occham con|fute:
Nay, his own Couzin Bellarmin too must go down,
And if e're he get up, he will have him by'th' Crown.

When Semele in Lightning and Thunder did fry,
Iove feather'd her Bastard, and sheath'd it in's Thigh:
But no doubt but he thriv'd in that Climate far worse
Than if in a Bottle he had put him to Nurse.
Some Pigmy Diogenes here might retreat,
And make it his spacious and worshipful seat;
One Room of a Floor, for a Cellar he might spare it;
'Tis needless, as well as a Chamber or Garret
Like Maggot in Nutshel he might revel with glee,
And none be so happy, so happy as he:
Nor need he to fear that he there should be Foxed,
Tho he drank up at once both the Cellar and Hogs-head.


NOTES.
(a) [In the midst of the Stars you planted your Cup.]
A Constellation call'd the Cup.
(b) [As a Lady of Rome
Produc'd all her Brats for her Plate.]
A famous StoryWhen one Lady had shown

the other all her Iewels and fine things, she car|ries
her home, and for her Iewels, shows her her
Children.
(c) [Gigantic Borrachio's Sir Quixot did fright.]
See the Notes on the Souldiers Duel.
(d) [When the Heidleburg Tun, c.]
The great Tun of Heidleburg, with a Lad|der of many rounds to ascend it.
(e) [It dribbles down daintily.]
I have taken care that should be set in other Characters, as a most considerable Flower bor|row'd from my good friend John Bunnyan.
(f) [Oraculous Bottles inspir'd of old.]
The Spirit of Ob, Webster and his Follow|ers say, was only a Bottle, c.
(g) [This Engine curst Sycorax her self could subdue,
And this did a Viceroy out of Trincalo hew.]
See the famous History of the Tempest, or the Inchanted Island, where this is explained.
(h) For malleable Glasses, like the Consuls of Dantsick.]
'Tis reported an ingenious Man had at Dant|sick; (or somewhere there abouts, te'n't much odds) a Glass which after he had drunk, he would throw on the ground, bulge it, and hammer it out agen.



(^a) Out of Lucian's true History,
Part the First.
^bAND now on a fair star-light Noon
Our Ship launch'd off, and gently left the Moon.
^c So stoops the Sun to kiss his watry Fair,
And with bright Foot-steps paints the ambi|ent
Air.
Boreas had lockt his Bullys in their Cave,
^d And Birds of calm brood o're the marble wave.
But ah! how treacherous are the smiles of Fate!
How slippery treads the blest and fortunate!
Twice the kind Sun had warm'd the chearful Skys,
Nor does less bright the third black day arise.
All dreadful bright it rose, the Air was spread
Far, far around with ominous gloomy Red.
Sad hollow Voices by the Pilot past,
^e And one pale Light glar'd o're the tremb|ling
Mast.

When such dark Bodings call'd for Aid Di|vine,
^f We vow'd a Bull on Neptune's oozy Shrine:
Tho' Fae was cross, yet he so far did hear,
We were no longer rackt with doubtful fear.
For see!
Whole Heards of Whales make the white Ocean roar,
New Seas they spout, and drive new Seas be|fore.
The Tide they brought had washt us far away,
But one Leviathan's Charibdis made us stay.
He, like some Tyrant-Gudgeon, floated by
Amidst the little Minews trembling Fry:
Like Lacquys by with finny feet they ran,
Lean Poets all the rest, he some fat Alderman.
And when the vast Abyss around him curl'd,
They seem'd but Mountains, he alone a World:
We took his Latitude when sailing in,
^g Full fifteen hundred Leagues from Fin to Fin:
His dreadful Iaws, for our destruction bent,
Had Teeth, each larger than the Monument,
And sharp as Needles near in Crooked-Lane,
^h Set on some Diamond Island of the Main:
And now there's not so much as room for Pray'r,
The last sad refuge of the Mariner.

These, O my Wife, these, O my Children cry!
Then all shake hands, and drink, and bid Good-b'w'y'!
Here, had we been with such Provision stor'd,
^i We should have thrown some Hogs-heads over-board:
^k But here tho' we had robb'd the Moon and Sun,
An hundred Delos's had hardly done:
The Monster gapes, unfinisht shrieks begin;
We sink, we sink, his Whirl-pool rolls us in!
Oceans are after Oceans on us hurl'd,
We shoot the Gulph, and down we sail to view the under World.


NOTES.
(a) Part of Lucian's true History.
'Tis paraphrastically done; tho I dare under|take, the Original is followed (at least) as close by the Transverser, as Truth by the Author.
(b) [And now, on a fair star-light Noon.]
Lucian and the Ships Crew had taken a Voyage to the Land i' the Moon, (without the help either of Domingo's feathery, or others Christal or Brazen Chariot, or so much as the French Smith's Wings;) and after many strange Adventures met with (you need not question) in so strange a place, is

now just bound for Earth and Sea agen.
(c) [So stoops the Sun to kiss his watry Fair.]
Apollo's pretty Hostess, whom he uses a-nights to call in to;But they are both very civil per|sons, and certainly mean no manner of harm in the World.I forgot to tell you her Name is Thetis.
(d) [And Birds of calm brood o're the Marble wave.]
These are a kind of Creatures the Poets have had the happiness to discover, as Harpys, Chy|maera's, c. when all the other less inquisitive, or less lucky part of the World know nothing of 'em. They are said to brood on the Sea at a set time in the year; and Neptune while they are hatching, is so complaisant to give 'em all fair wea|ther. If any would see any more of 'em let 'em en|quire at Lucian's true History, Second Part, and they shall know farther.
(e) [And one pale light glar'd o're the tremb|ling Mast.]
Two Lights appearing on the Ship in a storm, are counted good Omens, one single, bad.
(f) [We vow'd a Bull on Neptune's oozy Shrine.]
As common an Offering to Neptune of old, as now a wax Candle to-my Lady of Loretto.
(g) [Full fifteen hundred Leagues from Fin to Fin.]
I quote my Author: I have it from Lucian himself; and we must say of him here, as he a lit|tle

before of Aristophanes, [that he speaks like a learned Man, and would not tell a lie for all the World.]
(h) [Set on some Diamond Island of the Main.]
One of those Phaery Islands the Whale might know, tho' we don't.
(i) [We should have thrown some Hogs-heads over-board.]
As is the Custom for Mariners when a Whale is near.
(k) [But here, tho' we had robb'd the Moon and Sun.]
Delos being their Free-land, settled in the Sea on purpose for the Birth-place of Apollo and Diana.


An Elegant Letter, with a Copy of fine
Verses by a London Wit, in answer
to a Lampoon.

Right Reverend Knawpost,
YOur Prodigious Chaos of Nonsence
(composed, and wright by the Spawn
of a Moabite) I receiv'd, and am satis|fy'd,
that the Latitude of your Troble ex|ceeds
the Demensions of mine, or you need

not have given your self so much unneces|sary
labour to prove your self an inconsi|derable
Coxcomb. The perusal of your
Satyrical Rhetorical Lines made me ad|mire
to see so excellent a parrable [1] in
your Parts and Person; for as your Per|son
is monstruous without the Aid and As|sistance
of modeish Accouterments, (were
your Nose and Chinn an inch shorter) so
is there such a Chimaew [2] in your Dis|position,
that without the assistance of
good Literature, the sense of your hero|ick
Lines had rendred your Ape-ship more
rediculous then an Ass. Thus admireing
the work of Nature, which hath created
your Face so much like a Sunn-Dial, that
were it equally devided into twelve parts,
and as truly seated toward the South point,
as you Affections are toward your Mi|stress;
the shade of your Nose would cer|tainly,
when the Sunn shines, descover the
true time of the Day.
So I rest,
Your Servant.

So much for the Epistle; the Poem followeth,
(so much of it as the ill-natur'd Mice have left
legible.)


How doth the learned Critic stand,
Pensive and mad, with Pen in hand,
Fraighted with store of amorous Wares,
Which many an Author owns for theirs!


He is a Fool that thinks it good
To laugh at all that's made of Wood; [3]
And eke in time may lifted be
Unto the fatal wooden Tree.

In the Spark's Letter observe, 'tis spell'd in
the same manner that 'ti printed: For the word
mark'd with the figure [1] and wrote [parra|ble,]
I suppose he would ha' said [parallel;]
and figure [2.] for Chimaew,he means
either Chymaera, or nothing at all. In his
Verses, fig. [3.]That's made of Wood,]
For this block of a Lover, Poet, Scrivener, c.
was by Occupation a Ioyner, or some such wood|en
Trade, of which he had a touch in a former
Lampoon. In answer to his Letter he had this
following.


An Answer to the Ioyner's smart Letter.
Why Lad!
HOw now Lad! witty these cold mor|nings!
'Tis well if this don't prog|nosticate
some Plague; for certainly a
Comet is n't half so prodigious. But in|deed,
Friend Thomas, it terrifies the Coc|cles
of my Heart, lest thou should'st at
this rate run out in a little time longer
thy Right Reverend Master, and Right
Worshipful Self with Charges to Scrive|ner
and School-boy. I think thou'st claw'd
it off Lad! and the Mallet of thy Inven|tion
joyned with the peaceable Chizzel of
thy pestilent Wit, has for once obtunded
the Cerebrocity of every sawcy Rogue of
a Rival. In good sober sadness there's
Nonsence enow to perswade one it came
all, every bit and scrap, and Chip of it out
o' thy n'own dear Noddle; but that, as
the black old Gentleman, thy Friend,
would have it, who ow'd thee a spight
for once in thy life courting virtuous Wo|men,
'tis writ and spelt at such a rate,

none but such an incorrigible Blockhead
could ever blunder on.But who can
help't? We must e'ne take't for better
for worse, seeing there's no Remedy; and
therefore,Here's t'ye agen! alas poor
Thing! Is your queasie Gu surfeited with
all the Tripe-women, Kitchin-stuff-wen|ches,
Hogs-feetButter-Whores and
Scullions in our Street, that you have all so
sudden such a muckle mind to what's meat
for your Masters. 'Twould be worth the
while now to launch out into the due Ap|plause
of thy portly paunch and person, but
only thy sweet Face, my joy! is so much
like a Slough, that I'm already founder'd
Horse and Man, and therefore lest I should
marr thy Marriage, thinking one can't
pick and choose in the case, e'ne best re|commend
thee to an honest Cindar-wo|man,
or the Tankard-bearer's hump-backt
Lady, with whom, as I am credibly in|form'd,
you used to have intimate famili|arity
and converse in the corner of the Cel|lar.
So I rest,
Yours.




DIALOGUES.

I. Dialogue,
Between a Thatcher and a Gardener, for
Precedency, on occasion of a Pot of
Ale with this Inscription;
Detur Digniori.

Thatcher.
DOwn, down to the Clod out of which thou art made,
Nor with Tinder-box-hoof my Ladder invade!
The Pot shall be mine in spight of thy Spade.


Gardener.
And dares the poor Thatcher with the Gar|dener
vye?
Sure his Noddle's grown giddy with sitting so high;
Let our Titles be try'd by the next that comes by.



Thatcher.
Content! (Gardener,) And content; and look over the plain,
Where Cuddy the Shepherd comes trotting amai:
Who but he should decide which is best of the twain?


Thatcher.
Tho' a Shepherd may be partial, he's honest and true,
He's old, and he's grave, and he Justice will do,
And Cuddy will be equal to me and to you.


Gardener.
ut look, he's just here: pr'y thee tell him the Tale;


Thatcher.
ay, Cuddy, and judge whether Trade must prevail,
or the best of our two wins a Pot of good Ale.


Cuddy.
ll stay while I can, but then quickly begin,
 either expect the Honour to win!
 my Landlord in haste has sent for me in.


Gardener.
ce straining of Complements now would be vain,
 eldest and noblest of Trades I'le main|tain;
 Gardener was Adam, but a Thatcher was Cain.



Thatcher.
Not so fast Mr. Gard'ner! with Reeds and with Boughs
His Father before him had cover'd a House:
^b Sure you dare not deny what Dubartas a|vows.


Gardener.
The Hero's from Gardens and Solitudes came,
And sallying from thence fill'd the World with their Name;
But who ever heard of a Thatcher of Fame?


Thatcher.
^c Epicurus indeed from a Garden did rise,
But Atheism never can a Thatcher surprize,
^d Since he alwayes is viewing the Sun and the Sys


Gardener.
From the tops of their Houses Aegyptian must ow
^e To the rest of the World Idolatry's flown
And too many Gods are scarce better tha none


Thatcher.
If you 're driven into Aegypt, and fly fro the Greek
Very far from your Lodge, one need not  see
^f To find out the omnipotent Onion and Lee



Gardener.
Their Trophies Kings, Captains and Empe|rors
bring,
And all over-board for one Shovel they fling;
But who ever heard of a Thatcher a King?


Thatcher.
The Gallows and Garden when all other means fails!
Thus Dennis when scap'd from Siilian Jayls,
^g Fell from cutting of throats to cutting of tails.


Gardener.
Each Beggar the name of the Thatcher can tell,
For nothing you 're fit but a Cottage and Cell;
I with Princes and Lords by their Palace dwell.


Thatcher.
Thatch keeps out all Care as well as all Cold.
Besides by my Grandsire I've often been told,
^h That Straw has been Cov'ring for Churches of old


Gardener.
Scarce once in a Moon you mount from the ground,
And another Trade too, or you 'll starve, must be found,
I ha' still pleasant work that holds all the year round.


Thatcher.
No doubt on't; and Winter must never in|fest
Your fortunate Regions with Summer still blest,

Nor fix you like a Cuckow clung up in his Nest!


Cuddy.
Brave Boys, both! so well you each other abuse,
There's hardly between you a halter to chuse:
I jdge that to make one another amends,
I drink off the Ale, you shake hands and be Friends.



NOTES.
(a) [A Gard'ner was Adam, but a Thatcher was Cain.]
Thus demonstrated.Cain built a City be|fore any Iron-work was invented; he could not therefore have Tiles to cover it:Ergo, 'twas done with Thatch, or somewhat equivalent.
(b) [Sure you dare not deny what Dubartas avows.]
Dubartas in his Poem of the Creation, des|cribes Adam's rude draught of building in that manner.
(c) [Epicurus indeed from a Gard'ner did rise.]
Epicurus his Study and Schools being in a Gar|den, was so notorious, that his Principles are thence call'd,The Doctrine of [the Gar|den.]
(d) 
[But Atheism never can a Thatcher sur|prize,
Since he always is viewing the Sun and the Skys.]
This even the Epicureans confess a strong Inducement to the belief of a supream Be|ing, the Author of the World; and therefore give their Followers a Caution against it. So 
Lucretius, Book 5. p. 141.
For even those few exalted Souls that know
The Gods must live at ease, not look below;
Free from all medling Cares, from hate and love;
If they admire, if view the World above,
They wonder how those glorious Beings move.
They are entrap'd, they bind their slavish Chain,
And sink to their religious Fears again.
Mr. Creeches Translation.
(e) [From the tops of their Houses Aegyptians must own,
To the rest of the World Idolatry's flown.]
If the Gardener puts a fallacy on the Thatch|er, let him look to it himself; I only am to ex|plain his meaning thus far,That in Aegypt, from the tops of their houses the Aegyptians fre|quently used to view the Heavens, living in a Champain Countrey.Hence Astronomy, and as some say, Idolatry.
(f) 
[To find out the omnipotent Onion and Leek.
Part of the worshipful God-heads of Aegypt, which, tho' of the two more tolerable than the Cro|codile; yet, had Horace liv'd there, or ma|ny others, they had certainly, as to that point of the Compass, turn'd Atheists.
(g) [Thus Dennis, when scap't from Sicilian Jayls,]
Fell from cutting of throats to cutting of tails.]
When Dyonisius the Tyrant of Sicily was ex|pell'd, he went to Corinth, and there set up School-master.
(h) [That Straw has been Cov'ring for Chur|ches of old.]
The Church of Glastenbury, the ancientest certainly in England, if the Monks do'n't lie, was built, the sides with Hurdles, and thatcht with Straw.



The Second Dialogue,
Between the Herring, and Whale.

^a Whale.
I Am the bold Whale. (Herring:)And the brisk Herring I.


Whale.
Thro' the Ocean I roll. (Herring.) O're the Shallows I fly.


Whale.
^b Per fidem be gone from my presence! How dare
The ridiculous Mouse with the Mountain com|pare?


Herring.
Take my Honour, take my Life! to my Post I'll abide,
Now I find such Authority plain o' my side,
Tho' you swell, yet, unless the Rehearsal do's lie,
^c There's ten times more Beauty and Shape in a Fly.


Whale.
Tho' with ease I could breath thee to nothing again
Or spout thee a Mile, to thy Enemies, Men;

^d Like Phaebus I'll stoop from my glittering Throne,
And even descend to dispute for my own;
A couple we'll chuse, who the Umpires shall be,
The Dolphin is mine. (Herring)The Shrimp my Referee.


Whale.
^e When in the Abyss I no longer did sleep,
But kind Mother Nature call'd me out of the deep;
What a Gulph did I leave i' the space whence I came?
What a Canle of Chaos was spent i' my frame!
When Nature the Whale into Being did bring,
She smil'd, and she cry'dHe is made for a King.


Herring.
Tho' a World of dull Bullion your essence do's hold,
Scarce an Atom of Soul was cast into the Mould,
Room enough, and to spare lavish Nature al|lows,
But provides not a Tenant to suit with the House:
As for me, tho' she veils me with Flesh, and with Skin,
Yet my Form's little else but pure Spirit within:
And in vain you your Bulk for your Monarchy bring,
^f For if the Ocean were Goth-land who but I should be King.



Whale.
Not alone on my Bulk I intend to rely;
My Strength, and my Courage with my Mag|nitude
vye:
My side is too thick for a Spear or a Dart;
^g Huge Rafters of Ribs barricado my Heart.
Even Neptune himself is afraid when I roar,
And his quiv'ring Court dive away to the Shore.
With a courage undaunted I'll a Navy assail,
And disorder whole Squadrons by a brust with my Tail.


Herring.
Your strength and your Valour must needs be Divine,
^h When you 're caught, like a Gudgeon with a Hook, and a Line:
^i When spite of Dame Luna, at Ebb 'twill be flood,
And you make a Spring-tide all around with your Blood.


Whale.
The Laws of hard Nature forbid to withstand,
That Forreigner Man, the fierce Tyrant o'th' Land:
'Tis the Sea is my Kingdom, and the Waters must own,
At home I have ever been Monarch alone.


Herring.
^k Yes, as oft, as the Sword-fish, and Thrasher will please
To leave off their Sport, and allow you som ease:

On your Noddle and under your Paunch they are set,
While one Reyns you in, 'tother makes you Curvet;
Then Neptune indeed may shake when you roar,
Tho' you 're Nine-mile at Sea, they can hear you ashore.


Dolphin.
All to Arms! all to Arms! while we scolding sit here,
Look! look where the Enemyes fleet do's ap|pear:
The Fishermans Navy with sail, and with Oar,
That has often among us made Havock be|fore.


Shrimp, Herring.
I boyland I broyl till my Ierkin do's crack.


Whale.
And I feel barbed Irons like a Grove on my back:
'Tis in vain with such Odds for the Combat to stay,
All shift for your selves, and I'll lead you the way.




NOTES.
(a) [I am the bold Whaleand the brisk Herring I.]
First and formost, (and before I tell you by what Art I make these Gentlemen speak) 'tis the part of an Honest man to acknowledge, and repay what he has borrow'd. This Line is but little al|ter'd from that in
Rehearsal.
"I am the bold Thunderthe brisk Lightning I.
In the next placeBy what Art Magick can I perswade Fishes to speak, who are mute to a Pro|verb, and no more enclin'd to prating than Fryer Bacon's Brazen-Head? Why, first take notice that's a Vulgar Errour, and a scandal on the free Citizens of the Ocean: they are silent indeed when dragg'd into our Element, nor should we much, I believe, be more enclin'd to Oratory, if Head and Ears covered in theirs. Again, 'tis plain they have a voice, prov'd from the Whale, who in his Battle with the Sword-fish and Thrasher, describ'd below, roars with such an audible voice, he may be heard three Leagues off. If all this ben't enough, I'me sure they may as well pretend to speech as Lucians Bed, and Lamp; by which Figure I shall intro|duce Chamberpot and Frying-pan, two or three pages henc.
(b) 
[Per fidem be gone from my presence!]
By this Verse you may learn, if you understand Logickfirst that the Whale understands Latin; and secondly that he's Proctor of the Ocean.
(c) [There's ten times more Beauty, and shape in a Fly.]
Vid. Rehearsal.
" I'd sooner have a Passion for a Whale,
" In whose vast bulk tho'store of Oyl do's lie,
" We find more Shape, more Beauty in a Fly.
(d) [Like Phaebus I'll stoop from my glittering Throne.]
Once upon a time Phaebus having nothing else to do (perhaps when Jupiter gave him a Holi|day) descended to some Wake or other, and un|dertook the Fidler for a Wager; but being like to be baffled, he had no remedy but to call his God|ship in, and fright the Poor fellow so (whose name I should have told ye was Marsyas) that he made him leapt out of his Skin.
(e) [When in the Abyss I no longer did sleep.]
How should the Whale know that piece of Phi|losophy? Why might not Aristotle teach him when he leapt into the Water, as wisely as Empe|docles into Fire? But 'tis contrary to his Hypo|thesis, who denied a beginning of the World, and consequently the Chaos, c. Why then Arion when cap'ring on the Dolphins back, instructed that Dolphin, that Dolphin his Son, and so down to the Whaleand there's the short and the long on't.
(f) 
[For if the Ocean were Gothland, who but I should be King?]
'Twas the custom among the Goths to chuse a little man for their Prince.
(g) [Huge Rafters of Ribs barricado my Heart.
If you wo'n't take the Whales word, 'tis but step|ping to Rumford Road, or the Physick-Garden in Oxford, where a couple of Whales Ribbs are to be seen, neither inferiour in bigness to a lusty Rafter.
(h) [When you 're caught, like a Gudgeon with a Hook, and a Line.]
One way of Whale-fishing is striking at him with an Iron fasten'd to a long Rope, then letting the Rope loose, the Whale beats up and down till it for loss of blood yieldeth up the Ghost.
(i) [When spite of Dame Luna, at Ebb 'twill be Flood.]
By this compar'd with what went before, 'tis pro|bable that tho' the Whale was for the Neotericks, the Herring keeps close to the old Philosophy, and according to that, holds the Moon to be the cause of Tides.
(k) [Yes as oft as the Sword-fish, and Thrasher shall please.]
The Story is thus. The Thrasher and Sword|fish are two Fish, the Whales implacable Enemyes. The Sword-fish having a sharp bone in his Head, gets under his soft Belly, and makes him rise to the Top of the Water; where the Thresher with

his Wash-beetle Tayl, beats him down again, and between them both they Thump him so unconscio|nably, that he crys murder so loud you may hear him three Leagues off.


The Third Dialogue,
Between Chamber-pot and Frying-Pan.

Chamber-pot.
STand off! nor with rude Smut disgrace
^a The Glories of my brighter face!


Frying-pan.
Tho not so glib my Face be seen,
Yet all I'me sure's as sweet within.


Chamber-pot.
You in the Kitchin drudge alone,
None handles you but greasie Ioan!


Frying-pan.
I always lend, but you receive;
Which is most brave, to take, or give?


Chamber-pot.
Oft Maid and Mistriss fetch me ont,
To wash their their Lilly-hand and Snowt.


Frying-pan.
You 're civil sure, and use I hope
With Water to allow 'em Soap.



Chamber-pot.
Yes, such as ne're, at worst, indures
To scowre so foul a Mouth as yours.


Frying-pan.
O what a fragrant Hogo rose
But now, to twinge a swounding Nose?


Chamber-pot.
Such as when you were made a Tool,
^b To Fry the Break-fast for the Fool.


Frying-pan.
All bulg'd and yellow you must fall
At last behind some ruin'd Wall;
Or melt, and to your Masters loss
Leave both at once your stink and dross.


Chamber-pot.
Take then, since me you 'll thus Incense,
These marks of my Benevolence:
Such Water as if Fame says true,
Diana on Acteon threw;
Which as some learned men surmize,
With flap of Fox put out his Eyes:
And least of Rary show he brag,
^c Bewitcht poor Hunter into Stag.



NOTES.
(a) [The Glories of my Brighter Face.]
Hence take notice, to the Honour of the Poet,

'twas a Pewter Chamber-pot, and to the Honour
of the Maid, 'twas newly scoured.
(b) [To Fry the Break-fast for the Fool.]
A known story of a Lords Cook and Fool.
(c) [Bewitch't poor Hunter into Stag.]
Diana, on his viewing her Dimensions, and the rest of her Virgins, as naked as ever they were born, sprinkled him with some of her own Holy-water, and turn'd him into a Stag.



Against a Kiss.
A PINDARIC.

1.
CHarming Destroyer! whither wilt thou roll,
The tumbling Soul?
When Sylvia smiles with all her Sexes Arts,
And Angles for loose wandring Hearts;
Sweet lovely Poyson from her Lips she breaths,
Soft subtle Darts,
And dear bewitching Deaths;
Smiling Plagues she throws,
Golden Granado's sowes,
And into Air the tortur'd Soul with Loves white-powder blows,
Presents with painted Vipers gay, and crownd,
And scatters Heavenly Hells around.



2.
A Kiss! there's Magick in the Name,
What Amulet against its force can Arm;
The willing Letters of themselves forbidden sounds compose,
And leap into a charm,
And plunge the Hearer in blew Waves of Flame,
^a Such sulph'rous liquid flame as flows,
From Aetna's everlasting Womb:
Which oft e're now over proud Towns weak Walls arose,
^b And brought to Cities, and to men, both Death and Tomb;
Where Christal Lakes for long long Ages stood,
^c Supplyd from the Abyss with an eternal flood,
For long unnumbred Ages past,
Scarce Ice more cold, or chast;
There, over all the mouldring Banks red Sur|ges
pour;
There do's hot Vulcan ravish all, and all de|vour,
^d And even vitrifies the Mud.
With much ado, to their great Fund some stragling drops retire,
Close at the Heels pursu'd by swift prepo|st'rous Waves of Fire.


3.
A Lip's the Devils Tinderbox,
Whence by soft repeated stroaks

Lusts lurking Lightning flyes,
And blasts the unhappy Soul that pryes,
With rash unwary Eyes.
A downy Pillow where the firmest Heart is broke,
(Be't Heart of Flint, or Heart of Oak!)
With a sly never-smarting stroke:
A Kiss that Traytor in an Angels dress,
From bad Good-offices will never cease,
But ever seems to bring fair Overtures of Peace,
When its Commission speaks of nothing less.
At the Mouths tot'tring Gate it parlys Sin
Slides thro' a strong reserve,
To invested Lust, which else must quickly starve,
And gives Intelligence to every Enemy within.


4.
'Tis Death, 'tis Poyson all!
Slow, sure Italian poyson, 'twill
^e To a Year, an Hour, a Minute kill;
Dead without Hope the infected Wretches fall:
One Kiss will raise
^f More Frenzies than a score Tarantula's.
The tickling Venom thro' each secret path will run,
Till its mortal Errand's done,
The pungent Atoms search the Body o're,
Infect each drop of putred Goe,

And chase the quivring Soul thro' every wind|ing
Pore:
And see the curst Enchantress smiling by,
Glares with a sharp unlucky eye,
Hind'ring the very wish of Remedy.
^g Musick the common countercharm,
Can only here increase the Immedicable Harm:
And raise ten thousand Devils more,
To all the unnmber'd Legions revel'd there before.



NOTES.
(a) [Such sulph'rous liquid Flame as flows,
From Aena's everlasting Womb.]
(b) [And brought to Cities, and to Men, both Death and Tomb.]
At the Eruptions of that famous Sicilian Vol|cano, the melted Minerals broke down all opposi|tion, and ran for many Miles a continual stream of Fire; when it came to any Houses, it burst all down tho' never so strong, and buryed the very Walls in heaps of Pumice Stones, and such kind of matter.
(c) [Supplyd from the Abyss with an eternal flood.]
Among many other learned mens, 'tis the im|mortal Cowleys opinion, that under, or in the

middle of the Earth, there is a Fund of Concrea|ted water (as well as Fire) call'd[The Fountains of the great deep.)
(d) [And even vitrifies the Mud.]
Vitrification is the last degree of Heat, in plain
English turning into Glass.
(e) [To a Year, an Hour, a Minute kill.]
Some of the Italians are reported so skilful at the hellish Art of Poysoning (well reckon'd together, if not sometimes the same, with Witch|craft) that they 'll kill ye a man to any pre|cise time, as certainly as a Clock; and temper the potion so devilishly exquisite, it shall till such a time suspend its operation.
(f) [More Frenzies than a score Tarantula's.]
The Tarantula is a Spider found in Apulia in Italy, whose Poyson is so peculiar, that the Person bitten by it falls incessantly a Dancing, nor is to be cured but by
(g) [Musick the common Counter-charm.]
Which dissipates the Venom, and makes 'em, (I can't tell how) sweat it out again.



On a certain Nose.
ROom for a Nose (think what you will,
'Tis true) as High asHigh-gate Hill:
Turn't to a Bridge, 'twill ease the Feet,
^a And reach from thence to Fryday-street;
(If you 'll set under for a stay
The man in Chains at Holloway.)
Steeple crown'd Nose, who thinks it scorn
To be by any Spire o're-born;
^b (Fell Dragon-nose held up you know,
Disdainfully a top of Bow;
A Nose which would not be content
If meted by the Monument;
So scorns the May-pole in the Strand
To measure with a Fishing-Wand:
This with the Top of old St. Poll
Had easily stood Cheek by Ioll.
(Tho neither of their cloudy Spires
Were proof against invading Fires:)
Nor now is it afraid to show
^c For igness with the Cupulo;
Bright Gorgeons Nose, which stoopeth not
^d To that of the Rhinocerot.

And, if some Mad-man were his Friend,
Would yield as much by Candles-end:
But, ah! unless it self 'twould come,
One Fleet could never lug it home;
Unless packt up in several Loads,
^d Like the fat Stradling God at Rhodes.
A Voice it has; a Voice so swingeing,
^f It drowns with ease Sir Morelands Engine,
^g And may be heard to Red'riff Shore,
In spight of bawling Scull or Oar.
Thence larger fall, and louder Streams
Than those of roaring-Through-Bridge-Thames.
A Boat; a Boat! or Iam drownded,
I'th' Eddy of its Wave confounded;
Land me! that I may see my Dearest,
Land me at Queen-hithe!sure that's the (nearest.
Where I'll to Nose compar't agen,
In Head of Neighbour Saracen;
And sure the Painter could not erre,
Who Copyd Face and all from Her.



NOTES.
(a) [And reach from thence to Fryday-Street.]
Why Fryday Street? 'Tis reason enow if it lls up the Verse.
(b) [Fell Dragon-Nose, which mounts you know,
Disdainfully at Top of Bow.]
Alluding to that Dragon which is the Vane of Bow-Steeple.
(c) [For bigness with the Cupulo.]
The four Towers, to be joyn'd together, like hat at Wool-church.
(d) Like the fat Stradling God at Rhodes.]
The Colossus at Rhodes was broken down and carryed away by degrees. 'Twas of that vast bulk that Ships sail'd into the Haven between its Legs.
(e) [It drowns with ease Sir Morelands Engine.]
The speaking Trumpet, invented by Sir Sam. Moreland.
(f) [And may be heart to Red'riff Shore.]
One of these Trumpets had words pronounc'd by it at Gresham Colledge, which were heard distinctly and wrote down, a'tother side the water.



In Praise of Horns.
ASsist ye gentle Powers that can,
Assist some blind good natur'd Man,
All the Nines aid I'd now refuse
For one kind smile from Iordans Muse.
'Tis done! 'tis done! and by her power,
At Feet of Prince; or Emperour,
Transform'd, with voice, and visage mild,
I sit like any Pageant Child:
First mannerly I bow'd my Head,
Then perkt it up again, and se'd:
First Wheat and Barley shall be sown,
And sprout again on London-stone;
First Cure for Corns! i'th' Stillyard range,
And Thro'-bridge-hoa! roar round the Change:
And Guild-hall cross the Thames be born,
E're I forget renowned Horn:
When late with Ribbons all bedresst,
So gaudy, at the Cockney's Feast,
Each little-Master struts along,
Shouted by the Blew-apron'd-Throng,
Which of the pretty Lads confess't
Amongst 'em all their Fathers Crest?

ho' many a One his Glory owes
nto the Sweat of Mothers brows;
ho by the Childrens looks could find
e ever was to others kind?
The Calf is still without it born,
ho' Parent-Bull wears dreadful Horn;)
is Wardrobe, when set out in State
rops from his Fathers fertile Pate;
hich does whole Cornucopia's shed,
o finifie him, round his Head.
What glorious Things! what Trinkets rare,
Forrest Cart when joulted there,
 yearly bought at Charlton Fair.
n-fair that better Tricks can shew!
an Green-goofe, or than Bartlomew.
hen Mistress drinks, and Iohn does thank her,
 the Kings-head, or the Blew-Anchor;
ow harmless does she smiling come,
o bring best Husband Fairings home!
rings to make him fine and gay
gainst next Training Holyday?
hich more than Silver Head-piece grace
 brazen brow, and Copper Face:
atural Half-pikes which more adorn
an that upon the Vnicorn;
one such famous feats can do,
hat Miracles are found in Two?

Two, grafted in the place of frontlets,
A Princely pair of large Brow-antlets:
Which if the Herauld plays his part,
And draws his Hatchment out with Art;
Tho' Fields of Gules should overwhelm it,
Must peep at Top of Argent Helmet:
The MottoDecus  Tutamen,
^a And I'll for Rhyme, write under
Amen.


NOTE.
(a) [And I'll for Rhyme, write under
Amen.
If this seems a little of the dullest, consid what Muse I'me thro' all this Copy inspired wit


Advice to Monsieur Ragoo, 
had his choice either to be Hang 
or Married.
TAke Courage poor despairing Lover!
Walk up! walk up, and e'ne turnove
Who Mounts the BridaBed is madder
By far, than him that Mounts the Ladder.

What Man in's Wits wo'n't rather chuse
The Hempen, than the Marriage Noose?
Or in fo plain a Case would faulter,
And take the Ring to leave the Halter;
Since you perhaps slight my Authority,
Look back! look back on beauteous Doroty!
Who often without Wit or Fear,
Bids a whole Troop-Come on if they dare!
Come on! she crys, nor should they scare me,
Tho' Xerxes 'twere and all his Army.
There's Doll: who knows what mischief fol|lows?
Here's nothing but a single Gallows.
His prudence who would not admire,
That leaps from Frying-pan to Fire?
See if you dare, you quiv'ring Booby,
Those Lips of Pearl, that Snowt of Ruby:
Within, (I would not do her wrong)
There hangs a Clapper-alias-Tongue,
It shakes the Church, and rives the Steeple,
And when it Ringsbeware good People!
Then, tho' perhaps you 'll at it wonder,
Sowres all the Neighbours Ale like Thunder:
As Lyons roar to Mouses squeaking;
^b So Christ-church Tom, and Tom of Pequin
(Tho' we in this the Jesuits anger,)
Are both but Saints-bells to her Twanger:
To Hell she scorns to be beholding,
She deafs the Devils Dam with scolding;
Her face still Lavers when she washes,
^c Her Face which sneaks behind Proboscis.

Bring the Commissioners oth' Sewer,
And ere you Kiss her let 'em view her:
They 'll fifty Dung-carts round her place,
To clear the nnel of her Face;
But all in vain since all too late,
The Dirt is now concorporate:
Inveterate Dirt of sevn years standing,
That scorns to wagg for their commanding
And all her Frame you now may call
Without a FigureOne Mud-wall.
Which this great Rule to'th' Life expresses,
'Tis VniformIn Vglinesses.
But O! what Sea-weed may compare
With her strong Onion-Ropes of Hair.
Step back a little! call the Thatcher,
No Peruke-maker e're could match her:
No Nets are they, no Cupids fetter,
But Halters plain; nor worse, nor better.
If thus her upper features show,
Thy Mermaid sure's meer Devil below;
If all this in her Wast-coat's noted,
O how is she Be-petticoated!
Now of two Ills chuse you the least,
(And which that is may soon be guest)
Woo you the Rope, and not the Beauty,
And bid the Hangman do his Duty.



NOTES.
(a) [Look back! look back on Beauteous Doroty!
Doll-Troop, or Doll-Common, Laun|dress; (and somewhat into the Bargain) to a Troop of Horse: her Mr. Ragoo, when con|demn'd for Plundering, was to marry, or be hang'd.
(b) [So Christ-church Tom, and Tom of Pequin.]
The Iesuits relate at Pequin in China is a Bell weighing twelve hundred thousand pound weight.
(c) [Her Face that sneaks behind Proboscis.]
The Proboscis is the Trunk, or Nose of an Elephant.


On a pretended Schollar that would have
had some Verses he had stoln from ano|ther
Book inserted into the Maggots.
HA! then 'tis Time! affronted Muse begin!
Rouse each ill-natur'd sleeping Thought within:

Purse thy dark Brow! thy trembling Sinews strain,
And swell the angry blood in ev'ry Vein!
Has Fortune dragg'd thy Vengeance from her Throne,
Crusht out thy wonted Sting, and call'd thee Drone?
No! here's a Pen do's manly spite revive,
Jogs me, and lets me know my Soul's alive;
And tells the wretch that urg'd a Poets frown,
He has rouz'd a Lion that will rend him down.
Was I so easie grown, so tame a Tool!
Had fate the power to cramp me into Fool?
That this to me? and was my Stock so low,
I must for scrapps of Wit a Mumping go?
What! Thief at second hand! doubly the world abuse,
And robb that Spittle of thy hungry Muse!
Since one good turn another do's require,
Industrious Hackney these shall be thy Hire:
This Load of Curses which would make thee crack,
Tho' vampt with Porters, or with Camels back.
What Colledge Sir? where took you your Degree?
Bridewell or BedlamUniversity?
No doubt thou there wert bless't with due ap|plause,
For decent beating Hemp, and picking Straws;

In one of them (you see I dont collogue
With Friends) commencing Fool, in to'ther Rogue;
But ah! at last the better party fail'd;
The Fool went down, the Rampant Rogue pre|vail'd.
Long thou in Bridewell with fell fate didst wra|stle,
Like Hudibras, lock't in enchanted Castle;
What Devil against the Gates a Whirlwind hurl'd,
And let thee out agen to Plague the World?
Of old ye out-ran the Constable, 'tis true,
But sure my Verse can run as fast as you:
What tho' unknown? I dare thy shade arraign,
For Poets are not Prophets call'd in vain:
Here take this Pass e're we for ever part,
Then run, and then Farewell with all my Heart.
The Poets pride, and Beggery, and Lies,
The Cit kind Wife, and fear, and avarice:
The Lawyers yelling in their feign'd debate,
And the fleec'd Clients wisdom all too late;
The keeping Cully's Jealousie, and Care;
The slighted Lovers Maggots, and Despair;
A Womans Body every day to dress,
A fickle Soul, little as theirs, or less.
The Courtiers Business, th' Impudence 'o'th' stage,
And the Defeated Politicians rage;
A Clock-work Spouse, with loud eternal Clack,
A Shop i'th' Change, still damn'd to What d'ye lack!

Worse than these Last, if any Curses more,
^a Ovid e're knew, or fiercer Oldhams store:
Till not one part in Body, or Soul be free,
May all their barbed Vengeance shower on Thee;
Press't with their weight long mayst thou ra|ving
lye,
Envying an Halter but not dare to dye,
And when condemn'd thou dost thy Clergy plead,
Some frightful Fiend deny thee power to Read.
Madness, Despair, Confusion, Rage, and Shame,
Attend you to the place from whence you came;
To Tyburn thee let Carrion Horses draw,
In jolting Cart without so much as Straw.
Jaded may they lie down i'th' road, and tir'd,
And, (worse than one fair hanging) twice be mir'd:
^b Mayst thou be maul'd with Pulchers Sextos Sermon,
Till thou roar out For Hemp sake drive on Carman!
Pelted, and curst i'th' road by every one,
E'ne to be Hang'd mayst thou the Gauntlet run!
Not one good Woman who in Conscience can
Cry out'Tis pity Trotha proper Man!
Stupid and dull mayst thou rub off like Hone
Without an open, or a smother'd Groan.

May the Knot miss the place, and fitted be
To plague, and torture, not deliver thee!
Be half-a-day a dying thus, and then
^c Revive like Savage to be hang'd agen!
In pity now thou shalt no longer live,
For when thus satisfi'd, I can forgive.


NOTES.
(a) [Ovid e're knew, or fiercer Oldhams store.]
Ovids curses on Ibis, and Oldhams on the Woman who ruin'd his Friend.
(b) [Mayst thou be maul'd with Pulchers Sex|ton's Sermon.]
The Sexton of St. Sepulchres Church, makes a kind of a preachment to such as go by to be hang'd.
(c) [Revive like Savage.]
One that was hangd twice.


A Pindaric Poem
On Three Skipps of a Louse.

1.
QUeen of all harmonious Things!
Cap'ring Words, and frisking Strings,

What Hang'd Hero wilt thou sing?
What lowsy Rogue to equal Glories bring?
Ah! what could man do more? I strove
To teach my Strings of Thundring Iove;
Of long-nail'd Iuno, Scold Divine,
Of Cerberus and Proserpine;
But all in vain, for in a Trice
My mighty Hero's dwindled down to Lice:
Go Charioteer! the Coach prepare!
(Or call a Coach if any's there!)
My Muse forsooth must take the Air;
And we intend to rove
Beyond the narrow Bounds of Nature, and of Iove.
We 'll take a race
Where light-cloath'd Nothings, and thin fantoms dwell,
Beyond the narrow Bounds of time and place,
Beyond the out-strecht Line of Farth, of Heaven, and Hell.


2.
Pindaric Pegasus! advance
Now with the lofty Barbary proudly wa|ving
prance,
And amble now
Like a Galloping Cow!
But if thy Cross-grain'd Ladies will not lnd
Their winged Saddle-nag to 'blige a friend,

If they lock up their Cellar all-divine,
And will not spare one soop of Aganippe- Wine,
Tell 'em I'll get assistance nigher
That soon shall mount me higher;
In Bedstaffs-twinkling I'll be gone
^a To better Streams at Islington,
Inspir'd from Sadlers Pump I'le do, and dare
As much as any motly drunken Doctor there,
There boles of Helicon my Horse and I'll carouse,
And for the founder'd Iade mount my cur|retting
Lowse.


3.
So rides the great Mogul in State
^b When at proud Agra's trembling Gate,
Met by each humble, as a Potentate;
VVith Flow'rs the Roads are pav'd, with Flow'rs the houses crown'd,
And bruitish Mirth, and barb'rous joy runs all-along,
Whilst he uplifted high
Like a New Titan, scales the Sky.
From that wild Mount of Flesh, whose Shoulders bear,
Better than Aesops Eagles, Castles in the air.
So a tall Ant in days of yore
^c A Bold adventurous Pigme bore.
So, on my fair-neckt Louse securely set
^d Like great Astolfo, or little Pacolet,
With Spur and Switch I make my Steed curvet.

Hold, hold! I'me gone! I'me gone! that leap has lost us:
So Old-Nick sored away with Doctor Fau|stus.


4.
Beyond th' attraction of dull Earth we're born,
Near the purple chambers of the Morn;
Now less, and less the lengthen'd Species grow;
Now, credit me,
We hardly see
Athos and Tenariff, and Michaels Mount below,
^e In Glass or brazen Chariot scarce so soon,
^f Nor with Domingo's Ganza's had we reach'd the Moon.
There we discover
Over and over
^g VVhat e're quick Azant or Hevelius saw;
VVithout their Glasses
Her Lunatick Faces,
Aetna's, and Land, and Sea, we in a Map could draw.
But my poor Lowse more of its kind
^h Above could find,
For all the Lowsie Woodcocks still were left behind,
And therefore calmly dives to Earth again;
So Angels think themselves down thro' the airy Main.



5.
O'er Hedge and Ditch, a Scholars, or a Hunters pace
VVe run our hare-brain'd Race.
From Post to Pillar I'm like Epicurus hurl'd
By all the Flaming Limits of the VVorld.
VVhere e're we go
By Friend, or Foe,
We my Majestic Lowses Subjects found;
Armies of Beggars gay
In Endless Sun-shine play,
And Lice, as blithe as they
In jolly Squadrons dance around.
Thus did the Sprightly Youth, but those whom hoary age
Had form'd more wise and sage
Upon a Captive Comb plac'd round in State
Declaim among the unexperienc'd Fry
The Nitty Auditory listning by;
And all their Great Forefathers Deeds in greater Verse relate.


6.
Then to my Lowses Pallace we draw nigh,
(For sure by all this it may with ease be understood,
Mine was a Lowse of princely blood)
Where he in tryumph still remains
Dragging Pilgarlick Death in Chains,
And even in Church-yards obtains the Victory.

When pale Death with harpy claws
(And huge unconscionable Jaws)
To the Sick the Curtain draws.
And the Nurses softly tell
Sad enquiring Friends-He's well,
They to the Church-yard follow him, and there
With him they bury all their Love, and all their Care.
My kind Lowse more kind and bold
Hectors Death, and keeps his Hold,
Keeps his Hold, or what's as fair,
Comes agen, and finds him there.
Drives Sir Rawbones from the Stone,
Claims the Marble all his own;
^i  his own Substance quickens mouldring Men,
And makes 'em live, at least an Animals Life agen.


7.
Now Heaven and Earth survey'd a dreadful leap we take
Over the Sooty Stygian Lake;
My Lowse my Sybill was, and all as well
I know not how
^k Without a half-penny, or a Golden bough,
I like Aeneas travell'd Hell.
We lookt, and lookt again,
And lookt, and lookt with Care,
But lookt, and lookt in vain,

Nor could we find one House of Purgatory there:
Those old descriptions fail
Whose realms are chang'd
And in another Method rang'd;
We Mountains find where we expect a flow|ry
vale.


8.
Into the Gulph at last my Palfray plung'd, t' explore
Secrets to none but great Quevedo known before.
So brave Empedocles at Aetna's flaming Hole
(The sight enough to melt a common Soul)
Leapt smiling in, with this undaunted Cry,
To be a God 'tis worth the while to die.
So when the hungry Earth gap't wide
And let in hateful Light,
The trembling Ghost to fright
In their own Realm of Night;
Curtius all arm'd to the black breach did ride;
He saw, and smiled with an unbroken mind
Where all the quaking City sled, and scarce durst look behind:
In sprung the noble Youth with this undaunt|ed
Cry,
So Rome but live, and flourish,Thus let Cur|tius
dy.



9.
Where am I now? Bugbears, and sprights are there:
^l Here Kelly's Devils buz round me,
Here Doctor Dees dumfound me;
Here's Mephistophilus with Tail, and Horns, and Hair,
^m And each foul Fiend in Bartlomew Fair;
Sights which a stouter man than me might scare,
But worse, far worse than Devils at the Gate,
^n Bands of Quevedo's hungry Taylors wait;
From Aropos each stole a pair of Sheers,
And gladly now to ensure his Head I'd give my Louses Ears:
Horridly gay their Teeth, and Nails were painted ore
With flesh confus'd, and Skin, and Brains, and mingling Gore.
Hunger, as well as Anger weapons makes;
His Bodkin this, and this his pond'rous yard, and this his Thimble takes:
The Cannibals in dreadful order stood
To murder and devour even their own Flesh and Blood;
To murder and devour my Louse, so wise, so great, so good:
So conqu'ring Indians feed, and hope to find
In their brave enemyes broild Corps the Ver|tues
of his Mind.



10.
Yet my undaunted Louse can scorn 'em all,
He rears his strong Proboscis high,
And does the unmanly rage defie
Of each unequal enemy,
And like himself intends to fall.
^o His Martial Soul peeps thro' his Alablaster Skin,
The bloody drop moves quick, and beats a point of War within.
Their tedious trembling Troops he do's to Combat call,
Waits for each mortal blow, contemns each fatal pass,
^p And cryes, Pound on! 'tis but the husk of A|naxagoras.
Whilst quaking Hell do's with concern the event attend,
Least the sharp Conqu'rors should too rav'|nous
be,
And in the Carrae swallow me,
I durst not stay the fightbut wakedand there's an end.



NOTES.
(a) [From Aganippe I'll be gone,
To better springs at Islington.]
The New Waters discover'd there the last Summer.
(b) 
[When at proud Agra's trembling Gate.]
Agra is one of the Great Moguls Royal Cities; he uses to ride on a white Elephant.
(c) [So a tall Ant in days of yore,
A poor adventurous Pigmee bore.]
Read the story, thus ingeniously describ'd in Mr. Crashaw.
"High mounted on an Ant, Nanus the Tall,
"Was thrown alas! and got a deadly fall:
"Under the unruly Beasts proud feet he lies,
"All torn; with much ado before he dyes,
"Yet strains these WordsBase envy do! laugh on,
"Thus did I fall, and thus fell Phaeton.
(d) [Like great Astolfo, or little Pacolet.]
A couple of expeditious Gentlemen (as well mounted as the Witch in Paudaemonium) Astol|fo in Orlando Furioso on a Griffith: Pacolet in the famous and renowned Chronicle of Valen|tine and Orson, on a Wooden Horse.
(e) [In Glass or Brazen chariot scarce so soon,
(f) Nor with Domingo's Ganza's had we reacht the Moon.]
You see Reader, other folks have had their Maggots as well as your Humble Servant. Two Bishops have wrote expresly of this new Plantation, and the way to sayl thither. One by making a Globe of Glass, or Brass lighter than the Atmos|phere, which must therefore naturally ascend:

The other by a way perhaps as practicable as the former, by harnessing a certain number of Fowl, called by the Spaniards [Ganza's] on which he makes Signior Domingo hoisted thither.
(g) [What e're quick Azant, or Hevelius saw]
Two famous Astronomers, one in France, the other in Denmark.
(h) [For all the lowsy Woodcocks still were left behind]
Vid. Where you can find it, this account. When any of the Woodcocks remain behind, the main body returning at Summer to the Land of the Moon, they are reported to be all lowsy.
(i) [In his own Substance quickens mouldring men
A vulgar observationthat dead Bodies in time turn all to perfect Lumps of Lice.
(k) Without a Sybill, or a Golden bough.]
Both which are necessary to one that intends a visit to the Infernal Regionsask Virgil else.
(l) [Here Kellys Devils buz round me,
Here Dr. Dee's dumfound me]
See Dr. Casauban's account of those Spirits with whom Dr. Dee and Kelly had contracted so intimate a Correspondence. Very good natur'd Devils it seems, for they perswaded the Conju|rers to swp Wives, as a necessary Ceremony in their Magical operations.
(m) [Here's Mephistophilus with Tayl, and Horns and Hair.]

A Thundering Devil that, Dr. Faustus's fa|miliar.
See his Life.
(n) [Bands of Quevedo's hungry Taylors wait.]
Scarce any body but has read Quevedo's Vi|sions of Hell, nor can any that have read 'em sure forget how overstockt he mkes the sooty regions with that kind of Cattle.
(o) [His martial Soul peeps thro' his Alabla|ster skin,
The Bloody drop]
No Creature in the world so testy as a Lowse. In a Microscope, one drop of Blood is seen passing up and down very nimbly in the nature of a pulse.
(p) [And crys, pound on! 'tis but the husk of Anaxagoras.]
I would entreat any that know that hard-na|med Gentleman's right Name to keep silence, for 'twould' spoyl the Rhyme sadly if this should be blotted out, and that inserted.


FINIS




