




IHS

URANIA,
OR
A DESCRIPTION
OF THE
PAINTING
Of the TOP of the
Theater at OXON,
As the ARTIST lay'd his Design.
By RO. WHITEHALL, Fellow of Merton Colledge.
Pictoribus atque poetis
Quidlibet, c.
Licensed and Entred according to Order.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe and Thomas Daniel,
and are to be sold by them at their House in Newstreet
betwixt Shooe-lane and Fetter-lane. 1669.






URANIA,
OR
A DESCRIPTION of the PAINTING
Of the TOP of the
THEATER at OXON,
As the ARTIST lay'd his Design.

THe day's our own! though some might seem to doubt
Whether Augustus Caesar's days are out;
Had not the Lion, Bull, and savage Beare
Contended in his Amphitheater
With Bore, Rhinoceros and Elephant,
That did at once Spectators please, and daunt.
Or Creatures cruell and more fierce than these,
When Man to Man became a Sacrifice;
While acclamations with a grand applause
Endanger'd all to crown the Victors brows:
And the defeated Champion took his death,
Not from the Foe, but their unkinder breath:
Bleeding afresh, and groveling in his gore,
More deeply wounded than he was before:
And all this heat, and all this noyse, to tell
The World, This Day did Pilades prize well.



NO ROMAN Foyl here, nor Olympick Game,
Nor Table hang'd up to Nemaean fame:
The Graces and the Muses more befit
A Patron both to Reason and to Wit:
Whose benefaction, whose munificence
Might upon Earth immortalize a Prince.
Immense as th' Ocean, rich as th' Indian Fleet,
Were Tagus and Pactolus sands in it;
Admir'd more than those Argonauts of Greece
When they brought home their weighty golden fleece.
None but a Noble and Heroick breast
Bestow's Gifts out-live Baggs condemn'd to th' Chest.
Death-bed Donations are but cold and faint,
The Living onely give without constraint.
Such Actions when they shall be scan'd and read
Merit beyond th' Aegyptian Pyramid.



DRaw back the curtain then, and let's behold
A sight more welcome than Ben's misers gold
Where first th' ingenious Artist makes it known
He treads in no mans tract, his path's his own.
For though Antiquity be venerable,
Yet whereas anciently they had a cable
Or cordage from this pilaster to that
To knit together and keep tight the sheet,
For 'tis presum'd their theater so large
(Though sooner built perhaps and at lesse charge)
That they knew not th' expence of tile or lead
'Gainst th' injuries of weather over head:
So here a cord-mould gilded which doth reach
In length and breadth cross to prevent a breach,
Supports a red large drapery, suppos'd
To cover all the roof where it is hous'd.
But now 'tis furld up by the Genii round
About the roof, by th' walls, that those 'oth ground
May deem 'tis open aire above, a way
For th' Arts and Sciences 'ith' clouds to stray.
At whose sollicitation Truth descend's
To their assembly, as unto her Friends:
And at this Festival observe eftsoones
How th' other Genii sport with their festoones
Of bayes and lawrel, out of which they make
Ever green Garlands for their Lovers sake.
Which hieroglyphically seems to say
Rewards and Honor too attend this day.



TO make this Convents happiness compleat
Their grand Disturbers must have a defeat:
Envy with Rapine and Brutality
By th' Genii opposing them are made to fly.
Thrown headlong from the Clouds, and driven thence
By Prudence, Fortitude, and Eloquence.
This conquest to proclaim as Omen good
The Trumpet sound's and they disperse abroad.


THe day still ours, 'twill now be requisite
(As 'tis with Muster-masters after fight)
To rally up our force, and as by th' pole,
Distinctly in order to run o're the Role.
Where, lest we should by th' Heathen be out-done
And such as deifie the Sun and Moon
Theologie in reason must begin
As Spur to Vertue, and as Curb to Sinne.


SEe then a Book with seven seals in her hand,
While she implores Truth on her part to stand.
On one side is the Law Moysaicall
Veil'd, and the Tables we the Decalogue call,
Which lest we should neglect as slighting God
Truth poynts out to us with her iron Rod.



NExt (as inseparable) doth appear
The Gospel with a Crosse and Chalice, near
Her, History is holding up her Pen,
And dedicating it to truth, as men
Old writings left, and fragments which respect
Her Stories whence a Book she might collect.


VIew Poesie divine at th' other end
With Harp like Davids tun'd to what he pen'd.


THen come the Mathematick Sciences,
Grounded on Demonstration, not on guesse.
Astronomy with her Coelestiall globe
Adorn'd (as are the rest) with decent Robe.
With her terrestriall Orbe Geography,
With Square and Plum-line stands Geometry.
Arithmetique and Architecture passe
Neighbours, and Perspective with Optick glasse.


ON th' other side Law seated like a Queen,
With Scepter and Records that long have been,
Patents and Evidences sure and strong,
With whom goe's Rhetorique hand in hand along
With an attending Genius to produce
The scales of Iustice to prevent abuse:
A palm branch as an Emblem of Reward
For vertuous Actions, and as to regard
Of power to punish vice, or to remit
The Roman Fasces are the mark of it.



PHysick by Aesculapiu's staffe is known,
And Serpent twisted, ('tis a subtle one)
By her an Herbarist doth Truth implore
To teach her Plants for every grief and sore.
A Chymist, with a bolt head, and before
Is placed a Chyrurgion, with his store
Of Instruments, all to dissect a brain,
Layd open, (O Minerva don't disdain!)


SOme more there are; see Logick taking hold
On Argument; and if she's baffl'd, scould.


MVsick, with a note-paper, and a Lute
A little Boy playing upon a Flute.
These two are Emblems (known t' Apollo more)
Of the most antique Musick heretofore.


PRinting is with a Box of letters, and
A Form that's ready set 'ith' other hand:
Where lest the Printing-presse should vacant lie
Are several damp sheets hanging up to dry.


ITh' middle, as descending from above
Truth in a cloud sits; (harmless as a Dove)
One hand a palm branch hold's for Victory:
In th' other is the Sun in's radiancy.
So bright Truth seem's obscur'd to us below,
But every figure yield's the brighter shew.
And those three Prodigies we nam'd before
Now weary of the place, are got to th' door.



ENvy with snaky haire, hags breasts, squint eyes,
Pale venomous colour, strong, but ugly thighs:
(Of which one disappear's, as if the beast
Had fed upon her self, to make a Feast)
With rivell'd skin, confounded at the sight
Of Pallas shield with Gorgon's head t' affright.
To which she would oppose her angry snakes
But by precipitation downward make's.


THe same Fate Ignorance attend's Arts hater
Best represented to us by a Satyr
Scoffing at what she cannot understand,
But quell'd by Hermes Caducean wand.


WIth grinning teeth, sharp fangs, and fiery eyes,
Besmear'd with blood of Friends and Enemies,
Rapine appears: a flambeau and dagger are
His weapons of delight, with arm stript bare.
Wolf-like devouring, lying still in wait,
Unseen 'till now, (except in 48.)
He Magistracy hate's, abhor's the Gown,
But an Herculean Genius strikes him down.


THese to the life are drawn so curiously
That the Beholder would become all Eye:
Or at the least an Argus; so sublime
A phant'sie makes essayes to Heaven to climb.
That future ages must confess they owe
To STREETER more than Michael Angelo.




To the Most Honourable
JAMES Duke of ORMOND His
Grace, our most Renowned Lord, and
CHANCELLOR.
ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

WHile Arms and Arts contend
Which of them most stands poor Urania's friend,
The Graces at a meeting all conclude
They own, with thanks, this fair vicissitude;
That what the Crosier and the Miter deign'd
May by the sword and helmet be maintain'd.
So we successively have our Commander,
An Aristotle, and an Alexander.


OVr Theater though 'tis beautifull, in you
Alone it lies to make it vocall, now:
And things inanimate so to inspire
As Orhpeus did with his enchanting Lyre.
Your various tongues may teach youth how to please
More than Quintilian or Demosthenes.
And when the Sophister is at a stand
Your Genius brings fresh topicks to his hand.



TIme was when that same Antichristian word
Mecaenas sounded some outlandish Lord;
When half a dram of learning at one time
Was Language of the Beast (and no small crime)
Who then expected Exile and restraint
Should right the Muses when they made complaint?
Indulgent Providence! thou for their good
Hast one at home preserv'd, and one abroad.





