




A
TRVE
COPIE
OF
The Disputation held betweene Master
Walker and a Iesuite, in the house of one Thomas
Bates in Bishops Court in the Old Baily,
Concerning
The Ecclesiasticall Function.


Printed in the yeare, 1641.






A true Copy of a Disputation held
between Mr. Walker and a Iesuit.

Iesuit.
_I Pray you what is the reason that the
people in England would have no
Bishops?


Mr. Walker.
Were our Bishops one and the same
with Presbyters, we should not seeke to have them
removed. It is those lordly Hierarchicall Prelates,
which are instituted after the Popish order, those
lofty tyrants that rule like the Gentiles over the
people of God, these be the Bishops that the peo|ple
of God are offended with.


Ies.
If the Bishops should not governe the church,
then the people would fall into many errors, and
the Church would be full of Schismes.


Wal.
Doe you thinke that they keepe errours
out of the Church? no they (as it is very apparent)
have beene the sole cause of the Popery, errours,
schismes, and innovations, wherwith our Churches
have beene lately pestered.


Ies.
You are mistaken, for they have received
the power of the Holy Ghost, by which they are
led and guided that they cannot erre.


Wal.
Upon what grounds doe you conceive
that they should have a greater measure of the Spi|rit

of God then other Pastours and Ministers?


Ies.
They receive the Holy Ghost from succes|sion,
to which succession Christ hath promised to
be with them to the end of the world, so that they
cannot erre.


Wal.
How can you prove such a succession to
belong to them, as brings the Holy Ghost with it
to all without exception, to lead them that they can|not
erre?


Ies.
Because they are successors to Christ and
his Apostles, and you know that his Apostles could
not erre.


Wal.
Did not Peter erre when hee was reproved
by Christ to speak foolishly? did he not erre when
Christ said to him, Get thee behind me Satan, thou
savourest not? Did hee not erre when hee denyed
Christ? yea and forswore him too? Did not Tho|mas
erre when he thought it was not Christ that ap|peared
to them?


Ies.
They erred onely in some particulars of
frailty, which was incident to them as men, but
these were but veniall errors: they erred not in the
discipline of the Church as they were Apostles.


Wal.
Did not Iudas erre in discipline, when for
thirty peeces of silver hee betrayed Christ into the
hands of the High Priests to be crucified?


Ies.
I speake not of Iudas, for his Bishopricke
was taken from hm, and given to another, I speake
of the rest of the Apostles.


Wal.
If part of the Apostolicall function bee se|cluded
from the rest, whence then doe you prove

the government of Bishops to bee thus endued by
succession from the Apostles?


Ies.
Because as the Apostles taught nothing dis|sonant
from the truth of Gods word, being directed
thereunto by the Holy Ghost: so the Bishops their
successors doe the like.


Wal.
That doth not follow: for the Apostles
and our Prelates are not all one and the same office:
for the Apostles were the disciples of Christ, but
the Prelates are the limbs of Antichrist.


Ies.
Peter the Apostle was Bishop of Rome,
whose See hath beene held by succeeding Bishops
unto this day.


Wal.
Peter was no more tyed to Rome then to
other Churches, for that was contrary to Christs
command, who commanded both him and the rest
to preach to all Nations.


Ies.
The Bishop of Rome is in every respect a
true successor unto Peter. The power of Ecclesia|sticall
jurisdiction, in censuring, in Constitutions,
Decrees, c. is derived from the Apostle S. Peter,
to the Bishop of Rome, and from him to all other
Bishops.


Wal
Christ gave not the jurisdiction to one par|ticular
Apostle alone, that the rest should have it by
succession from him, but they all received it from
Christ: neither hath the Bishop of Rome any suc|ceeding
authority from them above others.


Ies.
This succession is of such consequence, that
should it cease, and there should be no Bishops, there
could be no lawfull admittance of any into the Ec|clesiasticall

function, for ordination cannot be with|out
the Bishops.


Wal.
Can you deny that that meanes whereby
men are kept, and maintained, and upheld in their
Ecclesiasticall offices, is the beginning and authour
thereof: But by the Spirit of God are Ecclesiasti|call
Officers prescribed in their office and Mini|stery.
Ergo, The Pastors and Elders which were ordai|ned
even by the Apostles themselves, receive not
their power and jurisdiction from the Apostles by
succession, but from the Lord: much lesse hath the
Pope right to doe it, or any Bishop in the world
from himselfe; for onely Christ hath authority to
prefer to the government of the Church.


Ies.
In the institution by Bishops the power of
the Holy Ghost is received, that God directeth
them that they shall be able to preserve the Church
from error, which is the chiefe end of the ministery.


Wal.
Is the Church preserved from error by
those that teach the people to be trecherous to their
Kings and Princes, and to slay the Lords anointed:
the Lord deliver our Church from such errors.


Ies.
The Bishop of Rome doth not allow of it.


Wal.
Did not Pope Innocentius the fourth hyre
his bastard sonne Manfredus to poyson the Empe|rour
Fredericke; and Sixtus the 5. made an oration
in praise and commendation of the Fryers faith
which murdered Henry 3. King of France.


Ies.
These are scandalous aspersions, such I doe
not beleeve to be true.



Wal.
What say you then to the fightings of the
Papists in Ireland against the Queen, the Spanish In|vasion,
the Gunpowder treason, that of Iames Cle|ment
against the King of France, c.


Ies.
The Bishop of Rome never allowed of any
of these, they had neither counsell nor consent
from him.


Wal.
It is wel enough knowne to the contrary;
but to come neerer to you, doe you thinke it is not
an error for the Pope to take upon him to curse and
excommunicate Kings and Princes at his pleasure?


Ies.
Such who have vowed to him allegeance he
hath power to excommunicate: as for such who
have not, they are of another Church.


Wal.
Therefore the Emperour Frederick was so
wise to make a Law, that if a Bishop were found to
attempt any thing against the publick quiet, that he
should live an hundred miles off from that City or
place which he had disturbed. And it were to bee
wished that all such disturbers of the peace and qui|et
of this our Nation, were sent not onely an hun|dred,
but a thousand miles off.


Ies.
Why doe you abuse those Bishops that are
of so noble and honourable a function? Christ the
head of the Church hath placed Bishops in his own
stead, giving them that power which himselfe re|ceived
of his Father, insomuch that there is no of|fice
or degree which Christ received from his Fa|ther,
but he doth communicate the same to them.


Wal.
Christ is our Mediator, will you say that
the Prelates are our mediators?



Ies.
As Christ is our Mediatour, paying to his
Father the ransome, so are they Priests and media|tours
by prayer.


Wal.
I deny your tenent, it is no better then
blasphemy; for there is onely one Mediatour be|tween
God and man, the man Christ Iesus, as Paul
saith, 1 Tim. 2. 5.


Ies.
They are our mediatours, I doe not say as
authors themselves of any benefit to us, but obtain|ing
through Christ and his merits whatsoever by
them is obtained for us.


Wal.
If Christ hath not purchased what is ob|tained
for us without their mediation, then were
Christ an imperfect mediatour: but Christ is a per|fect
Mediatour, even hee that hath trod the wine|presse
alone, and what is obtained is only from him,
and by him alone.

FINIS.




